


LINCOLN CITY CHARTER


PREAMBLE

We, the people of the city of Lincoln City, Lincoln County, Oregon, in order to avail ourselves of self-determination in municipal affairs to the fullest extent now or hereafter granted or allowed by the constitutions and laws of the United States and the State of Oregon, by this charter confer upon the city the following powers, subject it to the following restrictions, prescribe for it the following procedures and governmental structure, and repeal all charter provisions of the city enacted prior to the time this charter takes effect.

Be it enacted by the people of Lincoln City, Lincoln County, Oregon:


Chapter I NAME AND BOUNDARIES


1.1 Title of Enactment

This enactment may be referred to as the Lincoln City Charter of 1989.


1.2 Name of City

The municipality of Lincoln City, Lincoln County, Oregon, shall continue to be a municipal corporation with the name “Lincoln City.”


1.3 Boundaries

The city shall include all territory encompassed by its boundaries as of January 1, 1989, or as they are hereafter modified pursuant to law. The custodian of the city’s records shall keep an accurate, up-to-date description of the boundaries. The copies and descriptions shall be available for public inspection during regular office hours.


Chapter II POWERS


2.1 Powers of the City

The city has all powers which the constitutions, statutes and common law of the United States and of this state expressly or impliedly grant or allow municipalities as fully as though this charter specifically enumerated each of those powers.


2.2 Construction of Charter

In this charter no mention of a particular power shall be construed to be exclusive or to restrict the scope of the powers which the city would have if the particular power were not mentioned. The charter shall be liberally construed to the end that the city may have all powers necessary or convenient for the conduct of its municipal affairs, including all powers that cities may assume pursuant to state laws and to the municipal home rule provisions of the state Constitution.


2.3 Distribution of Powers

Except as this Charter prescribes otherwise and as the Oregon Constitution reserves municipal legislative power to the voters of the city, all powers of the city are vested in the council.


Chapter III FORM OF GOVERNMENT


3.1 Form of Government

The city of Lincoln City operates under the Council-Manager form of government.


3.2 Council

The council consists of a Mayor, nominated and elected at large, and six councilors, nominated and elected by wards with boundaries fixed by ordinance.


3.3 Councilors

Councilors in office at the time this Charter is adopted and those elected at the 1988 biennial general election shall continue in office until the end of the terms for which they were elected. At each general election after the adoption of this Charter, three councilors shall be elected, one from each ward, each for a four-year term.


3.4 Mayor

The term of office of the mayor in office when this Charter is adopted, is the term of office for which the mayor was elected before the adoption of the Charter. At the general election of the year 1990, and every four years thereafter, a mayor shall be elected for a term of four years.


3.5 Council Wards

For the purpose of electing members to the city council, the city shall be divided into three wards of approximately equal population. The boundaries of the wards in existence at the time this Charter is adopted shall remain in effect until such time as the wards are redefined by Council. The council shall, by ordinance, redefine the boundaries of the wards as necessary to accord persons in the city equal protection of the laws. When the boundaries of the wards are redefined, each ward shall have one continuous boundary. Within three months after available data from a decennial census of the United States Census Bureau or any other official census commissioned by the city indicates that the boundaries deny equal protection of the laws, the council shall re-specify the boundaries so as to accord equal protection of the laws.


3.6 Appointive Officers.

(1)    The city manager, municipal judge, and city attorney are appointive officers of the city who shall be appointed by the affirmative vote of four or more members of the council for an indefinite term, to hold office at the pleasure of the council and who may be removed at any time by the affirmative vote of four or more members of the council.

(2)    The council may combine any two or more appointive offices, except the offices of the city manager and the municipal judge, or city attorney and municipal judge. In no instance shall the municipal judge in the exercise of judicial functions or the city attorney be subject to supervision by any other officers.


3.7 Compensation

The council may prescribe the compensation for city officers and employees. No councilor or mayor, however, may receive compensation for serving in that capacity. The council may prescribe the plan for reimbursing city officers or personnel for expenses that they incur in serving the city.


3.8 Qualifications of Officers.

(1)    To be eligible for an elective city office, a person must be a qualified elector within the meaning of the state Constitution and have resided in the city during the six months immediately preceding the last day available for filing for election. For purposes of this subsection, city means all area included in the corporate limits as of the date of the election.

(2)    To serve as a councilor elected from a ward, the candidate must have resided within the ward he or she seeks to represent for six months immediately preceding the last day available for filing for election or appointment and must continue to reside in the ward throughout his or her term of office.

(3)    Removal of an officer’s principal residency from the city or from the area he or she represents shall create a vacancy in the office for which elected, to be filled in the manner other vacancies in that office are filled.

(4)    No city employee or appointive officer may serve on the council.

(5)    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the council is the final judge of the qualifications and election of its own members.


Chapter IV COUNCIL


4.1 Meetings

The council shall hold regular meetings at least once a month in the city at a time and place that it designates. Meetings of the council, other than regular meetings, may be held in accordance with procedures prescribed by state law and general ordinance. The council shall by ordinance prescribe rules to govern its members and proceedings.


4.2 Quorum

A majority of the incumbent members of the council shall constitute a quorum for its business, but a smaller number may meet and compel the attendance of absent members in the manner provided by ordinance.


4.3 Record of Proceedings

The council shall cause a record of its proceedings to be kept in a manner consistent with state law.


4.4 Meetings to Be Public

All deliberations and proceedings of the council shall be public except as otherwise authorized by state law.


4.5 Mayor’s Functions at Council Meetings.

(1)    The mayor shall preside over council deliberations and shall have a vote on all questions before the council. The mayor shall preserve order, enforce the rules of the council, and determine the order of business under the rules of council.

(2)    Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, the mayor may temporarily cease to chair a council meeting and delegate the functions described in subsection (1) to the council president or to another council member if the council president is absent, or unable to function as mayor.


4.6 Council President

At its first meeting of each odd-numbered year, the council shall elect a president from its membership. In the mayor’s absence from a council meeting, the president shall preside over it. Whenever the mayor is unable to perform the functions of his office, the president shall act as mayor.


4.7 Vote Required

Except as this Charter otherwise provides, the express concurrence of a majority of the members of the council voting when a quorum of the council is present at the council meeting, shall be necessary to decide any question before the council.


4.8 Interference in Administration

A member of the council shall not coerce or attempt to coerce the manager or any other city employee in carrying out the duties of the office; or coerce or attempt to coerce the manager or any other city employee in making an appointment or in removal of an officer or employee or in purchasing equipment, services or supplies; or attempt to exact a promise relative to an appointment from any candidate for manager. The council may, however, in open session, discuss with or suggest to the manager anything pertinent to city affairs or the interests of the city. A violation of this subsection may occasion the censure or removal from office of the offending member of the council, by the council or a court of competent jurisdiction.


CHAPTER V POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS


5.1 Mayor

The Mayor shall be deemed a member of the council and shall have the same rights as other council members. The Mayor shall appoint members of committees established by council rules, and where not otherwise specified in council rules or other city ordinances, such other committees as the mayor deems appropriate. The Mayor shall represent the city at ceremonial functions, unless the Mayor or Council directs otherwise. The Mayor shall sign all records of proceedings approved by the council and shall sign all ordinances passed by the council after their passage. The Mayor shall have no veto power. After the council approves a bond of a city officer or a bond for a license, contract or proposal, the Mayor shall endorse the bond.


5.2 City Manager.

(1)    The city manager is the administrative head of the city government.

(2)    The manager shall be appointed, solely on the basis of administrative qualifications, by an affirmative vote of four or more members of the council.

(3)    The manager need not reside in the city or the state when appointed.

(4)    The manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term and may be removed by the council at its pleasure in accordance with Section 3.6 of this Charter.

(5)    Within six consecutive months after a vacancy occurs in the office of city manager, the council shall fill the vacancy by appointment.

(6)    The manager shall:

(a)    Attend all council meetings unless excused by the council or mayor;

(b)    Keep the council advised of the affairs and needs of the city;

(c)    See that the provisions of all ordinances are administered to the satisfaction of the council;

(d)    See that all terms of franchises, leases, contracts, permits, and privileges granted by the city are fulfilled;

(e)    Appoint, discipline and remove appointive personnel, except appointees of the mayor or council;

(f)    Supervise and control the manager’s appointees in their service to the city;

(g)    Organize and reorganize the departmental structure of city government;

(h)    Prepare and transmit to the council an annual city budget;

(i)    Supervise city contracts;

(j)    Supervise operation of all city-owned public utilities and property;

(k)    Supervise all purchasing; and

(l)    Perform other duties as the council prescribes consistently with this charter.

(7)    The manager shall not control:

(a)    The council;

(b)    The municipal judge in the judge’s judicial functions, or the city attorney;

(c)    Except as the council authorizes, appointive personnel of the city whom the manager does not appoint.

(8)    The manager and other personnel whom the council designates may sit with the council but may not vote on questions before it. The manager may take part in all council discussions.

(9)    When the manager is absent from the city or disabled from acting as manager, or when the office of manager becomes vacant, the council may appoint a manager pro tem, who has the powers and duties of manager, except that the manager pro tem may appoint or remove personnel only with approval of the council. No person may be manager pro tem for more than six consecutive months.


5.3 City Recorder

The city recorder, or designee, shall serve ex-officio as clerk of the council, attend all its meetings unless excused therefrom, and keep an accurate record of its proceedings.


CHAPTER VI JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT


6.1 Municipal Court.

(1)    The judicial power of the city of Lincoln City shall continue to be vested in the Municipal Court for the city of Lincoln City, Lincoln County, Oregon.

(2)    Except as this charter or city ordinance prescribes to the contrary, proceedings of the court shall conform to general laws of this state governing justices of the peace and justice courts.

(3)    All area within the city and, to the extent provided by state law, area outside the city is within the territorial jurisdiction of the court.

(4)    The municipal court has original jurisdiction over every offense that an ordinance of the city makes punishable. The court may enforce forfeitures and other penalties that such ordinances prescribe.

(5)    The municipal court has concurrent jurisdiction over state traffic or misdemeanor offenses when permitted by state law.


6.2 Municipal Judge.

(1)    The council shall appoint a municipal judge to serve for an indefinite term and to hold office at the pleasure of the council. The municipal judge shall be the judicial officer of the city and shall hold within the city, at a place and times that the court specifies, a court known as the Municipal Court for the city of Lincoln City, Lincoln County, Oregon.

(2)    The municipal judge may:

(a)    Render judgments and, for enforcing them, impose sanctions on persons and property within the court’s territorial jurisdiction;

(b)    Order the arrest of anyone accused of an offense against the city;

(c)    Commit to jail or admit to bail anyone accused of such an offense;

(d)    Issue and compel obedience to subpoenas;

(e)    Compel witnesses to appear and testify and jurors to serve in the trial of matters before the court;

(f)    Penalize contempt of court;

(g)    Issue process necessary to effectuate judgments and orders of the court;

(h)    Issue search warrants or inspection warrants; and

(i)    Perform other judicial and quasi-judicial functions prescribed by ordinance.

(3)    The council may authorize the municipal judge to appoint municipal judges pro tem for terms of office set by the judge or the council.


Chapter VII ELECTIONS


7.1 City Elections.

Regular city elections shall be held on the same dates as the general biennial elections for the State of Oregon, in accordance with applicable state election laws. Special elections may be held in accordance with state law. (Amendment approved by the voters May 15, 2007, effective June 11, 2007)


7.2 Regulation of Elections.

Except as this Charter provides otherwise, and as the council provides otherwise by ordinances relating to elections, the general laws of the state shall apply to all city elections.


7.3 Canvass of Returns.

In all elections held in conjunction with state and county elections, the state laws governing the filing of returns by the county clerk shall apply. The results of all elections shall be made a matter of record of the proceedings of the council at the next regular council meeting following the election. The record shall contain a statement of the total number of votes cast for each person and for and against each proposition, the name of each person elected to office, the office to which the person has been elected, and a reference to each measure enacted or approved.


7.4 Tie Votes.

In the event of a tie vote for candidates for an elective office, the successful candidate shall be determined by a public drawing of lots in a manner prescribed by the council.


7.5 Commencement of Terms of Office.

The term of office of a person elected to a city office at a regular city election commences at the first council meeting of the new calendar year immediately following the election. (Amendment approved by the voters May 15, 2007, effective June 11, 2007)


7.6 Oath of Office.

Before commencing the duties of office, each elective officer shall take an oath or shall affirm faithful performance of the duties of the office and support for the constitutions and laws of the United States and the State of Oregon.


7.7 Nominations.

Any candidate for an elective office may be nominated by filing with the recorder a petition in such form as may be prescribed by ordinance, signed by 25 legal voters of the city. The signers of a petition for councilor from a particular ward shall be legal voters residing within that ward; but if the petition is for mayor, said petition may be signed by legal voters residing in any ward in the city. Subject to the requirements of this section, a legal voter may sign more than one nominating petition for the same office. No candidate for office may file for more than one elective city position.


7.8 Elections of Candidates for City Office.

A non-partisan election of candidates for city office shall be held in each even numbered year on the date of the general biennial election for the State of Oregon, or as hereafter provided by the constitution or general laws of Oregon regulating elections, and on the day and month fixed for such elections. The candidate who receives the highest number of the votes cast at the election for the office is elected to that office. (Amendment approved by the voters May 15, 2007, effective June 11, 2007)


7.9 Write-in Votes.

The ability of the voters of the city to elect a candidate by write-in vote shall be provided on all ballots. (Amendment approved by the voters May 15, 2007, effective June 11, 2007)


CHAPTER VIII VACANCIES IN OFFICE


8.1 What Creates Vacancy.

(1)    An office becomes vacant upon the incumbent’s:

(a)    Death;

(b)    Adjudicated incompetence;

(c)    Conviction of a crime involving official misconduct or misuse of confidential information;

(d)    Conviction of any felony;

(e)    Unlawful destruction of public records;

(f)    Resignation;

(g)    Recall or removal from office;

(h)    Ceasing to possess the qualifications for office;

(i)    Failure, following election or appointment to the office, to qualify for the office within ten days after the time for the term of office to commence.

(2)    An office becomes vacant upon declaration by the council of the vacancy in case of the incumbent’s:

(a)    Termination of residency in the city;

(b)    Termination of a council member’s principal residency in the area he or she represents;

(c)    Absence from the city for thirty (30) consecutive days without consent of the council;

(d)    Absence from the meetings of the council occurring within a sixty (60) day period without the council’s consent.


8.2 Filling Vacancies

A vacancy in the council shall be filled by appointment by majority of the council, provided, however, that the council may in its discretion call a special election for the purpose of filling such vacancy. The appointee’s term shall begin immediately upon his or her appointment and qualification and shall continue through the unexpired term of the appointee’s predecessor. During the temporary disability of a council member, or during a member’s absence from the city, the office may be filled pro-tem in the manner provided for filling vacancies in office.


CHAPTER IX ORDINANCES


9.1 Ordaining Clause

The ordaining clause of an ordinance shall be: “The City of Lincoln City ordains as follows:”.


9.2 Adoption by Council.

(1)    An ordinance may be enacted at a single meeting of the council by unanimous vote of all council members voting when a quorum is present upon being read by title only. If a request is made by any council member for the ordinance to be read in full, the ordinance shall be read fully and distinctly prior to vote on the ordinance, unless at least three days before the reading a copy of the ordinance was provided for each council member and three (3) copies of the ordinance were available for public inspection in the office of the custodian of city records and notice of the availability of the ordinance was posted at City Hall and two (2) other public places in the city.

(2)    If, after first reading of the ordinance in full or by title, the council does not unanimously approve adoption of the ordinance, the ordinance shall come back to the council for a second reading at a the council meeting on a different day. The second reading shall be by title only, unless a council member requests that the ordinance be read in full and a majority of the council concurs that the ordinance should be read in full. Adoption of an ordinance after second reading requires the express concurrence of a majority of the members of the council voting when a quorum of the council is present.

(3)    An ordinance read by title only has no legal effect if it differs substantially from its terms as it was filed prior to the reading unless each section so differing is read fully and distinctly in open council meeting before the council adopts the ordinance.

(4)    Upon the adoption of an ordinance, the ayes and nays of the council members shall be entered in the record of council proceedings.

(5)    After adoption of an ordinance, the custodian of city records shall endorse it with the date of adoption and the endorser’s name and title of office. The mayor shall also sign the ordinance and include thereon the date of signing and the title of office.


9.3 Effective Date

A non-emergency ordinance takes effect on the thirtieth (30th) day after its adoption or on a later day the ordinance prescribes. An ordinance adopted to meet an emergency may take effect as soon as it is adopted or on some other date specified in the ordinance.


CHAPTER X PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS


10.1 Procedure

The procedure for making, altering, vacating, or abandoning a public improvement shall be governed by general ordinance or, to the extent not so governed, by applicable state law.


10.2 Special Assessments

The procedure for fixing, levying, and collecting special assessments against real property for public improvements or other public services shall be governed by general ordinance.


10.3 Public Contracts

Public contracts shall be in accordance with state law and ordinances and resolutions adopted by the City Council and at the discretion of the local contract review board for the city of Lincoln City in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted by the local contract review board.


CHAPTER XI MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS


11.1 Debt Limit

The city’s indebtedness may not exceed debt limits imposed by state law. A city officer or employee who creates or officially approves indebtedness in excess of this limitation is jointly and severally liable for the excess. A charter amendment is not required to authorize city indebtedness.


11.1.5 Imposition and Allocation of Transient Room Tax.

(1)    For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient shall pay a tax in the amount of nine and one-half percent of the rent charged by the operator. The procedures applicable to the collection, administration and enforcement of this tax shall be governed by ordinance of the city.

(2)    After payment of the costs associated with administering the fund determined as provided by ordinance of the city, the net funds collected pursuant to a tax of 9.5 percent of the rent charged by the operator shall be distributed as follows:

(a)    One eighth of the revenue from the 8 percent tax shall be irrevocably pledged and utilized, while bonds are outstanding, for the repayment of the general obligation bonds issued for the purpose of acquisition or construction of a Library and Civic Center at Lincoln Square, and for payment of refunding bonds, if any are issued to reduce debt service for this issue, except that, while bonds are outstanding, any surplus of one eighth of the revenue over the debt service on the bonds or refunding bonds also may be used for renovation, rehabilitation, improvement, and physical maintenance of Lincoln Square. Thereafter, this portion of the transient room tax will be allocated to other capital construction needs of the city.

(b)    Two eighths of the revenue from the 8 percent tax shall be deposited in the city’s Visitors and Convention Bureau Fund, shall be restricted to marketing Lincoln City as a tourist destination, and shall be expended solely and directly by the city’s Visitors and Convention Bureau. “Marketing” means those activities that will increase Lincoln City’s share of leisure, motorcoach, and conference business through advertising, public relations, collateral materials, tourism research, and operation of a visitor information center.

(c)    One eighth of the revenue from the 8 percent tax shall be allocated to the public safety needs of the city.

(d)    Four eighths of the revenue from the 8 percent tax shall be retained by the city to be used for the purposes of street construction and maintenance, traffic control signals, drainage facilities, (including storm drains), pedestrian safety equipment and features, lighting, right-of-way acquisition, pavement widening, grade separation, bridge or culvert construction, channelization, and street extension, for park and recreation facilities construction and maintenance; for community celebrations and the provision and maintenance of visitor-oriented outdoor signs and facilities; and for the actual and reasonable administrative costs allocable to such stated purposes or any of them.

(e)    Beginning July 1, 2008, the revenues from the increase of one and one-half percent transient room tax shall be allocated in the following proportion: 30 percent to public safety needs of the city and 70 percent to tourism promotion or tourism-related facilities including programs of the city and eligible non-profit corporations that primarily serve the shoulder and off-season period of September 16 through June 30, and as allocated in the City’s annual budget.

(Amendment approved by the voters May 20, 2008, effective July 1, 2008; amendment approved by the voters May 21, 2002, effective July 1, 2002: tax originally approved by voters June 25, 1991, effective January 1, 1992)


11.2 Continuation of Ordinances

All ordinances of the city consistent with this charter in force when it takes effect remain in effect until amended or repealed.


11.3 Structures Exceeding 45 Feet in Height.

(a)    Notwithstanding any other provision of this charter, nor of state law, no variance, permit, license or consent shall be granted by the city of Lincoln City, nor by any council, board, commission, agency or officer thereof, for the construction or erection of any structure used for human habitation more than 45 feet in height within the city of Lincoln City as it now or in the future may be, unless such variance, permit, license or consent first shall be approved by the voters of the city of Lincoln City at a regular or special election; nor shall any person, corporation, partnership, association or public agency construct or erect such a structure without such prior approval by the voters of the city of Lincoln City.

(b)    For the purposes of this section, “height” shall mean the vertical distance from the average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of the building to the highest point of the roof, exclusive of chimneys.


11.4 Repeal of Previously Enacted Provisions

All charter provisions of the city enacted prior to the time this charter takes effect are repealed. This repeal shall not affect the validity of an outstanding bond issued by the city or impair the obligation of the city under the bond or the rights of the holders of the bond, and it shall not affect bond issuing power or the power of taxation that has not been exhausted.


11.5 Severability

The terms of this charter are severable. If a part of the charter is held invalid, that invalidity does not affect another part of the charter, except as the logical relation between the two parts requires.


11.6 Time of Effect of Charter

This charter shall take effect January 1, 1989.


Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.04    General Provisions

1.08    Ward Boundaries

1.12    Elections

1.16    Violations

1.20    Repealed

1.24    Initiative and Referendum Procedures

1.26    Uniform Administrative Appeals


Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION

Sections:

1.01.010    Adoption.

1.01.020    Title – Citation – Reference.

1.01.030    Contents.

1.01.040    Ordinances passed prior to code adoption.

1.01.050    Reference applies to all amendments.

1.01.060    Title, chapter and section headings.

1.01.070    Reference to specific ordinances.

1.01.080    Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

1.01.090    Effective date.

1.01.100    Constitutionality.


1.01.010 Adoption.

There is hereby adopted the Lincoln City Municipal Code as published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. (Ord. 89-13 § 1)


1.01.020 Title – Citation – Reference.

This code shall be known as the “Lincoln City Municipal Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the “Lincoln City Municipal Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Lincoln City Municipal Code. Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the Lincoln City Municipal Code, and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 89-13 § 2)


1.01.030 Contents.

This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the city of Lincoln City, Oregon. (Ord. 89-13 § 3)


1.01.040 Ordinances passed prior to code adoption.

The last ordinance included in the original code is Ordinance 89-3, passed January 23, 1989. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 89-3, but prior to adoption of this code, are hereby adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinances 89-4, 89-5, 89-6, 89-7, 89-8, 89-9, 89-10, 89-11, and 89-12. (Ord. 89-13 § 4)


1.01.050 Reference applies to all amendments.

Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “Lincoln City Municipal Code” or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Lincoln City, Oregon, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 89-13 § 5)


1.01.060 Title, chapter and section headings.

Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 89-13 § 6)


1.01.070 Reference to specific ordinances.

The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 89-13 § 7)


1.01.080 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendments hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 89-13 § 8)


1.01.090 Effective date.

This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code as the “Lincoln City Municipal Code” shall become effective. (Ord. 89-13 § 9)


1.01.100 Constitutionality.

If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council hereby declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 89-13 § 10)


Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

1.04.010    Definitions.

1.04.020    Title of office.

1.04.030    Interpretation of language.

1.04.040    Grammatical interpretation.

1.04.050    Acts by agents.

1.04.060    Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.

1.04.065    General penalty.

1.04.070    Computation of time.

1.04.080    Construction.

1.04.090    Effect of repeal of code sections and ordinances.


1.04.010 Definitions.

The following words and phrases, whenever used in this code, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:

“City” and “town” each mean the city of Lincoln City, Oregon, or the area within the territorial limits of the city of Lincoln City, Oregon, and such territory outside the city of Lincoln City over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.

“Council” means the city council of the city of Lincoln City. “All its members” or “all councilors” means the total number of councilors holding office.

“County” means the county of Lincoln.

“Handicapped person” means a person who, temporarily or permanently, is affected by any of the following disabilities:

1. An ambulatory disability because of which a person:

a. Is so severely physically and permanently disabled as to be unable to move from place to place without the aid of a wheelchair,

b. Is not able to cross curbs because of paralysis or loss of function of the person’s legs,

c. Is missing one or both legs, or

d. Has a permanently impaired or unsteady gait that makes it impossible or impractical to walk as a means of transportation;

2. Loss or loss of function of one or both legs or significant limitation in the use of the legs;

3. Inability to be mobile without the use of a wheelchair or other assistance device;

4. Respiratory disability that makes use of walking as a means of transportation impossible or impractical;

5. Cardiovascular disability that makes use of walking as a means of transportation impossible or impractical.

In order to qualify for any privileges granted by city ordinances to handicapped persons, the city may require that the individual provide certification from a licensed physician that the person is a handicapped person as defined above.

“Law” means and denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of Oregon, the ordinances of the city of Lincoln City, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.

“May” is permissive.

“Month” means a calendar month.

“Must” and “shall” are each mandatory.

“Oath” includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”

“Owner,” applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or part of such building or land.

“Person” includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

“Personal property” means and includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt.

“Preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.

“Property” includes real and personal property.

“Real property” includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.

“Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.

“State” means the state of Oregon.

“Street” includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs or other public ways in the city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of the state.

“Tenant” and “occupant,” applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

“Written” includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form.

“Year” means a calendar year. (Ord. 88-12 § 1)


1.04.020 Title of office.

Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city of Lincoln City. (Ord. 88-12 § 2)


1.04.030 Interpretation of language.

All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. (Ord. 88-12 § 3)


1.04.040 Grammatical interpretation.

The following grammatical rules shall apply in this code, unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended:

A. Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders.

B. Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.

C. Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. (Ord. 88-12 § 4)


1.04.050 Acts by agents.

When an act is required by this code, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. (Ord. 88-12 § 5)


1.04.060 Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.

Whenever in this code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 88-12 § 6)


1.04.065 General penalty.

A. Violation of any provision of this code, including any official rule or regulation authorized to be established by resolution or order pursuant to this code, is unlawful and an offense against the city. Unless a different penalty is specified for an offense in this code or in the appropriate resolution or order, such violation shall be enforced as a Class B violation and is subject to citation as provided in Chapter 1.16 LCMC.

B. In addition to any fine imposed, any violation of a provision of this code, including a rule or regulation established by resolution or order, shall be subject to recovery of administrative enforcement costs.

C. In addition to any fine imposed, any violation of a provision of this code, including a rule or regulation established by resolution or order, which violation causes damage to city property, shall require full restitution for all damages caused by the violation.

D. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the criminal prosecution of violators who cause damage to city property when violating a code provision. (Ord. 2015-10 § 3; Ord. 2013-18 § 1)


1.04.070 Computation of time.

Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Saturday, Sunday or a city recognized state or federal holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. (Ord. 2015-10 § 4; Ord. 88-12 § 7)


1.04.080 Construction.

The provisions of this code and all proceedings thereunder are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. (Ord. 88-12 § 8)


1.04.090 Effect of repeal of code sections and ordinances.

Repeal of a code section or ordinance shall not revive a code section or ordinance in force before or at the time the repealed code section or ordinance took effect. The repeal shall not affect a punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect nor a suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the repealed code section or ordinance. (Ord. 88-12 § 9)


Chapter 1.08 WARD BOUNDARIES

Sections:

1.08.010    Designated.

1.08.020    Review of boundary lines.

1.08.030    Official map.


1.08.010 Designated.

The ward boundaries of the city are shown in Exhibit A to the ordinance codified in this section, and specifically described as follows:

A. Ward 1 shall be the area of the city north of the line that starts at the intersection of the eastern boundary of the city and the eastern line of Tax Lot 00202 as shown on Lincoln County assessor’s map 07-11-11-AC, then northerly along said eastern lot line to the northern lot line of the said Tax Lot 00202, then westerly along the said northern lot line to the eastern lot line of Tax Lot 06000 as shown on Lincoln County assessor’s map 07-11-11-AB, then northerly along the said eastern lot line of the said Tax Lot 06000 to its intersection with NE 26th Street, then westerly along NE 26th Street to its intersection with West Devils Lake Road, then southerly along West Devils Lake Road to its intersection with NE 22nd Street, then westerly along NE 22nd Street to its intersection with Highway 101, then northerly along Highway 101 to its intersection with NW 26th Street, then westerly along NW 26th Street to its intersection with NW Inlet Avenue, then northerly along NW Inlet Avenue to its intersection with NW 28th Street, then easterly along NW 28th Street to its intersection with NW Jetty Avenue, then northerly along NW Jetty Avenue to its intersection with NW 31st Street, then westerly along NW 31st Street to the western boundary of the city.

B. Ward 2 shall be the area of the city south of Ward 1 and north of the line that starts at the intersection of the easterly boundary of the city and East Devils Lake Road, then westerly along East Devils Lake Road to its intersection with Highway 101, then across Highway 101 to SW 12th Street, then westerly along SW 12th Street to its intersection with SW Fleet Avenue, then northerly along SW Fleet Drive to its intersection with SW 11th Drive, then westerly along SW 11th Drive to the western boundary of the city.

C. Ward 3 shall be the area of the city south of Ward 2. (Ord. 2012-02 § 1; Ord. 2003-15 § 4; Ord. 2001-09 § 2; Ord. 230 § 2, 1974)


1.08.020 Review of boundary lines.

The city council shall review the boundary lines of the respective council wards from time to time and, at the least, every two years, commencing with the month of January 1975, and shall adjust the boundary lines as necessary to maintain wards of as equivalent population as is practical. (Ord. 230 § 4, 1974)


1.08.030 Official map.

The city staff is directed to prepare an official map indicating the current boundary lines of the council wards. (Ord. 230 § 5, 1974)


Chapter 1.12 ELECTIONS

Sections:

1.12.010    Eligibility for nomination for elective office.

1.12.020    Petition – Required – Contents.

1.12.030    Petition – Required signatures – Forms.

1.12.040    Petition – Time for filing.

1.12.050    Deficient petitions – Correction – Refiling.

1.12.060    Preservation of successful candidate’s petition.


1.12.010 Eligibility for nomination for elective office.

A qualified elector who has resided in the city during the six months immediately preceding the last day available for filing for the election may be nominated for an elective city position. (Ord. 89-3 § 1)


1.12.020 Petition – Required – Contents.

Nomination shall be by petition, which shall contain:

A. The name by which the candidate is commonly known. A candidate may use a nickname in parentheses in connection with the candidate’s full name;

B. The mailing address of the residence of the candidate;

C. The office for which the candidate seeks nomination;

D. A statement that the candidate is willing to accept the office if elected;

E. A statement that the candidate will qualify if elected;

F. The signature of the candidate. (Ord. 89-3 § 1(a) – (f))


1.12.030 Petition – Required signatures – Forms.

Such petition shall be signed by not fewer than 25 electors. The signers of a petition for councilor from a particular ward shall be legal voters residing within that ward; but if the petition is for mayor, such petition may be signed by legal voters residing in any ward in the city. The signature sheets and forms therefor shall be in accordance with the applicable rules and forms designed by the Secretary of State. (Ord. 89-3 § 2)


1.12.040 Petition – Time for filing.

All nomination papers comprising a petition shall be assembled and filed with the city recorder as one instrument not later than five working days before the last day available for filing for the election with the county. The city recorder will post notice of the date for filing nomination petitions with the city at least 20 days prior to the filing date. The recorder shall make a record of the exact time at which each petition is filed and shall take and preserve the name, residence and mailing address of the person by whom it is filed. (Ord. 89-23 § 1; Ord. 89-3 § 3)


1.12.050 Deficient petitions – Correction – Refiling.

If the petition is not signed by the required number of qualified electors, the recorder shall notify the candidate and the person who filed the petition within five days after the filing. If the petition is insufficient in any other particular, the recorder shall return it immediately to the person who filed it, certifying in writing wherein the petition is insufficient. Such deficient petition may be amended and filed again as a new petition, or a substitute petition for the same candidate may be filed within the regular time for filing nomination petitions. (Ord. 89-3 § 3)


1.12.060 Preservation of successful candidate’s petition.

The petition of nomination for a successful candidate at an election shall be preserved in the office of the recorder until the term of office for which the candidate is elected expires. (Ord. 89-3 § 3)


Chapter 1.16 VIOLATIONS

Sections:

1.16.010    Applicability.

1.16.020    Purpose.

1.16.030    Definitions.

1.16.040    Enforcement authority – Initiation of violation proceedings.

1.16.045    Warnings.

1.16.050    Arrest or detention prohibited.

1.16.055    Right of entry – Administrative search and inspection warrant.

1.16.060    Service – Service by mail and failure to receive notice – Default.

1.16.070    Fine and assessment amounts.

1.16.080    Response by defendant.

1.16.090    Statement by defendant deemed waiver of hearing and consent to presumptive fine.

1.16.095    Failure to appear on a violation citation.

1.16.100    Trial/hearing – Notice.

1.16.110    Discretionary powers of court.

1.16.120    Violation trial – Requirements and procedures.

1.16.130    Repealed.

1.16.140    Cumulative nonexclusive remedies.

1.16.150    Additional remedies.

1.16.160    Delinquent forfeitures – Lien.

1.16.170    Continuing violations.


1.16.010 Applicability.

The procedures set forth in this chapter shall be applicable to all noncriminal offenses (violations) so designated by existing ordinances of the city and all future ordinances which designate an offense as a violation. (Ord. 2015-10 § 1; Ord. 87-10 § 14)


1.16.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide a convenient and practical forum for a civil hearing and determination of cases arising out of violations of city ordinances. (Ord. 2015-10 § 1; Ord. 87-10 § 1)


1.16.030 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:

“City enforcement officer” or “enforcement officer,” means, for purposes of this chapter, any one or more of the following personnel: city manager, city attorney, code enforcement officer, VRD compliance officer, city engineer, building official, building inspector, any sworn member of the Lincoln City police department, or any city employee, contractor or agent designated by the city manager in writing to perform code enforcement. 

“Fine” means the penalty imposed when a violation is found to have been committed.

“Person” means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association of persons. 

“Violation” is defined as described in ORS 153.008 which generally means that the offense is not punishable by imprisonment but may be subject to a fine or other sanction. (Ord. 2015-10 § 1; Ord. 87-10 § 2)


1.16.040 Enforcement authority – Initiation of violation proceedings.

Enforcement officers are empowered to investigate and enforce all violations of city ordinances. For criminal offenses created by city ordinance, any city police officer may make an arrest consistent with the criminal laws of the state of Oregon or may issue and serve a citation in lieu of arrest as authorized by state law. Except as provided herein, violation enforcement shall be consistent with ORS Chapter 153. For violation offenses created by city ordinance or charter, including ordinances adopting state law by reference, any enforcement officer may issue and serve a citation, complaint and summons which shall be in the form of a uniform citation and complaint form adopted by the Oregon Supreme Court. Notwithstanding the above, a city enforcement officer is expressly authorized by law to issue a citation to a person for a violation created by city ordinance if the city official personally witnesses the violation or has probable cause to believe that the person has committed a city ordinance offense. If the person to be issued a citation is a firm, corporation or any other organization, issuance of a citation to any employee, agent or representative thereof shall be sufficient to confer jurisdiction upon the municipal court. Only city enforcement officers may initiate violation proceedings for city charter and city ordinance offenses, except that consistent with ORS 153.058, a person other than an enforcement officer may commence a violation proceeding for violation of state law offenses described in ORS 153.058, and their city ordinance equivalents, if adopted by reference. (Ord. 2015-10 § 1; Ord. 92-24 § 1; Ord. 87-10 § 3(1), (2))


1.16.045 Warnings.

A city enforcement officer may issue a warning notice for any noncriminal violation of the code, provided the code does not prohibit a warning. Warning notices generally provide a brief description of the violation, the name of the city department to contact regarding the abatement of the violation, the name of the person issuing the warning notice, the date the warning was issued, and a statement that failure to correct the alleged violation or to contact the named department contact within a specific time frame may result in enforcement proceedings. The warning notice shall be served upon the person or entity accused of the violation and a copy placed in the enforcement file. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a warning notice be given to any defendant prior to issuing a citation or taking any other enforcement or abatement action. (Ord. 2015-10 § 1)


1.16.050 Arrest or detention prohibited.

No person may be arrested or detained for violation of a city ordinance denominated as a violation. (Ord. 2015-10 § 1; Ord. 87-10 § 3(3))


1.16.055 Right of entry – Administrative search and inspection warrant.

When it is necessary to inspect a building or premises to enforce the provisions of this code, or the city enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to, in violation of this code or which otherwise makes the building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the city enforcement officer may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code; however, if the building or premises is occupied the city enforcement officer must present his credentials to the occupant and request entry. If the building or premises is unoccupied, the city enforcement officer shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person in charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the city enforcement officer shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry, including but not limited to taking action to obtain an administrative search warrant from the municipal or circuit court. (Ord. 2015-10 § 1)


1.16.060 Service – Service by mail and failure to receive notice – Default.

A. Service on individuals may be made by a city enforcement officer by any of the following means:

1. Service may be made by mailing the summons and complaint by restricted or unrestricted certified or registered mail, return receipt requested. For purposes of computing any time period prescribed by this code, service by mail shall be complete three days after such mailing if the address to which it was mailed is within the state, and seven days after mailing if the address to which it is mailed is outside the state.

2. No default shall be entered against any responsible party served by mail under this section who has not either received or rejected the registered or certified letter containing a copy of the summons and complaint, unless otherwise authorized by the municipal judge based upon service procedures of the Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure.

3. Service may be made by delivering the summons and complaint directly to the person to be served.

4. Substituted service may be made by delivering a copy of the summons and complaint at the dwelling house or usual place of abode of the person to be served, to any person over 14 years of age residing in the dwelling house or usual place of abode of the person to be served. Where substituted service is used, the enforcement officer, as soon as reasonably possible, shall cause to be mailed a true copy of the summons and complaint to the responsible party at the responsible party’s dwelling house or usual place of abode, together with a statement of the date, time, and place at which substituted service was made. For the purpose of computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this code, substituted service shall be complete upon mailing.

5. If the person to be served maintains an office for the conduct of business, office service may be made by leaving a true copy of the summons and complaint at such office during normal working hours with the person who is apparently in charge. Where office service is used, the enforcement officer, as soon as reasonably possible, shall cause to be mailed a true copy of the summons and complaint to the responsible party at the responsible party’s dwelling house or usual place of abode or the responsible party’s place of business or such other place under the circumstances that is most reasonably calculated to apprise the responsible party of the existence and dependency of the action, together with a statement of the date, time, and place at which office service was made. For the purpose of computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this chapter, office service shall be complete upon such mailing.

B. Service on particular responsible parties, minors, incapacitated persons, corporations, limited partnerships, the state, other public bodies, general partnerships and other entities, shall be on the persons named in the Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure. (Ord. 2015-10 § 1; Ord. 92-24 § 2; Ord. 87-10 § 4)


1.16.070 Fine and assessment amounts.

A. Violations designated by ordinances of the city are classified and the maximum fines and presumptive fines for commission of a violation, consistent with ORS Chapter 153, are as follows:

Maximum: 

1. Class A violation, $2,000;

2. Class B violation, $1,000;

3. Class C violation, $500.00;

4. Class D violation, $250.00;

5. Class E violation, $125.00;

6. Class F violation, $75.00.

Presumptive fine to be included on citation/summons: 

1. Class A violation, $440.00;

2. Class B violation, $265.00;

3. Class C violation $165.00;

4. Class D violation, $115.00

5. Class E violation, $70.00;

6. Class F violation, $30.00.

The presumptive fine for a specific fine violation is:

1. The amount specified by the ordinance or statute adopted by reference as the presumptive fine for the violation; or

2. An amount equal to the greater of 20 percent of the maximum fine prescribed for the violation, or the minimum fine prescribed by statute for the violation.

3. The $5.00 additional charge consistent with the 2017 legislative increase shall be added to any specific fine amount presumptive fine.

B. Notwithstanding the above, a person who commits a tree removal violation shall also be subject to a fine in an amount equal to the value of trees removed in violation of LCMC Title 17. The value of those trees shall be computed utilizing the International Society of Arboriculture tree value formula or a similar method in common use as determined by the city engineer. Such fines shall be deposited in a special revenue fund known as the tree preservation and planting fund, which fund is hereby established effective December 1, 1992, to be used for tree preservation or planting efforts.

C. Whenever the city municipal court orders a fine as a penalty for committing a violation, an assessment in addition to such fine shall be collected and forwarded to the city finance director to be credited to a special revenue fund known as the code enforcement fund, which fund is hereby established effective December 1, 1992, to be utilized by the city for the partial funding of its code enforcement efforts. The amount of the assessment shall be as follows:

1. For Class A violations, $100.00;

2. For Class B violations, $60.00;

3. For Class C violations, $25.00;

4. For Class D violations, $10.00;

5. For Class E violations, $5.00;

6. For Class F violations, $0.00.

D. When a defendant is served with a violation citation for violation of a city ordinance, the amount of the presumptive fine set forth in the citation and complaint/summons shall not include the assessment imposed in subsection (C) of this section. If the violator submits the presumptive fine with a guilty or no contest plea prior to the date of appearance, the assessment in subsection (C) of this section is deemed waived. The city municipal court shall impose the fee in all other circumstances, and shall not waive or suspend any portion of the mandatory assessment imposed in subsection (C) of this section. (Ord. 2017-24 § 1; Ord. 2015-10 § 1; Ord. 92-24 § 3; Ord. 87-10 § 5)


1.16.080 Response by defendant.

A. When a defendant is served with a violation citation, the defendant shall either appear in court at the time indicated in the summons or make an appearance as provided in ORS 153.061. As authorized by ORS 153.061(4), a defendant requesting a trial under ORS 153.061(3) shall deposit an amount equal to the presumptive fine for the offense or such other amount as the court determines appropriate if the defendant has failed to appear in any court on one or more other charges in the past.

B. Notwithstanding the appearance options generally available for violation offenses under state law, when the municipal code offense alleged involves a continuing violation, a personal appearance on the citation shall be required. The violation citation itself or this code may specify offenses or classes of offenses which require a personal appearance.

C. In any case in which the defendant personally appears in court at the time indicated in the summons, if the defendant desires to admit the violation and the judge decides to accept the plea, the judge shall hear any statement in explanation or mitigation that the defendant desires to make. 

D. The municipal court is bound by the minimum fine provisions of ORS 153.021 as it relates to Class A through D violation offenses.

These statutory minimum fine amounts are as follows:

1. For a Class A violation, $225.00;

2. For a Class B violation, $135.00;

3. For a Class C violation, $85.00;

4. For a Class D violation, $65.00.

Except as otherwise provided by law, a court may not defer, waive, suspend or otherwise reduce the fine for a specific fine violation to an amount that is less than 20 percent of the presumptive fine for the violation. (Ord. 2017-24 § 2; Ord. 2015-10 § 1; Ord. 87-10 § 6)


1.16.090 Statement by defendant deemed waiver of hearing and consent to presumptive fine.

If the defendant has submitted to the court any written statement in explanation or mitigation of a guilty or no contest plea, the statement constitutes a waiver of hearing and consent to judgment. The court may declare a forfeiture of any presumptive fine submitted on the basis of the statement and any testimony or written statement of the city manager, his designee, or any other police officer or person which may be presented to the court. (Ord. 2015-10 § 1; Ord. 87-10 § 7)


1.16.095 Failure to appear on a violation citation. 

Failure to appear on a violation citation may result in a default judgment, criminal prosecution for failure to appear pursuant to state law (ORS 153.992), a court order to show cause for contempt, as well as issuance of an arrest warrant. (Ord. 2015-10 § 1)


1.16.100 Trial/hearing – Notice.

If the defendant requests a trial/hearing, or the court directs that a trial/hearing be had, the court shall fix a date and time for the trial/hearing and, unless notice is waived, shall, at least seven days in advance of the trial/hearing, mail to the defendant a notice of the date and time so fixed. (Ord. 2015-10 § 1; Ord. 87-10 § 8)


1.16.110 Discretionary powers of court.

The court, on its own motion, may direct that a trial/hearing be held for any violation offense and may enter the appropriate judgment, declare a forfeiture of the presumptive fine or other deposit, and remit to the defendant any amount by which the fine assessed is less than the amount posted by the defendant, if any, pursuant to LCMC 1.16.080. (Ord. 2015-10 § 1; Ord. 87-10 § 9)


1.16.120 Violation trial – Requirements and procedures.

A. The trial of any violation offense shall be by the court without a jury, unless otherwise required by law. 

B. The city shall have the burden of proving the violation offense by a preponderance of the evidence and the defendant may not be required to be a witness in the trial of such violation offense. 

C. Proof of culpable mental state is not an element of a violation. 

D. The city attorney shall have the authority to prosecute any violation of a city ordinance. At any trial involving a violation offense, the city attorney shall not appear unless the defendant is represented by an attorney, or unless the city attorney is granted leave of the court to appear. The city attorney may aid any enforcement officer in preparing the case for trial including obtaining evidence and witnesses. Further, at any such violation trial, defense counsel shall not be provided at public expense, unless otherwise required by law. 

E. Consistent with state law, in any trial of a violation offense, whether created by ordinance or statute, in which the city attorney is prohibited from appearing, the city police officer or the city enforcement officer who issued the citation for the offense is specifically authorized by law to present evidence, examine and cross-examine witnesses and make arguments relating to: 

1. The application of statutes and rules to the facts in the case; 

2. The literal meaning of the statutes or rules at issue in the case; 

3. The admissibility of evidence; and 

4. Proper procedures to be used in the trial. 

F. Except as expressly provided above for enforcement officers, only a person who is currently licensed to practice law in the state of Oregon by the Oregon State Bar is permitted to represent another person or entity in the Lincoln City municipal court.

G. A person who commits a violation offense by violating designated provisions of the code shall not suffer any disability or legal disadvantage based upon conviction of crime. (Ord. 2015-10 § 1; Ord. 87-10 § 13)


1.16.130 City attorney involvement.

Repealed by Ord. 2015-10. (Ord. 87-10 § 12)


1.16.140 Cumulative nonexclusive remedies.

The rights, remedies, and penalties provided in the code are cumulative, are not mutually exclusive, and are in addition to any other rights, remedies and penalties available to the city under any other provision of law, including but not limited to the abatement of a nuisance. (Ord. 2015-10 § 1; Ord. 87-10 § 3(4))


1.16.150 Additional remedies.

In addition to any other remedy provided in this chapter, the city manager may deny or revoke any city license or permit held or applied for by a person owing a forfeiture to the city assessed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2015-10 § 1; Ord. 87-10 § 11)


1.16.160 Delinquent forfeitures – Lien.

In any case where a fine or forfeiture assessed by the court is not paid, or where there is a default judgment, the city recorder shall enter into the lien docket the amount of the fine or forfeiture against any real or personal property of the defendant within the city, and the fine or forfeiture, after being filed as a lien, shall be collected in the same manner as other liens owing to the city or in any other manner allowed by law for the collection of a debt. (Ord. 2015-10 § 1; Ord. 87-10 § 10)


1.16.170 Continuing violations.

When a violation is of a continuing nature, a separate violation will be deemed to occur on each calendar day that the violation continues, and the citation shall clearly indicate the dates or range of dates alleged for such continuing violation. In addition, a separate citation may be issued for each such violation date or range of dates. (Ord. 2015-10 § 1; Ord. 87-10 § 3(5))


Chapter 1.20 ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT

(Repealed by Ord. 2015-10)


Chapter 1.24 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM PROCEDURES

Sections:

1.24.010    Definitions.

1.24.020    Adoption of state initiative and referendum laws.

1.24.025    Processing fees.

1.24.030    Filing requirements for initiative petitions.

1.24.040    Verification of signatures.

1.24.050    Explanatory statement.

1.24.060    Effective date of measures.

1.24.070    Conflicting measures.

1.24.080    Unlawful acts.

1.24.090    Violation – Penalty.


1.24.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter:

“City elections officer” means the city recorder for the city of Lincoln City.

“Elector” means a person who is qualified to vote in the city.

“Emergency election” means an election held as provided by ORS 221.230(2) when the council finds that to avoid extraordinary hardship to the community it is necessary to hold an election sooner than the next available election date specified in ORS 221.230(1).

“Measure” means a legislative enactment by the council that is not necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health and safety; a part of such enactment; or a proposed legislative enactment submitted by initiative for the city.

“Petition” means an initiative or referendum petition for ordering a measure to be submitted to the electors. (Ord. 89-12 § 1)


1.24.020 Adoption of state initiative and referendum laws.

ORS 250.005 through 250.041 and ORS 250.255 through 250.346 are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 89-12 § 2)


1.24.025 Processing fees.

A. Processing Fees. Any person or persons, organization or organizations presenting or offering any prospective initiative petition or referendum for review by the city elections officer shall, at the time of filing said prospective petition or referendum, pay a nonrefundable processing review fee; said fee shall initially be set at $280.00 for an initiative and $140.00 for referendum, but said fees may be adjusted by the city council by resolution.

B. Fees Required with Final Filing. Any person or persons, organization or organizations presenting or offering any initiative or referendum petition for final filing with signatures for review shall, at the time of such filing, submit to the city elections officer a nonrefundable processing fee for costs. The fee shall be either cash or a certified check made to the order of the city of Lincoln City, or other payment acceptable to the city finance director, and the initial fee shall be set at the sum of $500.00 but said fee sum may be adjusted by the city council by resolution.

C. The fee provisions herein are expressly made for the purpose of preventing depletion of city resources and funds by elections on matters in which the public is not interested and which have no merit. (Ord. 2016-12 § 1)


1.24.030 Filing requirements for initiative petitions.

An initiative petition relating to a city measure must be filed with the city elections officer not later than the one hundredth day after the date the prospective petition was filed with the city elections officer. The city elections officer shall not accept petitions submitted later than the one hundredth day after the date the prospective petition was filed with the city elections officer. (Ord. 2016-12 § 2; Ord. 89-12 § 3)


1.24.040 Verification of signatures.

A. A signature on a petition sheet shall not be counted unless the person who circulated the sheet verifies by a signed statement on its face that the individuals signed the sheet in the presence of the circulator and the circulator believes that each individual who signed is a qualified elector.

B. No signature upon an initiative petition shall be counted unless a completed petition is offered for filing with the city elections officer within 75 days of the date of the signature.

C. After a petition is submitted for signature verification, no elector who signed the petition may remove the signature of the elector from the petition. (Ord. 89-12 § 4)


1.24.050 Explanatory statement.

For any initiative or referendum by petition, an impartial, simple and understandable statement explaining the measure and its effect shall be submitted by the city council to the Lincoln County elections official to be included in the county voters’ pamphlet for the election. (Ord. 2009-15 § 1)


1.24.060 Effective date of measures.

A. A measure submitted to the electors shall take effect when approved by a majority of the electors voting on it, unless it specifies a later effective date.

B. A measure adopted by the council but subject to a pending referendum for which a completed petition has been timely filed shall have no effect unless and until it is approved by a majority of the electors voting upon it. (Ord. 89-12 § 5. Formerly 1.24.050)


1.24.070 Conflicting measures.

When conflicting measures are approved by the electors at an election, the one receiving the greater number of affirmative votes shall be paramount. (Ord. 89-12 § 6. Formerly 1.24.060)


1.24.080 Unlawful acts.

A. No person other than a registered elector shall sign a petition.

B. No person shall sign a petition with a name not his or her own.

C. No person shall knowingly sign a petition more than once.

D. No person shall knowingly circulate, file or attempt to file with the elections officer a petition that contains a signature signed in violation of this chapter.

E. No person shall procure or attempt to procure a signature on a petition by fraud.

F. No person shall knowingly make a false statement concerning a petition.

G. No person shall make a document required or provided for by this chapter that contains a false statement. (Ord. 89-12 § 8. Formerly 1.24.070)


1.24.090 Violation – Penalty.

Violation of a provision of LCMC 1.24.070 is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. (Ord. 89-12 § 9. Formerly 1.24.080)


Chapter 1.26 UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS

Sections:

1.26.005    Title, purpose and authority.

1.26.010    Definitions.

1.26.020    Applicability and scope of this chapter.

1.26.030    Initiation and scheduling of administrative appeal.

1.26.040    Procedures applicable to de novo hearings.

1.26.050    Costs.


1.26.005 Title, purpose and authority.

A. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “uniform administrative appeals ordinance” and may also be referred to herein as “this chapter.”

B. The purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform appeal procedures for the conduct of due process hearings, including appeal hearings, which may be called for in various sections of the Lincoln City Municipal Code. This chapter will apply only when the code specifically references this chapter for the conduct of a hearing or appeal.

C. This chapter is enacted under the home rule charter authority of the city of Lincoln City. (Ord. 2013-04 § 1)


1.26.010 Definitions.

A. “City recorder” means the person holding the position of city recorder or any officer or employee of the city of Lincoln City delegated or assigned in writing any or all of the tasks of the city recorder herein.

B. “City” means the city of Lincoln City, Oregon.

C. “City council” or “council” means the city council for the city of Lincoln City, or council’s designee.

D. “Day” means calendar day, unless otherwise specified.

E. “Department head” means the person holding the position of department head for any department of the city of Lincoln City, or designee of the department head authorized to perform the duties of the department head by express written delegation.

F. “Hearing officer” means the city manager, municipal court judge, municipal court judge pro tem, contract hearing officer or other outside party not affiliated with the city of Lincoln City, that is hired or selected by the city council or city manager to conduct a hearing or other appeal proceeding. (Ord. 2013-04 § 1)


1.26.020 Applicability and scope of this chapter.

A. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city manager or a department head may appeal such action to the city council through the following procedures if the Lincoln City Municipal Code chapter granting the city manager or department head authority to make the decision expressly authorizes an appeal (or a hearing), and the code specifically authorizes the use of this uniform administrative appeals ordinance. Land use decisions subject to LCMC Title 17 shall not be subject to the appeals process in this chapter.

B. The appeals covered by this chapter include only de novo appeals or hearings from administrative decisions made without a hearing. This chapter does not address “on the record” appeals from decisions made after a hearing.

C. The city council, in its sole discretion, may designate a hearing officer to conduct the hearing and make the decision in its entirety, or to conduct the hearing and prepare a recommended order for council consideration in deliberations. The council may specify use of a hearing officer for individual appeals, or for classes of appeals in a written order or resolution, in their sole discretion, with due consideration of budgeting. (Ord. 2013-04 § 1)


1.26.030 Initiation and scheduling of administrative appeal.

A. Where the LCMC authorizes an appeal, the specific appeal procedures, timeframes, fees and other requirements of the specific LCMC section authorizing the appeal shall control over the more general provisions of this section. Where the specific code sections are silent, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.

B. General procedures for initiation of an appeal are as follows:

1. Appeal Time. A person appealing a decision of the city manager or department head shall, within 10 days of such decision as measured from personal service of the decision, or 12 days of mailing of written notice of decision, file a written notice of appeal with the city recorder.

2. Notice of Appeal Contents. The written notice of appeal shall include the name and address of the appellant, a statement of the authority or jurisdiction for the appeal including specific LCMC sections authorizing the appeal, a statement of the appellant’ s standing or right to be heard, the nature of the decision being appealed, a copy of the decision being appealed, a short and plain narrative statement including the reason(s) the original decision is alleged to be incorrect, with reference to the particular sections of the Lincoln City Municipal Code involved, and the result the appellant desires on appeal.

3.  Appeal Fee. The appellant shall pay a nonrefundable appeals fee to facilitate the appeal. Unless otherwise specified in the applicable code authorizing the appeal, appeal fees shall be $150.00 for each decision appealed, and may be adjusted by resolution of the Lincoln City council.

4. Jurisdictional Defect. Failure to strictly comply with the applicable appeal requirements, including, but not limited to, the required elements for the written notice of appeal, time for filing of the notice of appeal, and payment of the applicable appeal fee, shall constitute jurisdictional defects resulting in the summary dismissal of the appeal. All requirements shall be fully met prior to the appeal deadline.

5. Stay. Unless otherwise specifically provided for in the code, the action of the department head or director shall be stayed pending the outcome of an appeal properly filed pursuant to this section. A stay shall not remain in effect for more than 90 days unless the council or their designee consents to a longer stay.

C. Scheduling the Appeal Before the Council or Hearing Officer.

1. Filing. The city recorder shall accurately document the filing of receipt of appeal materials, including time-stamping the materials submitted.

2. Designated Hearing Officer. If the council has designated a hearing officer for a type or class of appeals, or otherwise delegated the subject matter to a hearing officer, the appeal materials shall be forwarded to the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall first determine whether the jurisdictional requirements for the appeal have been met.

a. If the hearing officer finds the requirements are not met, the hearing officer shall reduce such decision to writing and summarily dismiss the appeal; the final decision sought to be appealed shall stand as the final decision of the city.

b. If the hearing officer finds the requirements for the appeal are met, or does not respond within five days, the city recorder shall contact the hearing officer to set a hearing date not more than 30 days after the appeal has been filed. Nothing herein shall prejudice the hearing officer to later determine that there is no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

3. Council Ad Hoc Hearing Officer Decision. If the council has not designated a hearing officer for this type or class of appeals, the council, after consultation with legal counsel, shall first determine whether the jurisdictional requirements for the appeal have been met. If the council finds the requirements are not met, the council shall reduce this decision to writing and summarily dismiss the appeal; the final decision sought to be appealed shall stand as the final decision of the city.

a. If the council finds the requirements for the appeal are met, the council shall determine by majority vote, and after review of the complexity of the matter, whether to conduct the hearing before the council or to refer the matter to a hearing officer, in whole, or in part (i.e., for hearing and decision, or for hearing and preparation of a recommended order).

b. Thereafter, the city recorder shall set the hearing before the council or contact the hearing officer to set a hearing date not more than 30 days after the appeal has been filed.

4. Public Notice.

a. The city recorder shall notify the parties in writing of the time fixed for hearing. Such written notice shall not be less than 10 days prior to the date of the hearing unless the appellant and the city department head agree to a shorter time.

b. Public notice of the appeal hearing shall be as provided in the specific code section creating authority for the appeal. (Ord. 2013-04 § 1)


1.26.040 Procedures applicable to de novo hearings.

The term “council” in this section includes a delegated hearing officer.

A. The intent of the hearing is to provide the parties with reasonable notice and a meaningful opportunity to be heard. The procedures herein may be varied by the hearing officer in order to best afford the parties procedural due process.

B. The parties shall be entitled to appear personally or by legal counsel. When appearing by counsel, reasonable notice to the city recorder, with copy to the city attorney, is required.

C. The decision of the council shall be the final decision of the city, and it shall be issued in writing and supported by findings of fact as well as competent substantial evidence in the record.

D. The council shall provide procedural due process and shall at a minimum do the following:

1. At the commencement of the hearing, the council shall announce the matter to be heard, the applicable criteria for the decision, the relevant issues involved in the hearing, a summary of applicable procedures, and the burden of proof.

2. At the commencement of the hearing the council shall place on the record the substance of any written or oral ex parte communications concerning any relevant and material fact in issue at the hearing which was made to the council outside the official proceedings during the pendency of the proceeding. The parties shall be notified of the substance of the communication and the right to rebut the communication. Notwithstanding the above, the parties are prohibited from engaging in ex parte communications with the council.

3. Bias challenges made by the parties must be in writing submitted prior to the commencement of the hearing, and must be supported by competent substantial evidence of actual bias.

4. Testimony may be taken upon oath or affirmation of the witnesses. Evidence provided under oath will be given more weight than evidence which is unsworn.

5. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of their serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any law or rule that might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil action in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Evidence of past transactions and occurrences shall not be excluded solely on the basis of having occurred in the past and may be relied upon by the council in making its recommendation. However, irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.

6. The order of proceedings may be varied by the council in order to best afford the parties procedural due process. Generally the order of proceedings shall be as follows:

a. Staff will present the staff report. The staff presentation shall address the applicable criteria for the decision, introduce the relevant and material facts related to the criteria, discuss the application of the facts to the law, and offer a conclusion of compliance or noncompliance.

b. The appellant (applicant below) will present their case and may present such facts, evidence and arguments as may tend to support the appellant’s positions on appeal.

c. Interested members of the public shall be given an opportunity to present evidence or testimony bearing upon the application, whether such evidence is supportive or adverse to the application.

d. The applicant shall be afforded an opportunity to rebut evidence presented in opposition to the application.

e. The council may ask questions of participants, during the participant’s presentations.

7. The council shall ensure that the record developed at the hearing shows a full and fair inquiry into the relevant and material facts for consideration for the issues properly before the council.

8. A verbatim, written or mechanical record shall be made of all motions, rulings and testimony. The record need not be transcribed unless requested for purposes of rehearing or court review. The city shall require a deposit for costs of transcription or a copy of such transcription.

9. Written testimony may be submitted under penalty of perjury and false swearing for entry into the record. All written evidence shall be filed with the city recorder no less than five working days before the date of the hearing. Written evidence may be introduced at the hearing at the discretion of the council, upon demonstration that such evidence was unavailable by the deadline.

10. Informal disposition may be made of any case by stipulation, agreed settlement, consent order or default. (Ord. 2013-04 § 1)


1.26.050 Costs for frivolous appeals.

If the appellant loses on appeal, and the council in a written finding determines that the appeal was entirely without merit, the appellant will be held financially responsible for the full cost to the city of Lincoln City for the appeal proceeding, including, but not limited to, the cost of hiring an independent hearing officer. (Ord. 2013-04 § 1)


Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL

Chapters:

2.04    City Council

2.05    Public Contracts

2.06    City Appointive Bodies

2.07    City Public Records Policy

2.08    Planning Commission

2.12    Building Board of Appeals

2.14    Committee for Citizen Involvement (CCI)

2.16    Repealed

2.18    Vacation Rental Dwelling License Appeals Board

2.20    Parks and Recreation Board

2.24    Visitor and Convention Committee

2.28    Urban Renewal Agency

2.32    Police Reserve

2.36    Drug and Alcohol Abuse Task Force

2.40    Municipal Court

2.44    Rewards for Crime Information

2.52    Retention of Records

2.54    Driftwood Public Library

2.56    Recovery of Library Materials

2.60    Personnel System

2.64    Arts Committee

2.66    Community Sustainability Committee

2.68    Transient Lodgings Tax Review Committee

2.70    Budget Committee

2.72    Emergency Operations


Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL

Sections:

2.04.010    Meeting.

2.04.020    Order of business.

2.04.025    Consent agenda.

2.04.027    Time certain agenda items.

2.04.030    Presiding officer.

2.04.040    Debate and withdrawal of motions.

2.04.050    Manner of voting.

2.04.060    Reconsideration.

2.04.070    Council committees.

2.04.080    Committee of the whole.

2.04.090    Resolutions.

2.04.100    Preparation of ordinances.

2.04.110    Enforcement of decorum.

2.04.120    Suspension of rules.

2.04.130    Rules of procedure.

2.04.140    Time limits.

2.04.150    Executive session records.

2.04.160    Council rules.

2.04.170    Violation of council rules.

2.04.180    Appendix – Council rules.


2.04.010 Meeting.

The city council shall hold a regular meeting at least once a month. The regular meeting of the city council may be held on the second and fourth Mondays of each month at 6:00 p.m. on the third floor at City Hall, Council Chambers, 801 SW Highway 101, Lincoln City, Oregon. (Ord. 2011-08 § 1; Ord. 95-3 § 1; Ord. 87-20 § 1; Ord. 87-1 § 1)


2.04.020 Order of business.

In the conduct of the business of the council, the order of business shall be substantially as follows, except as otherwise provided in LCMC 2.04.027 for time certain agenda items:

A. Roll call;

B. Pledge of allegiance;

C. Consent agenda;

D. Council deliberations;

E. Comments from citizens present on agenda and nonagenda items not involving public hearings or public comment;

F. Presentations;

G. Public hearings/public comments;

H. Ordinances (ordinances may be advanced and considered immediately following a public hearing on the ordinance);

I. Resolutions (resolutions may be advanced and considered immediately following a public hearing on the resolution);

J. Special order of business, if any;

K. City manager and city attorney reports;

L. Actions, if any, based on work session, executive session or citizen comment;

M. Additional comments from citizens present on nonagenda items;

N. Announcements or comments by city council;

O. Adjournment. (Ord. 2018-04 § 1; Ord. 2015-01 § 1; Ord. 2003-12 § 1; Ord. 99-1 § 1; Ord. 95-25 § 1; Ord. 89-10 § 1; Ord. 87-1 § 2)


2.04.025 Consent agenda.

A. Items may be included on the council agenda as “consent” or “regular” agenda items. The printed council agenda shall clearly distinguish the consent from the regular agenda items. The city recorder shall make an appropriate designation if none otherwise has been assigned.

B. The consent agenda may include any matter for council consideration except:

1. Ordinances;

2. Appeals of land use decisions or other land use matters requiring a hearing under state law;

3. Any matter that will increase a department’s or fund’s budget; or

4. Any matter designated for placement on the regular agenda at the time of establishment of the agenda.

C. The consent agenda shall be positioned on the council agenda in accord with LCMC 2.04.020.

D. An item designated for the consent agenda may be removed from the consent agenda by a council member or any individual prior to council vote on the consent agenda. A request to remove an item from the consent agenda shall be made either to the city recorder prior to the beginning of the council meeting or orally at the meeting prior to the vote on the consent agenda. When removed, items shall be considered individually at the end of the consent agenda at the same council meeting.

E. At any meeting at which there is a consent agenda, all items on the consent agenda shall be voted on by a single council vote. It shall not be necessary that there be a reading of the titles or the effect of items on the consent agenda. Items on the consent agenda shall not be subject to amendment or debate. Action on the consent agenda shall require a unanimous vote of all council members present. (Ord. 2003-12 § 2)


2.04.027 Time certain agenda items.

A. Any agenda item may be designated as “time certain,” with consideration of the item to begin at a designated time during a council meeting rather than when the item is reached in the agenda order.

B. The council agenda shall clearly distinguish time certain items from all other items. Each item designated as a time certain item shall include the time at which consideration of the item will begin, and an estimate of the amount of time to be devoted to the item.

C. At the beginning of each council meeting, the city recorder shall remind the council of any time certain item on the council agenda. (Ord. 2003-12 § 3)


2.04.030 Presiding officer.

The presiding officer shall be the mayor. The mayor shall be deemed a member of the council and shall have the same rights as other council members in addition to other powers established by Charter or ordinance. The mayor shall preserve order and decorum, recognize council members seeking the floor, speak on all questions of order in preference to any other member, and shall decide on all questions of order subject to an appeal from the council. In cases of appeal from the decision of the chair, the chair shall always have the last right to debate and shall state the questions as follows: “Shall the decision of the chair be upheld?” (Ord. 87-1 § 3)


2.04.040 Debate and withdrawal of motions.

No motion shall be debated until it has been seconded and distinctly stated by the chair and shall have been reduced to writing if so desired by any member. It shall be read by the recorder when required by members for information. A motion may be withdrawn at any time before amendment. (Ord. 87-1 § 10)


2.04.050 Manner of voting.

All questions shall be voted on by affirmation except those involving ordinances and any matter that will increase a department’s or fund’s budget, in which case a roll call shall be had (in alphabetical order for the first motion of each meeting and rotating in alphabetical order with each successive motion of the meeting). If the presiding officer doubts, or if a division of the council is called for, a roll call shall be had. Every member who shall be present when a question is put shall vote for or against the same, unless the council shall excuse him. (Ord. 2009-14 § 1; Ord. 87-1 § 4)


2.04.060 Reconsideration.

When a question has been decided, it shall be in order for any member who voted in the majority to move for a reconsideration thereof, provided the motion to reconsider is made the same day of the passage of the matter in question; but no motion for the reconsideration of a vote shall be made after the ordinance, resolution or act has gone out of the possession of the council. (Ord. 87-1 § 7)


2.04.070 Council committees.

The mayor shall appoint, from among the members of the council, members of ad hoc committees, when the need for a committee arises. (Ord. 87-1 § 5)


2.04.080 Committee of the whole.

Whenever it is desired that the council go into a committee of the whole, the presiding officer shall leave the chair and appoint a chairman of the committee of the whole, who shall report the proceedings of the committee to the council. (Ord. 87-1 § 8)


2.04.090 Resolutions.

All resolutions shall be in writing and numbered consecutively in the order in which they are received. (Ord. 87-1 § 9)


2.04.100 Preparation of ordinances.

All ordinances shall be prepared by the city attorney. No ordinance shall be prepared for presentation to the council unless ordered by a majority vote of the council, the mayor, city manager, or prepared by the city attorney with the approval of the mayor or city manager. (Ord. 87-1 § 11)


2.04.110 Enforcement of decorum.

The chief of police, or such member or members of the police department as he may designate, shall be sergeant-at-arms of the council meetings. He, or they, shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the council meetings. Upon instructions of the presiding officer, it shall be the duty of the sergeant-at-arms or any of them present to place any person who violates the order and decorum of the meeting under arrest, and cause him to be prosecuted under the provisions of the ordinances of the city; and violation of this section shall be prosecuted as such on a complaint to be signed by the presiding officer. (Ord. 87-1 § 12)


2.04.120 Suspension of rules.

No standing rule or order of the council shall be rescinded or suspended except by the unanimous vote of every member present. (Ord. 87-1 § 6)


2.04.130 Rules of procedure.

All cases not specifically provided for in this chapter or in the Charter of the city shall be governed by the law and precedents laid down in Robert’s Rules of Order, Revised Edition. (Ord. 87-1 § 13)


2.04.140 Time limits.

A person speaking to the council under the agenda item “comments from citizens present” shall be limited to a presentation not exceeding five minutes in length. Where appropriate, the mayor and council may extend or place further limits on such comments as they deem appropriate. (Ord. 91-21 § 1)


2.04.150 Executive session records.

A. A record of each city council executive session meeting shall be kept in the form of a sound tape recording. Written minutes shall not be required. The tape of each executive session meeting shall be identified with a label stating “City Council Executive Session” and stating the date of the executive session meeting.

B. The city recorder shall be responsible for maintaining possession of tapes of city council executive session meetings. The city recorder shall maintain the tapes, at City Hall, in a secure file or lock-box, accessible only by key maintained by the city recorder.

C. Any current city council member may review the tape of any city council executive session meeting. Any current city employee who was present at an executive session meeting may review the tape of any portion of the meeting at which the employee was present. The current city attorney may review the tape of any portion of an executive session meeting at which the city attorney, past or current, was present and, in addition, may review the tape of any executive session meeting for which a copy of the tape has been provided to a court for a determination whether the contents of the tape are admissible in a court proceeding or for a determination whether the executive session was properly held.

D. The city recorder shall maintain a written log book, for purposes of identifying each person who reviews executive session tapes. Each person who wishes to review a tape shall enter his or her name, signature, and city position, and the date of the tape reviewed, in the log book prior to reviewing an executive session tape. The city recorder, except as to current council members, shall determine whether the person seeking review was present at the portion of the meeting the person is seeking to review and, if so, shall allow the person to review that portion of the tape. Executive session tapes may be reviewed only at City Hall on equipment provided by the city, under the supervision of the city recorder. (Ord. 99-5 § 2)


2.04.160 Council rules.

The council rules set forth in LMC 2.04.180 and made a part hereof by this reference shall govern the conduct of the mayor and city councilors in the conduct of city business. (Ord. 2017-20 § 1)


2.04.170 Violation of council rules.

A. General. The city council may enforce the city Charter and municipal code (including incorporated council rules), as well as Oregon Revised Statutes applicable to governing bodies. If a member of council violates council rules, city ordinances, the city Charter or state laws applicable to governing bodies, the council may take action to protect the integrity of the council and discipline the member with a public reprimand, censure, citation or, in extreme cases, removal from office (for offenses provided for in the Lincoln City Charter).

B. Investigation. The council may investigate the actions of any member of the governing body and may meet in executive session under ORS 192.660(2)(b) to discuss any finding that reasonable grounds exist that a violation of council rules, local ordinance, the city Charter or state laws applicable to governing bodies has occurred. Sufficient notice must be given to the affected member to afford them the opportunity to request an open hearing under ORS 192.660(2)(b).

C. Due Process and Sanctions. Due process requirements of notice and the opportunity to be heard will be met with regard to any proceeding to reprimand, censure or remove a member of the governing body. No matter discussed or disclosed in executive session may be discussed or disclosed in any reprimand, censure, or removal proceeding, except by approved motion of the city council and upon advice of the city attorney. Sanctions should be generally geared towards changing problem behavior rather than punitive in nature, and measured against the severity and frequency of the violation(s) and the impact on the city organization and/or council operations and effectiveness.

D. Citation. The city governing body, exclusively, may, by motion, initiate a violation citation against a member pursuant to Chapter 1.16 LCMC for violation of council rules. The general penalty provisions of LCMC 1.04.065 shall apply to any such violation. For continuing violations, each day the offense continues shall be a separate offense. (Ord. 2017-20 § 2)


2.04.180 Appendix – Council rules.

CITY OF LINCOLN CITY

COUNCIL RULES

INTRODUCTION

The City Charter, Section 4.1 specifies that the Council may adopt rules for the governance of its members and meetings. These rules are adopted by ordinance and incorporated into the Lincoln City Municipal Code.

The following also apply to the City Council and its proceedings and are incorporated into these rules by reference:

◊ ORS Chapter 192 Records; Public Reports and Meetings

◊ ORS Chapter 244 Government Ethics

◊ Lincoln City Charter Section:

2.3 Distribution of Powers

3.1 Form of Government

3.6 Appointive Officers

4.1 Meetings

4.2 Quorum

4.3 Record of Proceedings

4.4 Meetings to be Public

4.5 Mayor’s Functions at Council Meetings

4.6 Council President

4.7 Vote Required

4.8 Interference in Administration

5.1 Mayor

5.2 City Manager

5.3 City Recorder

8.1 What Creates Vacancy

8.2 Filling Vacancies

◊ Lincoln City Municipal Code (LCMC):

Section 2.04.020 Order of business

Section 2.04.025 Consent agenda

Section 2.04.027 Time certain agenda items

Section 2.04.030 Presiding officer

Section 2.04.040 Debate and withdrawal of motions

Section 2.04.050 Manner of voting

Section 2.04.060 Reconsideration

Section 2.04.070 Council committees

Section 2.04.080 Committee of the whole

Section 2.04.090 Resolutions

Section 2.04.100 Preparation of ordinances

Section 2.04.110 Enforcement of decorum

Section 2.04.120 Suspension of rules

Section 2.04.130 Rules of procedure

Section 2.04.140 Time limits

Section 2.04.150 Executive session records

Section 17.76.030 Quasi-judicial public hearing procedure and requirements

Section 17.76.040 Appeals

Chapter 17.88 Amendments

The above-referenced statutes and charter provisions are adopted and incorporated by reference into the Lincoln City Municipal Code; violation of any such statute or charter provisions adopted by reference shall be an offense against the City and a violation of the Municipal Code subject to enforcement as provided in LCMC 2.04.170. Nothing in this Chapter prohibits or restricts the criminal prosecution of a member by the appropriate prosecutor and law enforcement professionals with jurisdiction. Similarly, prosecution of a member for City criminal or violation level offenses, including all provisions identified in LCMC Chapter 9.04.010, is not prohibited by this Chapter.

1. COUNCIL RULES – GENERALLY

1.1 Pursuant to Lincoln City Charter Section 4.1 Meetings, the City Council is authorized to prescribe rules for the conduct of its meeting and business. In addition to the powers, duties, and responsibilities of the City Council established by Lincoln City Charter, Chapter IV- Council, Lincoln City Municipal Code (LCMC) Chapter 2.04 provides rules for Council meetings. Where additional Charter or Code provisions pertain to any matter discussed in these rules, the citation is noted for further reference.

1.2 The City Council may review these rules periodically as necessary. Amendments to the rules may be made at any time by ordinance.

1.3 Council rules are not intended to replace or supersede applicable federal or state laws, regulations, city ordinances or provisions of the Lincoln City Charter (Charter). In the event of any conflict between the Charter and these rules adopted by ordinance, the Charter provision shall prevail.

2. COUNCIL MEETINGS – PRESIDING OFFICER

2.1 The Mayor is the presiding officer. LCMC Section 2.04.030 describes the duties and responsibilities of the presiding officer. As presiding officer, the Mayor shall determine the order of business of any matter before the Council, subject to these rules.

2.2 The Mayor may temporarily cease to chair a Council meeting and delegate the functions described in subsection (1) to the Council president or to another designated Council member if the Council president is absent or unable to function as mayor. [See also Charter Section 4.5 Mayor’s Functions at Council Meeting; Section 4.6 Council President; and Section 5.1 Mayor.]

3. COUNCIL MEETINGS – GENERALLY

3.1 Under the Charter, the authority of the City Council as governing body lies in the Council as a whole, not individual Councilors. As part of the democratic process, Councilors may engage in debate and express opposing views; however once the City Council decides any matter, the decision should be supported by all Councilors as the decision of the governing body, notwithstanding individual positions.

3.2 Councilors should at all times, while in a public meeting or otherwise, conduct themselves in a manner appropriate to the dignity of the office and show respect for the office. Councilors should conduct themselves so as to bring credit upon the government of the City by respecting the rule of law, ensuring non-discriminatory delivery of public services, keeping informed concerning the matters coming before the Council, and abiding by all decisions of the Council, whether or not the Councilor voted with the majority.

3.3 The Mayor is responsible for preserving order. City Councilors should observe professional decorum during Council meetings by adhering to questions or issues under discussion and by being courteous in addressing staff or members of the public. Councilors should refrain from engaging in personal attacks or impugning the motives of any speaker.

3.4 Councilors shall adhere to the following general guidelines:

A. Gather necessary information before a meeting, such as asking questions of staff.

B. Speak for yourself and not for other Councilors unless specifically designated.

C. Do not state you represent the Council unless you have been asked by Council to do so.

D. During public meetings do not attempt to edit or rewrite prepared ordinances; however, amendments to an ordinance may be appropriate and you should request input from staff or the city attorney on how best to accomplish your objective.

E. Remain open, direct and candid. Be brief and succinct in stating your views and focus on a single issue or topic at any one time.

F. Give all members of the Council an opportunity to express their views on the issues.

G. Avoid disguising a statement as a question or using repetition as a way to convince others.

H. Schedule discussion on a major policy issue for a future agenda rather than raising it as an addendum to current agenda items.

4. COUNCIL MEETINGS – SCHEDULE AND ATTENDANCE

4.1 City Council meetings are established in LCMC Chapter 2.04. These rules are intended to implement, not replace, any provision of that chapter.

4.2 All Council members shall make every effort to attend all meetings. Councilors will inform the Mayor and/or the city recorder as soon as possible if they are unable to attend any meeting. Additionally, the Mayor will inform the Council president and the city manager regarding any absence by the Mayor.

4.3 If the day of a Council meeting is a legal holiday or the 4th Monday in December, the Council shall review the meeting date and decide whether to conduct or cancel the scheduled meeting.

4.4 When unable to physically attend a Council meeting, Councilors may participate in any Council meeting, including executive session, by telephone or other means providing real time transmission and receipt of audio communication. Any Councilor attending by telephone is encouraged to attend for the entire meeting.

5. USE AND DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION

5.1 Definition. For the purpose of this section, “confidential” shall be defined to include anything done or communicated in a manner to denote confidence or secrecy, including but not limited to information designed to be held in trust or labeled as confidential; information not subject to public disclosure under Oregon public records or public meetings laws; information disclosed during or in connection with a privileged or protected relationship, such as the relationship between an attorney and his or her client; and other information determined to be essential to the fiduciary duties of an elected official to the municipal corporation. All matters properly discussed in executive session shall be considered confidential under these rules.

5.2 Disclosure of Confidential Information. Confidential information shall not be disclosed or otherwise communicated to any individual or entity and shall be maintained by all Council members in a manner to protect its confidential nature. The unilateral release of confidential information by a member of the Council is expressly prohibited. Confidential information may be disclosed or otherwise released to the public only upon an affirmative vote of the Council that the matter is to be disclosed or that confidentiality is no longer necessary.

5.3 Improper Disclosure of Confidential Information. The Council may censure or cite a member who discloses a confidential matter or otherwise violates these rules. In addition to any other sanction imposed for violation of this rule, improper disclosure of confidential information shall be deemed an act outside the course and scope of the disclosing official’s agency relationship with the city and shall subject the official to forfeiture of the protections under the Oregon Tort Claims Act, including the right to defense and indemnification, for any damages or liability resulting from or relating to the disclosure of the confidential information.

5.4 Statements Relating to Confidential Matters. All public statements, information, or press releases on confidential matters shall be made by designated staff or a designated Council representative.

5.5 Written and Electronic Materials. Staff shall only provide confidential materials to Council members in coded written form or electronically to an official city email address with no print option. Council members will keep all written and electronic materials that are confidential under law in complete confidence. Written materials shall not be copied and shall be maintained in a secure location or returned. Electronic materials shall not be printed or forwarded from official city email addresses.

5.6 Executive Session. Council members shall not communicate any information from any executive session to the media or to anyone who was not present at the executive session unless authorized by the affirmative vote of the Council. If staff is given direction in executive session to proceed with negotiations or litigation in a specific manner, Council members shall not have any contact or discussion on the matter or subject with any other party or its representative, or otherwise take steps that might interfere with the direction given to staff by Council.

6. COUNCIL – STAFF COMMUNICATION

6.1 Councilors shall respect the separation between policy-making, which is a Council function, and administration, which is the city manager’s function. The city manager is the administrative head of the city government and all Council direction to staff shall be to the city manager. Council requests for information shall be to the city manager except for minor requests that can be quickly handled by staff, or requests of a Council member not as a Councilor but as a city resident. [See also Charter Section 4.8, Interference with Administration.]

6.2 Guidelines for staff:

A. Staff shall respect the roles and responsibilities of Council members.

B. All written informational material requested by individual Councilors will be submitted by staff to the entire Council with a notation indicating which Councilor requested the information.

C. Except in a Council meeting, staff shall not attempt to influence individual Council members concerning City business.

6.3 Guidelines for Councilors:

A. Work with the staff as a team with a spirit of mutual respect and support.

B. Except in a Council meeting, avoid influencing a department head or the city manager concerning personnel matters, purchasing issues, contracts, the selection of consultants, the processing of development applications, granting of City licenses and permits, or any other matter under the direction of the city manager. However, the sharing of ideas on these matters is appropriate.

C. Limit individual contacts with city officers and employees so as not to influence staff decisions or recommendations, interfere with staff work performance, undermine the authority of supervisors, or prevent the full Council from having the same benefit of information received.

D. Respect roles and responsibilities of staff, including if and when expressing critical opinions in a public meeting or in correspondence including electronic mail messages.

6.4 Authorized use of City Resources.

The Mayor and Councilors (hereinafter “Councilors”) are expressly authorized to use the following city resources for official city business, without going to the full City Council for action. Councilors may utilize city laptop computers for official city business. City email addresses are provided for Councilor’s official use, as well as an optional Councilor webpage on the city website. (Such pages may not be used for political activity, will not be interactive and will be turned off during election periods). Councilors may request Information Technology Department support for city electronic devices and accounts. Councilors may also hold city office hours in available rooms and may calendar such times and other available constituent or event times (and places) on an online city calendar. Finally, Councilors may utilize city vehicles for training or attendance of events, after compliance with city insurance policies.

7. COUNCIL MEETINGS – AGENDA

7.1 The City Manager’s office will prepare an agenda for each Council meeting specifying the time and place of the meeting, and a brief, general description of each item to be considered by Council. The Mayor or a Council representative may consult with the City Manager or designee on scheduling agenda items.

7.2 An item may be placed on the Council agenda after the agenda is printed and the notice published by the Mayor, a Councilor, or city manager, provided the business necessity is explained and the presiding officer consents. The city manager will notify the media and any known interested citizens as soon as possible after receiving information about proposed agenda additions. The practice of adding items to the Council agenda after it has been printed and published is to be discouraged and should be undertaken only when necessary.

7.3 Documentation for an agenda item shall be received by the city manager by noon the Monday before the Council meeting for which the agenda has been prepared. Staff will provide the agenda packets by delivering the packets to City Councilors on Wednesday before the Council meeting. Late materials will be provided only if dictated by business necessity.

8. COUNCIL MEETINGS – DISCUSSION AND VOTING

8.1 The Mayor may, with the concurrence of Council, consider agenda items out of order.

8.2 The consent agenda requires a unanimous vote of all council members present. A “single council vote” for purposes of the consent agenda is interpreted to be one affirmative vote on a motion to approve the consent agenda. If there are dissenting votes on the consent agenda, then the Council will vote on each item on the consent calendar separately. [See also Municipal Code Section 2.04.025 Consent agenda.]

8.3 After a motion has been made or after a public hearing has been closed, no public member shall address the Council without first obtaining permission from the Mayor.

8.4 Any matter involving ordinances and expenditure of money shall be decided by a roll call vote rather than a single council vote on a motion. The city recorder shall call the roll in alphabetical order for the first motion of each meeting and rotating in alphabetical order with each successive motion of the meeting.

8.5 If there is any question about the correct manner of voting, the vote shall be by roll call.

8.6 All members of the Council present for a question shall vote on the question unless excused by the Council.

8.7 After the Council has voted on a matter, all Councilors shall support the Council’s determination on the matter, regardless of the Councilor’s personal opinion or vote on the matter. Councilors shall not make comments during voting but may comment on a vote after the vote has been concluded and announced. [See also LCMC section 2.04.050 Manner of voting.]

9. ORDER AND DECORUM DURING COUNCIL MEETINGS

9.1 Any person may photograph or record regular meetings of the City Council conducted in Council chambers provided the activity is conducted from a fixed location, the photography or recording is conducted in a manner that does not interfere with or disrupt the proceedings, and no additional lighting is utilized. The use of still photography or video or film requiring flash or other additional lighting may be conducted by permission of the presiding officer granted prior to the start of the meeting, and provided the activity is conducted from a fixed location and does not interfere with or disrupt proceedings. This rule shall not be construed to prevent news media representatives from performing their duties so long as the manner of performance is not unreasonably disruptive of the meeting.

9.2 Any of the following shall be sufficient cause for the removal of any person from the Council Chambers for the duration of the meeting:

A. Unreasonably loud or disruptive language, noise or conduct that interferes with the progress of business by the City Council;

B. Any violent outburst or distracting actions;

C. Willful damage to the interior of the Council Chambers; and

D. Refusal to obey an order of the presiding officer or the City Council.

9.3 Before a person is removed from the Council chambers for disruptive conduct or activity, the presiding officer may warn the person to cease the offending conduct; however a warning is not required as a precondition to enforcing decorum. If a meeting is disrupted by members of the audience, the presiding officer may order the Council Chambers cleared. [See also LCMC section 2.04.110 Enforcement of decorum.]

10. EXECUTIVE SESSIONS

10.1 Only the Council, city attorney, city manager, city recorder, designated staff, and persons invited by the city manager or Council may attend executive session meetings.

10.2 The presiding officer will announce at the start of the executive session that news media may not report the substance of any executive session. Representatives of news media, as determined by the City Council, may attend an executive session in order to be informed of the background of deliberations and to gain a better understanding of any decisions made as a result of the meeting. Representatives of news media may not attend executive sessions involving labor negotiations, or litigation in which the news media of the representative is a party.

10.3 If the Council meets in executive session, Councilors should attempt to provide direction or input to designated staff on proposed terms and conditions for negotiations including but not limited to real property transactions, litigation, labor negotiations, or other matters.

10.4 The information of executive session meetings is confidential. Councilors and staff will not discuss or communicate about executive session matters with any person, except City Councilors, the city manager, city attorney, and designated staff, about any executive session discussion. [See also LCMC section 2.04.150 Executive session records.]

11. MINUTES

11.1 Minutes shall be prepared with sufficient detail to meet their intended use. Verbatim minutes are not required. The minutes of meetings of the Council shall comply with provisions of ORS 192.650 by containing the following information at a minimum:

A. The name of Councilors and staff present;

B. All motions, proposals, resolutions, orders, ordinances and measures proposed and their disposition;

C. The result of all votes, including ayes and nays, and the names of the Councilors who voted, unless the vote is unanimous;

D. The substance of the discussion on any matter;

E. Reference to any document discussed at the meeting.

11.2 The Council may amend the minutes to more accurately reflect what transpired at the meeting. Upon receipt of the minutes in the Council agenda packet, the Councilors should read and submit any changes, additions or corrections to the City Recorder in order that a corrected copy can be issued prior to the meeting for approval. Under no circumstances shall the minutes be changed following approval by the Council, unless the Council authorizes such change, with the exception of grammatical errors.

12. BIAS AND EX-PARTE CONTACTS

12.1 Any proponent, opponent or other party interested in a quasi-judicial matter to be heard by Council may challenge the qualification of any Councilor to participate in such hearing and decision. The presiding officer shall provide an opportunity to respond to the challenge. The Council should make a determination on the challenge and the participation of the Councilor. Such challenges and the Council’s decision shall be incorporated into the record of the hearing.

12.2 In the case of a quasi-judicial matter that is heard by the Council, a Councilor shall disclose his or her participation in a prior hearing or action on any matter that is before the Council and after disclosure, shall not participate in the matter and shall step down. Common examples include when a Planning Commission member is elected or appointed to the City Council or when a Councilor appears and testifies as a private citizen at a Planning Commission meeting. In the event of a challenge for bias, if the City Council determines there is potential for actual bias, the Councilor should step down or if necessary, the Council may vote on a motion to disqualify the challenged councilor from participating in the matter.

12.3 In quasi-judicial matters, Councilors should refrain from having ex parte contacts. Ex parte contacts include oral or written communication with a party, or information concerning the matter, obtained under circumstances that do not involve all parties to the proceeding. Ex parte contacts include any visual, oral or written information obtained by a Councilor that all participants do not receive.

12.4 Councilors shall disclose any ex parte contact at the beginning of the public hearing. The Councilor shall describe the substance of the contact, and the presiding officer shall announce the right of interested persons to rebut the substance of the communication. The Councilor also will state whether such contact affects the Councilor’s ability to participate in an impartial manner.

12.5 For quasi-judicial hearings, a Councilor who was absent during the presentation of evidence shall not participate in any deliberations or decision regarding the matter unless the Councilor has first reviewed all the evidence and testimony received.

13. ETHICS

13.1 Councilors shall be familiar with and observe the requirements of the State Ethics Law (ORS 244.010 to ORS 244.390) dealing with the use of public office for private financial gain. Any questions about ethics shall be directed to the city manager or city attorney.

13.2 Generally, conflicts of interest arise in situations in which a Councilor, as a public official deliberating in a quasi-judicial proceeding, has a potential or actual financial (pecuniary) interest in the matter before the Council. Under Oregon Government Ethics Law, a Councilor must publicly disclose a potential or actual conflict of interest and, in the case of an actual conflict of interest, must step down and not participate in the matter. [See also LCMC Section 17.76.030 and ORS Chapter 244.]

13.3 Although a determination of conflict of interest is a personal Councilor decision, any Councilor may seek the advice of the city attorney prior to disclosure of any potential or actual conflict of interest.

14. PUBLIC RECORDS

14.1 Public Record Defined. A public record includes any document, book, paper, photograph, file, sound recording, machine readable electronic record, electronic communications, or other material, regardless of physical form or characteristics, made, received, filed or recorded in connection with the transaction of public business, whether or not confidential or restricted in use.

For purposes of these rules, “Electronic Communications” means E-mail, text messages or other forms of communications transmitted or received by technological means. “Electronic Communications Devices” means desktop or lap-top computers, blackberries, cell- phones, notebooks, tablets, pads, or other similar devices capable of transmitting or receiving messages electronically.

14.2 Electronic Records. All communications on electronic communications devices have the same public records character as they would have had they been sent on paper. Any electronic communications that may be exempt from disclosure under Oregon public records law should be clearly marked as confidential and exempt from disclosure. Unless exempt, electronic records in any way relating to the business of the city created on electronic communication devices not owned or provided by the city are subject to review and disclosure under Oregon Public Records law. Electronic records, including emails sent and received on city systems are the property of the city and public records. Councilors should assume that most correspondence about city business, even if contained on personal electronic communication devices, is a public record subject to disclosure. There is no protected right of privacy if the electronic record is a public record. Unless the City Attorney determines a records exemption applies, on an individual case basis, you should assume no privacy right in these areas.

14.3 Retention. Public records created or received by Council members, including electronic communications, shall be retained in accordance with Oregon Public Records Law and the rules of the Secretary of State and State Archivist. To this end, Councilors shall use only official City email addresses for the conduct of City business. If Councilors inadvertently receive electronic communications concerning city business on personal electronic communication devices, Councilors shall forward such public records to their official email addresses for retention. Councilors shall reply to such messages by directing the sender to the official city email address. Similarly, all written public records should be in the possession of the City. Councilors shall periodically turn into the City Recorder any written records for retention.

14.4 Public Meetings. Under the Public Meetings Law, any time a quorum of the Council meets to make a determination or gather information, a “public meeting” may be presumed to occur. Councilors shall therefore avoid inadvertent electronic meetings by limiting use of e-mail communication to no more than two councilors at any one time.

15. CITY ATTORNEY

15.1 Requests to the City Attorney for advice requiring significant legal research shall not be made by a Councilor except with the concurrence of the Council. Before requesting research or other action by the city attorney, the Council is encouraged to first consult with the city manager to ascertain whether there is already information available on the matter. Outside a Council meeting, a Councilor should make requests of the city attorney by direct contact with the city attorney or through the city manager.

16. EXPENSES AND REIMBURSEMENT

16.1 City Councilors may be reimbursed for eligible expenses related to official city business that occurs in the State of Oregon and in the Councilor’s official capacity as a City Councilor. Eligible expenses include:

A. Travel to meetings to which a Councilor is a member appointed by Council;

B. Travel and lodging to the annual League of Cities Conference;

C. Travel to a training provided by the League of Cities;

D. Any other travel, training or function authorized by Council; and

E. Expenses of the Mayor related to the attendance at functions where the City’s presence is customary or expected.

16.2 All expenses are subject to budgetary limitations. Councilors shall be reimbursed according to the administrative procedure for reimbursement of eligible expense related to city business. Councilors shall direct any questions on reimbursement to the city manager. [See Charter Section 3.7 Compensation]

17. AMENDMENTS AND SUSPENSIONS OF RULES

17.1 Any part of these operating procedures and policies may be temporarily suspended by a majority vote of those members of the Council present and voting.

17.2 These operating procedures and policies may be permanently amended by ordinance with prior notice of the proposed change provided to each member of the Council.

(Ord. 2019-18 § 1; Ord. 2018-04 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2017-20 (Exh. A))


Chapter 2.05 PUBLIC CONTRACTS

Sections:

2.05.010    Local contract review board.

2.05.020    Public contracting rules.

2.05.030    Purchasing agent.

2.05.040    Model rules.

2.05.045    Application.

2.05.050    City manager authority.

2.05.060    Public contracts.

2.05.070    Procurement of goods and services.

2.05.080    Exemptions.

2.05.090    Personal service contracts.

2.05.100    Disposal of surplus personal property.

2.05.110    Public improvement contracts.

2.05.120    Additional powers.


2.05.010 Local contract review board.

The city council is designated the local contract review board for the city and the city urban renewal agency under the Public Contracting Code and is the contracting agency where that term is used except where otherwise specified. The local contract review board may delegate its powers and responsibilities as contracting agency consistent with the Public Contracting Code, the city Charter, municipal code, the Model Rules, and any other applicable ordinances and resolutions. Notwithstanding the above, the city council acting as the urban renewal agency may approve URA contracts as the LCRB without the need for placing the matter on both agendas. (Ord. 2014-19 § 1; Ord. 2005-04 § 1)


2.05.020 Public contracting rules.

The local contract review board adopts the following rules as the city’s public contracting rules. The Model Rules adopted by the Attorney General to implement ORS Chapters 279A, 279B, and 279C do not apply, unless otherwise provided for herein or as adopted by ordinance or resolution of the local contact review board. (Ord. 2005-04 § 1)


2.05.030 Purchasing agent.

The city manager is the purchasing agent of the local contract review board and may act as the contracting agency as authorized. (Ord. 2005-04 § 1)


2.05.040 Model rules.

Except as specifically provided herein, or by subsequent ordinance or resolution, the Model Rules, OAR Chapter 137, Divisions 46, 47, and 49, adopted by the Attorney General under ORS Chapters 279A, 279B, and 279C, as they now exist, are hereby adopted as the city of Lincoln City’s public contracting code. (Ord. 2013-15 § 1; Ord. 2005-04 § 1)


2.05.045 Application.

The words used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as defined in the Public Contracting Code and the Model Rules. The “Public Contracting Code” refers to ORS Chapters 279A, 279B, and 279C, and as amended in the future. In the event that rules adopted by the local contract review board do not sufficiently address a particular circumstance, or a conflict between these rules and the Public Contracting Code and the Model Rules exists, the Public Contracting Code or the Model Rules shall apply. (Ord. 2005-04 § 1)


2.05.050 City manager authority.

The local contract review board authorizes the city manager and city staff designated by resolution (designated staff) to exercise additional responsibility for public contracting as follows:

A. Except as otherwise provided for emergency contracts, the city manager may enter into any and all contracts, change orders and amendments not requiring a formal procurement (ITB, RFP, or selection) process or the approval of a special procurement or other authorization by the local contract review board. The city manager’s authority extends to the limits of all intermediate and small procurements and informal selection, including authorized changes, and is generally described, without limitation, as follows:

1. For a single obligation not exceeding $150,000 for the purchase of goods and services, supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual services, without further authorization by council (total with change orders may not exceed $150,000);

2. For a single obligation not exceeding $100,000 for professional and personal services, including but not limited to architectural, engineering, photogrammetric mapping, transportation planning, land surveying services and related services as defined in ORS 279C.100 (total with change orders may not exceed $100,000); and

3. For an obligation not exceeding $100,000 for public improvement contracts (except the total single obligation (i.e., with change orders) may be approved up to $150,000 – per LCMC 2.05.110(B)(3)).

As used herein, “single obligation” includes the original contract and any change orders. Any change order which would cause the total contract to exceed the city manager’s delegated authority set forth above must be approved by the contract review board.

The council may by resolution limit or condition the contracting authority of the city manager, including but not limited to monetary limits, or procedural safeguards such as sign off by the finance director as to legally available funds, or sign off by the city attorney as to form of the contract.

Any contract or procurement approved by the local contract review board may specify a percentage or dollar amount of authority delegated to the city manager to approve an amendment or change order. If the LCRB contract does not otherwise specify, the delegation to the manager to approve a change order or amendment shall be equal to the authorized contingency percentage or dollar amount on the contract.

B. Designated staff are hereby delegated contracting authority to the limits of small procurements under the applicable Model Rules or 10 percent of the monetary limit delegated to the city manager, whichever is greater. Notwithstanding this delegation, the city manager may limit or condition the contracting authority of any designated staff by written order, including but not limited to monetary limits, or requiring a sign off by the finance director as to legally available funds, or sign off by the city attorney as to the form of the contract, or city manager approval of a purchase order prior to execution of the contract.

C. The city manager shall adopt administrative procedures and policies, computer software programs, and forms as necessary or required to implement the administration of all public contracting in the city, as authorized by City Charter, municipal code, the local contract review board, or these rules. At a minimum, contracts shall include the following:

1. Unless otherwise approved by the contracting agency, all city contracts shall require the contractor to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees against and from any and all claims or demands for damages of any kind arising out of or connected in any way with the contractor’s performance under the contract and shall include a waiver of contractor’s right to ORS 30.285 and 30.287 indemnification and defense.

2. Unless otherwise approved by the contracting agency, city contracts shall contain a provision requiring the person or entity providing the service to obtain and maintain liability insurance coverage in at least the amount of the city’s tort liability limits, naming the city as an additional named insured, during the life of the contract.

3. The city attorney in consultation with the city manager shall be responsible for providing contract forms that meet all requirements of state law and the municipal code, including but not limited to provisions for indemnification, insurance, and worker’s compensation. These provisions may be incorporated in the contract by reference to state law, unless state law provides otherwise.

D. The city manager shall have discretion to implement any desired method of advertising or communicating the city’s announcement or procurement of contracts, including using electronic means.

E. The delegation of contracting authority to the city manager and designated staff includes the authority to sign any and all associated contract documents, including but not limited to exemption findings necessary for the contract.

F. Nothing herein prohibits the city manager or department head from requesting the local contract review board approve a public contract or procurement. (Ord. 2018-10 § 1; Ord. 2014-19 § 2; Ord. 2013-15 § 2; Ord. 2005-04 § 1)


2.05.060 Public contracts.

Except as specifically provided herein, the solicitation and award of public contracts in the city shall be accomplished pursuant to the Public Contracting Code, the Model Rules as they now exist, and the Lincoln City Municipal Code. (Ord. 2013-15 § 3; Ord. 2005-04 § 1)


2.05.070 Procurement of goods and services.

Procurement of goods and services shall be awarded as provided in the Public Contracting Code, ORS Chapter 279B, the Model Rules, and these rules.

A. Any procurement of goods or services shall be accomplished by competitive bid or proposal, except as provided herein.

B. A procurement of goods and services exceeding $10,000 but not exceeding $150,000 may be awarded as provided in ORS 279B.070. The local contract review board or city manager as contracting agency may use an intermediate procurement method, seeking at least three informally solicited competitive price quotes or competitive proposals from prospective contractors. The contracting agency shall keep a written record of the sources of the quotes or proposals received. If three quotes or proposals are not reasonably available, fewer will suffice, but the contracting agency shall make a written record of the effort made to obtain the quotes or proposals. (Ord. 2013-15 § 4; Ord. 2005-04 § 1)


2.05.080 Exemptions.

The following classes of public contracts are exempt from competitive procurement:

A. Emergency Contracts.

1. The city may declare an emergency and enter into a public contract without first obtaining competitive bids or proposals. “Emergency” means circumstances that meet all of the following requirements:

a. There is a substantial risk of loss, damage, or unnecessary or undesirable disruption or interruption or degradation of public facilities or services, or a threat to public health or safety;

b. The circumstances require prompt award and execution of a contract to remedy the situation resulting from the circumstances; and

c. Due to lack of sufficient time or other reasons related to the circumstances, the contract should be awarded without first obtaining competitive bids or proposals.

2. Emergency contracts under $100,000. The city manager may exercise the city’s authority for emergency contracts up to $100,000. At the first city council meeting following declaration of an emergency under this section, the city manager shall provide a written report to the city council describing the contract and explaining the circumstances that created the emergency.

3. Emergency contracts of $100,000 or more. The city council may exercise the city’s authority for emergency contracts of $100,000 or more. Prior to the city council’s declaration of an emergency, the city manager shall provide a written report to the city council describing the proposed contract and explaining the circumstances that create the emergency.

4. Award within 60 days. The city shall not award an emergency contract under this rule if 60 days have expired since declaration of the emergency, unless an extension is granted by the city council.

B. Change orders or contract amendments reasonably related to the scope of work, up to 25 percent of the contract price.

C. Contracts for the purchase of computer equipment and software, which may be obtained by quotes under the procedures provided in LCMC 2.05.110.

D. Contracts for goods or services less than $10,000, provided at least one quote has been obtained.

E. Purchases through federal programs, pursuant to ORS 279A.18.

F. Sole source contracts where an attempt has been made to solicit interest but only a single source has been identified, provided:

1. The local contract review board or city manager determines in writing that the goods or services are available from only one source.

2. The determination of sole source shall be based on findings, which may include: the factors in ORS 279B.075(2) or other findings that support the conclusion that goods or services are available from only one source.

G. Contracts for natural gas, electricity including street lighting, local telephone service, cable and telecommunications services, and any other utility service.

H. Contracts for personal services as defined in this chapter.

I. Price regulated items, library periodicals, advertising contracts, equipment maintenance repair and overhaul, purchases under established price agreements, gasoline, diesel fuel, heating oil, lubricants and asphalt, investment contracts, insurance contracts, office copier purchases, and oil or hazardous material removal.

J. Brand name specification contracts for equipment and supplies needed to replace or repair equipment in facilities operating with specialized equipment, such as water or sewer facilities, provided the local contract review board, or city manager for contracts less than $25,000, approves the description of the proposed contracting procedure, the goods or services to be acquired, and the circumstances that justify the use of a special procurement. The local contract review board may approve any special procurement method in accordance with ORS 279B.085.

K. Any contract exempted by the Public Contracting Code or Model Rules.

L. Any other contract in which the local contract review board makes a determination that the public interest would be promoted by exempting the contract from the competitive bidding process, provided the exemption is adopted pursuant to the Public Contracting Code and these rules. (Ord. 2014-19 § 3; Ord. 2013-15 § 5; Ord. 2005-04 § 1)


2.05.090 Personal service contracts.

“Personal service contracts” are contracts for services performed by independent contractors, with specialized knowledge, skill, or resources, or which require the exercise of professional, artistic, or management discretion or judgment, or as may be determined by the local contract review board or the city manager.

A. “Personal services” includes, but is not limited to, the following professions:

1. Accountant;

2. Advertising consultant;

3. Artist;

4. Administrator;

5. Administrative assistant;

6. Analyst;

7. Appraiser;

8. Arborist;

9. Architect;

10. Attorney;

11. Auditor;

12. Educator;

13. Engineer;

14. Environmental consultant or expert;

15. Financial consultant;

16. Health services consultant;

17. Human resources specialist;

18. Hydrologist;

19. Investigator;

20. Insurance consultant;

21. Information systems or computer specialist;

22. Land surveyor;

23. Land use or planning consultant;

24. Manager;

25. Management systems consultant;

26. Marketing consultant;

27. Project manager;

28. Public relations consultant;

29. Realtor;

30. Receptionist;

31. Secretary;

32. Training consultant;

33. Wetlands biologist;

34. Writer;

35. Any contractor identified by the local contract review board or city manager as a contractor for personal services.

B. Unless provided herein, all personal services contracts shall be awarded by a competitive selection process.

C. For personal service contracts involving $25,000 or less per year, the city manager as contracting agency is authorized to negotiate for such services with any qualified contractor.

D. Where the amount of the personal services contract is anticipated to be more than $25,000 per year but less than $100,000 per year, the local contract review board through the city manager shall solicit at least three prospective contractors who appear to have at least minimum qualifications for the proposed assignment, notify each prospective contractor in reasonable detail of the proposed assignment, and determine the prospective contractor’s interest and ability to perform the proposed assignment. The contracting agency may also negotiate a contract for such services with any qualified contractor. A contract of $100,000 or more for architectural, engineering, photogrammetric mapping, transportation planning, land surveying, or related services as defined by ORS 279C.100(8) shall be selected in accordance with the qualification based selection (QBS) process mandated by Chapter 458 Oregon Laws (2011) and applicable implementing administrative rules.

E. The contracting agency may arrange for any or all interested prospective contractors to be interviewed for the assignment by an appropriate city employee or by an interview committee. Following a review of the qualifications and interview, where conducted, of the interested prospective contractors, the contracting agency shall select the prospective contractor and shall prepare a personal service contract.

F. As appropriate, the personal services contract may be advertised by any method designed to solicit a pool of qualified competitive applicants, including advertising by electronic means.

G. At the time of award of a personal services contract or any time thereafter, the local contract review board may authorize terms under which the city manager may supplement, extend, amend, or renew any personal services contract.

H. The local contract review board or city manager shall consider the following criteria in evaluation and selection of a personal services contractor:

1. Specialized experience in the type of work to be performed.

2. Capacity and capability to perform the work, including any specialized services, within the time limitations for the work.

3. Educational and professional record, including past record of performance on contracts with governmental agencies and private parties with respect to cost control, quality of work, the exercise of discretion, ability to meet schedules, and contract administration, where applicable.

4. Availability to perform the assignment and familiarity with the area in which the specific work is located, including knowledge of design or techniques peculiar to it, where applicable.

5. Any other factors relevant to the particular contract.

I. The selection procedures described in this section may be waived by the city manager, at his or her discretion, where (1) an emergency exists that could not have been reasonably foreseen and requires such prompt execution of a contract to remedy the situation that there is not sufficient time to implement selection procedures, (2) selection is from a list of providers with similar qualifications and selection is determined based upon an annual qualification process, or (3) follow-on work and a change in contractor would clearly result in increased costs or increased time. (Ord. 2013-15 § 6; Ord. 2005-04 § 1)


2.05.100 Disposal of surplus personal property.

A. Determination of Surplus and Valuation.

1. The local contract review board shall determine whether any personal property is surplus and shall establish an estimate of value. Valuation shall be based on any method of valuation commonly used in municipal financial practices or as recommended by the city manager in the particular circumstances.

2. Where the estimated value of surplus property is $5,000 or less, the city manager shall have authority to make a determination that any personal city property is surplus.

B. Procedure.

1. After property has been determined to be surplus and an estimate of value established, the city manager shall select a method of disposal that, in the discretion of the city manager, is likely to result in the greatest net benefit to the city, considering net financial benefit, cost of disposal, and the public welfare.

2. The city manager shall retain a written record of the disposal, including a statement containing the basis for the determination of surplus, the valuation method, if any, and the procedure used for disposal.

3. The city manager may dispose of surplus personal property as follows:

a. By sale to the highest qualified buyer after advertisement at least one week prior to sale;

b. By trade for the acquisition of other equipment or supplies;

c. By sale at public auction, including Internet auction, after advertisement at least one week prior to sale in a newspaper of general circulation or notice on the city or other municipal organization website, with sale by cash to the highest bidder;

d. By sale at a fixed price;

e. By donation or by agreement for use by a private nonprofit or public entity; and

f. By any other means of sale or exchange appropriate in the circumstances.

C. All proceeds of sale shall be paid to the city’s general fund, subject to the terms and conditions of contract, if any, approved by the contracting agency between the city and a firm selected to conduct the sale or auction.

D. The city council may dispose of surplus property by donation or by agreement for use, operation, or maintenance by one or more private nonprofit or public entities, upon a determination that the disposal will promote the economic development or the public welfare of the city.

E. Personal property shall be disposed of “as is,” without any warranty, express or implied. Sales and advertisement of disposal under this chapter may be conducted by electronic means. (Ord. 2017-21 § 1; Ord. 2005-04 § 1)


2.05.110 Public improvement contracts.

Public improvement contracts shall be awarded by competitive bid or as provided by the Public Contracting Code or these rules.

A. Exemptions. The local contract review board may exempt any public improvement contract or class of contracts under $100,000 from the requirements of this section and award a public improvement by competitive proposal or competitive quotes, provided the local contract review board approves the exemption as provided in this section.

B. Public improvement contracts not to exceed $100,000 may be based on competitive quotes under the following procedures:

1. The local contract review board authorizes the city manager as contracting agency to informally solicit at least three price quotes from prospective contracts. If three prospective contractors are not available, then fewer quotes may be solicited. The city manager shall maintain records of the attempts to obtain quotes.

2. The local contract review board shall award the contract to the prospective contractor whose quote will best serve the interests of the city, taking into account price, experience, specific expertise, availability, project understanding, contractor capacity, contractor responsibility, and other similar selection criteria. If the contract is not awarded on the basis of lowest price, the local contract review board shall make a written record of the basis for the award.

3. Intermediate level public improvement contracts obtained by competitive quotes may be increased above the original amount of award by contracting agency issuance of a change to the work or amendment, up to an aggregate contract price increase of 25 percent over the original contract amount when the contracting agent determines that a price increase is warranted for additional reasonably related work, and up to 50 percent over the original contract amount when the contracting agent determines that a price increase is warranted for additional reasonably related work and the local contract review board approves the increase.

C. The local contract review board authorizes the city manager as contracting agency to let public improvement contracts based on competitive quotes as provided herein where the city manager estimates the contract price not to exceed $100,000.

D. Construction contracts that are not public improvements, including minor alterations, ordinary repair, or maintenance of a public improvement, shall be procured as provided in ORS Chapter 279B.

E. Prequalification.

1. Where the city manager determines it is in the public interest to prequalify bidders on public improvement projects, bidders shall be prequalified as determined by the city. The city manager may allow bidders to meet prequalification requirements by submittal of an approved application for prequalification by ODOT, or due to the nature of the contract, by meeting prequalification requirements by completing and submitting a form provided by the city. Prequalification submittals must be completed by the date required by the city.

2. Where the city requires mandatory prequalification, offers from persons that are not prequalified shall not be considered.

3. The city manager shall be responsible for prescribing the form of prequalification based on the following criteria and any other criteria relevant to the contract:

a. Description of relevant experience;

b. Description of project experience with the city;

c. Description of project experience with other public agencies;

d. Contact information for prior project supervisors;

e. Financial capability;

f. Company history and officers; and

g. Any other relevant standard.

4. The city manager shall approve or disapprove applications for prequalification. If the city manager denies prequalification to an applicant, the city manager shall provide the applicant with notice of denial, specify the basis for decision, and provide opportunity for appeal of the decision to the local contract review board as provided in the Public Contracting Code, ORS 279C.445 and 279C.450.

F. Negotiations. If bids are solicited for a public improvement contract, and all bids exceed the budget for the project, the contracting agent may, prior to contract award, negotiate for a price within the project budget under the following procedures:

1. Negotiations will begin with the lowest responsive, responsible bidder. If negotiations are not successful, then the contracting agent may begin negotiations with the second-lowest responsive, responsible bidder, and so on.

2. Negotiations may include value engineering and other options to attempt to bring the project cost within the budgeted amount.

3. A contract may not be awarded under this section if the scope of the project is significantly changed from the description in the original bid documents.

4. The contracting agent will adhere to the provisions of ORS 279C.340 in applying this section.

G. Rejection of Bid. The contracting agency may reject any bid not in compliance with all prescribed public bidding procedures and requirements and may reject all bids if it is in the public interest to do so. A rejection may be based on any of the following findings:

1. The person does not have sufficient financial ability to perform the contract. Evidence that the person can acquire a surety bond in the amount and type required shall be sufficient to establish financial ability; or

2. The person does not have equipment available to perform the contract; or

3. The person does not have personnel or sufficient experience or expertise to perform the contract; or

4. The person has repeatedly breached contractual obligations to public and/or private contracting agencies.

H. Appeal of Disqualification. A person who has been disqualified as a bidder may appeal such disqualification to the local contract review board as follows:

1. Within three business days of receipt of notice of disqualification, the disqualified bidder shall notify the city recorder in writing that the person wishes to appeal the disqualification;

2. Immediately upon receipt of the written notice of appeal, the city recorder shall inform the local contract review board;

3. Upon receipt of such notification from the city recorder, the local contract review board shall direct the city recorder to deliver notice to the person appealing and to provide the time and place of the hearing on the appeal; and

4. At a public hearing, the local contract review board shall consider de novo the notice of disqualification, the record of the investigation made by the city manager and/or the city manager’s designee, and any evidence provided by the parties. The hearing shall be conducted and the appeal decided within 14 days after the board receives notification from the city recorder. The board shall issue a final order of decision containing written findings not more than 14 days after decision on the appeal. (Ord. 2013-15 § 7; Ord. 2005-04 § 1)


2.05.120 Additional powers.

In addition to the powers and duties established in this code, the local contract review board shall have such additional powers as authorized by state law and may also:

A. Require notice publication in addition to that required by state law;

B. Make alternate arrangements for retainage pursuant to the Public Contracting Code; or

C. Grant exemptions from the bid security and performance bond required on contracts for public improvements. (Ord. 2005-04 § 1)


Chapter 2.06 CITY APPOINTIVE BODIES

Sections:

2.06.005    Purpose and applicability.

2.06.010    Created or established.

2.06.015    Recruitment and appointment process.

2.06.020    Terms, term limits.

2.06.025    Quorum and effect of lack thereof.

2.06.030    Meetings and attendance.

2.06.035    Vacancies and removal.

2.06.040    Public meetings and public records law.

2.06.045    Hearings officer appointment.

2.06.050    Election of officers, secretary and subcommittees.

2.06.055    Role and time commitment of staff.

2.06.060    Agendas, minutes, order of proceedings.

2.06.065    Powers and duties.

2.06.070    Rules for conduct of business.

2.06.075    Code of ethics.

2.06.080    Deliberation.

2.06.085    Council as final decision maker.

2.06.090    Gifts.

2.06.095    Budget, compensation and expenses.

2.06.100    Reports to council.

2.06.105    Lobbying and representing the city.


2.06.005 Purpose and applicability.

Appointive bodies require uniform rules, policies and operating procedures to assure maximum productivity and fairness for members and the public. Except where otherwise provided in this code or state law, the following policies and procedures govern all the city’s appointive bodies. For purposes of this chapter, “appointive body” means any board, commission, committee, task force, advisory group, ad hoc committee, or any other such group appointed by the mayor or by the city council, however designated. Nothing herein removes the requirement for compliance with more specific regulations and guidelines set forth by state statute, administrative rule, ordinance, or resolution specific to the appointive body. These rules do not apply to filling a vacancy under Chapter VIII, Section 8.2 of the Lincoln City Charter. (Ord. 2017-05 § 1; Ord. 2000-02 § 1. Formerly 2.06.010)


2.06.010 Created or established.

All regular boards, commissions and committees are codified in Chapters 2.08 through 2.70 LCMC. Ad hoc entities shall be formed by resolution of the council. (Ord. 2017-05 § 1)


2.06.015 Recruitment and appointment process.

A. Recruitment. The city recorder shall regularly provide notice of vacancies on city appointive bodies by doing the following:

1. Email vacancy notices to council, and city officers and employees;

2. Email or fax vacancy notices to the “media group”(i.e., radio stations, newspapers);

3. Post vacancy notices on bulletin boards at City Hall and transmit vacancy notices for posting at Driftwood Library and Lincoln City Community Center;

4. Provide applications for pick up at information desk and administration offices;

5. Email vacancy notices to recognized neighborhood associations;

The city recorder may also, but is not required to, place ads in the local newspaper of record or place vacancy notices on the city website.

B. Application Process.

1. Applications shall be made on approved city forms and must be signed by the applicant (including appropriate consents to background investigation). All applications must be turned in to the city recorder in city administration and date-stamped. Incomplete applications shall not be processed. The form of application and consent documents must be approved by the city attorney.

2. The city recorder will review the application for completeness and notify applicants when the application will not be processed due to missing information. Applicants can supply missing information if the recruitment is still open.

3. The city recorder shall perform the following threshold review:

a. Verify required residency requirements, if any, with the county clerk;

b. Determine whether the applicant qualifies for the specific committee based upon any stated minimum criteria in the code;

The city recorder will notify applicants who do not meet residency or minimum qualifications; such decisions may be appealed to the city council pursuant to Chapter 1.26 LCMC.

4. The recorder shall also send the application materials to the HR director to conduct the background investigation and reference checks. After the checks are complete, the city recorder will scan the approved applications and forward them to the mayor and council for review. Applications frequently contain information protected from disclosure under Oregon law. Councilors are cautioned not to disclose application materials or supporting documents in the file.

C. Selection of Individual Interviewers or Interview Subcommittees.

1. Two councilors shall be appointed by the mayor at a regularly scheduled city council meeting to conduct interviews for open positions. Groups of two can be appointed for multiple openings.

2. Unless otherwise stated at the time of appointment, the interviewer appointments shall be for individual councilors to conduct interviews and provide council with individual recommendations (i.e., the councilors are not a part of an interview subcommittee and shall not deliberate or discuss the applicants except when giving their individual reports to council).

3. Nothing herein prohibits the mayor and council from conducting interviews and making recommendations to council as an interview subcommittee (requiring public meeting notice).

4. Nothing herein prohibits council from electing to conduct interviews of all applicants at a regular or special city council meeting.

5. Notwithstanding the above, the planning commission and budget committee applicants shall be interviewed at a regular or special city council meeting.

D. Background Investigation and Reference Check.

1. The background check shall be conducted as soon as possible (generally takes one to two days). Generally, the investigations shall proceed as follows:

a. The human resources director shall contact the candidate and notify them that a background check will be completed using the paperwork (release) they signed in the application packet. The human resources director will provide the information to a qualified individual or company that completes background investigations. The human resources director will review the background information provided, considering the following:

i. Type of conviction (misdemeanor/felony).

ii. Number of convictions (e.g., is there a pattern?).

iii. Type of crime (e.g., crimes such as, but not limited to, violent crimes).

iv. How recently a conviction occurred (five years ago or less).

v. What actions the candidate took following the conviction to prevent it from occurring again (e.g., anger management classes).

2. The human resources director will contact the applicant if a background check question arises and notify the applicant of any potential adverse decision. The human resources director shall provide the applicant with a copy of the report and ask any questions to assist in understanding whether the background should preclude service on a committee. The human resources director will make a pass/fail determination and notify the mayor and city council of the determination.

E. Interview and Evaluation Process.

1. A councilor conducting individual interviews may schedule their own interviews with applicants.

2. Subcommittees conducting interviews shall have interviews noticed and scheduled by the city recorder, or designee. Councilors jointly conducting individual interviews may request interviews be scheduled by staff, but such interviews shall be noticed.

3. Only interview subcommittee members may discuss the applications and deliberate on recommendations to council.

4. Individual councilors or the interview subcommittee members shall advise the city recorder or designee of their recommendations.

5. The HR director shall place the results of the background investigation and reference check investigations in the file for review by all councilors.

F. Appointment. At a regular or special meeting of the city council the question of appointment of one or more applicants for appointive bodies can be placed on the agenda for consideration. No applicant will be placed on the agenda until completion of the interview, background and reference check process. At the time the matter is considered the individual interviewers may give their recommendation, or, as applicable, an interview subcommittee member may give the recommendation of the subcommittee. The council may use the ballot nomination process to narrow the applicant field. Notwithstanding any other provision in the municipal code, all appointments shall be by motion, approved by majority vote of the governing body.

G. Reappointment. Requests for reappointment of appointive public officers (only for those who have previously completed the interview, reference and background check) may be processed using this abbreviated procedure. The council, by motion, may direct the city recorder to place appointive officers on the agenda for reappointment, subject only to an update of the background investigation (pursuant to a current release). Unless council by motion directs the use of the abbreviated procedure, all reappointments shall follow the procedure identified herein for original applicants. (Ord. 2017-05 § 1)


2.06.020 Terms, term limits.

A. All successors to original members of a city appointive body shall have a three-year term, except as otherwise provided in the appointment order or this code. When multiple appointments are being made, or the appointment is the original appointment, the appointing authority may stagger terms in an original appointment order at one, two and three years, as necessary. Notwithstanding the three-year limitation, planning commissioners shall serve four-year terms.

B. Members may serve four terms on any single commission or board, after which time the mayor and council will give due consideration to other qualified candidates before making a reappointment. (Ord. 2017-05 § 1)


2.06.025 Quorum and effect of lack thereof.

A. A quorum shall consist of the first whole number of members more than one-half of the total number of authorized members of the body including any vacant positions (e.g., seven-member body: one-half is 3.5; quorum is four). Nonvoting ex officio members, staff and liaisons do not count toward the quorum.

B. A quorum must consist of qualified members meeting the numeric minimum of this chapter; appointive body membership provisions (e.g., residency requirements) do not impact quorum calculations. Unless specifically stated otherwise in city code or state law (e.g., budget committee), only a simple majority of the quorum is necessary to adopt any motion or take action or recommendation.

C. Members need not be physically present at a meeting if another means of attendance (e.g., telephonic, internet, etc.) is provided and if public meetings law requirements are met (public can hear the remote participant).

D. If there is no quorum for a meeting, no official business shall be conducted and all matters advertised shall automatically be continued to the next regularly scheduled meeting.

E. If an appointive body, acting in an advisory capacity with respect to a city matter, fails to make a recommendation to the city council within 60 days of referral, the matter shall be forwarded to the council without a recommendation. (Ord. 2017-05 § 1; Ord. 2013-03 § 1. Formerly 2.06.030)


2.06.030 Meetings and attendance.

Unless otherwise provided by law, the number of meetings related to business needs of a city appointive body may be set by the body. All members are expected to attend all regularly scheduled meetings, study sessions and special meetings when applicable. If a member will be absent from a meeting the member must notify the chair or the staff liaison at least two hours prior to the meeting. Unexcused absences can lead to the declaration of a vacancy (below). Attendance shall be reviewed by the appointive body annually (e.g., at first meeting in January) with a report sent to the city recorder advising of the need for appointment or reappointment, if necessary. (Ord. 2017-05 § 1)


2.06.035 Vacancies and removal.

A. A vacancy is created on an appointive body and the position automatically deemed vacant and open for appointment before the expiration of the term if:

1. A member dies, resigns, or is removed from office;

2. A member ceases to possess any other qualification required for appointment to such office;

3. A member has three or more unexcused absences in a six-month period;

4. A member is convicted of a felony or adjudicated incompetent;

5. The appointment of the member is declared void by a court of law.

B. If a vacancy on an appointive body occurs, the council shall fill the vacancy by appointment for the unexpired term. Vacancies shall be filled in accordance with the process set forth for appointment of members pursuant to this chapter.

C. Notwithstanding the above, the city council, with or without cause, may by majority vote of the city council at a regular meeting, remove any member of an appointive body prior to the expiration of the term of the appointment. Written notice of removal to the affected member shall be provided. Removal shall be handled with respect and courtesy. If a member resigns or is removed, the mayor and council shall appoint a replacement for the remainder of the term. Notwithstanding the above procedure, removal of a planning commissioner shall be governed by the procedures in ORS 227.030. Hearings under ORS 227.030 are hereby delegated by the governing body to a hearings officer designated by the city council. (Ord. 2017-05 § 1)


2.06.040 Public meetings and public records law.

All meetings of appointive bodies are subject to strict compliance with public meeting laws of the state of Oregon. Notice of meetings shall be sent to the media group, including a newspaper with general local circulation. Public notice may also be posted on the city’s website. In the case of emergency or when a state of emergency has been declared, notice appropriate to the circumstances shall be provided and reasons justifying the lack of 36-hour notice shall be included in the minutes of such meeting. Agenda packets, materials and minutes must be retained in accordance with applicable public records law and retention schedule. (Ord. 2017-05 § 1)


2.06.045 Hearings officer appointment.

When a quasi-judicial appeal has been filed and an appointive body lacks sufficient members to conduct business, or when an appointive body requests assistance from the city manager on a complicated matter, the city manager is authorized to designate a city hearings officer to conduct the hearing and prepare a recommended order for the manager’s or appointive body’s consideration in making the decision. In the alternative, the city hearings officer, in appropriate circumstances, may conduct the hearing and make the decision. Such hearing shall be conducted consistent with the Uniform Administrative Appeals Ordinance. Notwithstanding this delegation, the city council may also by written order or resolution specify use of a hearings officer for individual appeals, or for classes of appeals in their sole discretion, with due consideration of budgeting. (Ord. 2018-11 § 1)


2.06.050 Election of officers, secretary and subcommittees.

At its first meeting of the year the appointive body shall elect officers, including a chair and a vice chair who shall hold office at the pleasure of the body. Neither the chair nor vice-chair shall serve as an officer for more than two consecutive years. Without the need for an appointment, the head of the city department staffing the appointive body shall be the secretary and shall be responsible for keeping an accurate record of all proceedings. The department head may delegate such tasks to a staff liaison. The department head or staff liaison shall consult with the city recorder and city attorney regarding matters such as public meeting notice, minutes, and records retention. Subcommittees may be formed by an appointive body for the purpose of gathering information and forming a recommendation to be brought forward to the full appointive body; however, only the full body can make recommendations to the city council. Subcommittees must comply fully with the requirements of the Oregon Public Meetings Law. (Ord. 2017-05 § 1)


2.06.055 Role and time commitment of staff.

At least one staff person shall be assigned to work with each regular appointive body. The city manager shall appoint a department head as staff liaison for each regular appointive body. The department head may delegate the staff liaison to a designee. Ad hoc entities are governed by the resolution creating them and do not have dedicated staff. The staff liaison provides professional guidance, continuity, and insight into city policy and attends all regular and special meetings and workshops. The staff liaison is not the employee of the appointive body or supervised by the body but supports the body as a whole. The staff liaison shall not do work at the request of individual members. Each staff liaison has a limited amount of time to devote to the appointive body. If additional staff time is needed the request should be made to the city manager. (Ord. 2017-05 § 1)


2.06.060 Agendas, minutes, order of proceedings.

A. The staff liaison, after consultation with the appointive body chair, will be responsible for the agenda of all meetings of their respective appointive bodies. A member or staff liaison will be responsible for taking minutes. All meetings shall be noticed in accordance with the Oregon Public Meetings Law. Agendas, minutes and supporting packets will be posted on the city’s website, when possible. Staff will email or mail documents to members upon request. Public review copies shall be available at the appropriate city department.

B. In the conduct of the business of the appointive body, the order of business shall be substantially as follows:

1. Roll call;

2. Pledge of allegiance;

3. Consent agenda;

4. Public hearings;

5. Appointive body deliberations;

6. Presentations;

7. Special order of business action items, if any;

8. Reports from city staff;

9. Comments by city appointive body members;

10. Adjournment.

Nothing in this section prohibits appointive bodies from holding public hearings or requesting public input on appointive body agenda items within the scope of their delegated authority. (Ord. 2018-11 § 2; Ord. 2017-05 § 1)


2.06.065 Powers and duties.

A. The powers and duties of the respective appointive bodies are set forth in the Chapters 2.08 through 2.70 LCMC. Subject to approval of the public contracting officer, appointive bodies with quasi-judicial decision making authority are authorized to delegate, by majority vote, the conduct of the hearing and drafting of a recommended order to a qualified hearings officer. In addition, if the respective appointive body is without a quorum or otherwise unavailable to render a timely decision, the contracting officer is authorized to refer a quasi-judicial matter to a hearings officer for hearing and final decision or recommendation.

B. Appointive bodies cannot enter into contracts on behalf of the city. However, nothing herein prohibits staff from involving an appointive body in selection processes provided the appointive body makes only a recommendation on a contract award.

C. Appointive bodies are encouraged to review their powers and duties on an annual basis. After review of such powers and duties, appointive bodies should establish annual goals and action items that reflect the body’s charge as stated in the specific code authorization for the body. Appointive bodies are expected to suggest, support, and advance council goals and are encouraged to look for ways within their own unique responsibilities to do so. (Ord. 2017-05 § 1)


2.06.070 Rules for conduct of business.

All appointive bodies are authorized to adopt such rules of procedure as are necessary for the conduct of their business, such as the conduct of meetings, when not inconsistent with the Charter, the code, or Oregon law. These rules of procedure may be less formal than Robert’s Rules of Order. In the event of conflicts that cannot be resolved less formally, Robert’s Rules of Order may be used as the standard for meeting rules and procedures. Failure to strictly follow Robert’s Rules of Order shall not be cause to void or otherwise disturb a decision or action. The body will strive to be clear in its proceedings. (Ord. 2017-05 § 1)


2.06.075 Code of ethics.

The city of Lincoln City is committed to the highest ethical standards for its public officials, including elected and appointive officers. To ensure public confidence, all members of elected and appointive bodies (council, commissions, boards and the like) must be independent, impartial, responsible and not use their position for personal gain or to benefit or harm others. Members of appointive bodies shall operate in the general public interest serving the community as a whole and shall serve no special interests. Elected and appointive officers shall not endorse in their official capacity any commercial product or enterprise. Except for authorized reimbursements, elected and appointive body members shall not receive a salary or any payment for material or services provided to the elected or appointive body. Notwithstanding the above, council may provide volunteers with certain fringe benefits (e.g., community center privileges) in accordance with adopted council policy. Appointive body members should be familiar with the criminal codes, ethics and conflict of interest laws set forth in state statutes and city ordinances. (Ord. 2017-05 § 1)


2.06.080 Deliberation.

It is the duty of the chair or presiding officer to ensure that each member has the opportunity to speak. Members speak only for themselves and shall be open, direct and candid. Members shall strive to deliberate to a decision and shall rely upon the chair to keep the discussion moving. (Ord. 2017-05 § 1)


2.06.085 Council as final decision maker.

With the exception of certain delegated quasi-judicial actions, most appointive bodies do not make final decisions subject to appeal but rather make recommendations to, or act in an advisory capacity to, the city council. The city council is the final decision maker on all city policies and the use of city property and resources. Proposals by appointive bodies for endorsement or sponsorship of events, activities or programs must receive approval by city council or such matters must be formally delegated to the appointive body or manager. (Ord. 2017-05 § 1)


2.06.090 Gifts.

Subject to the acceptance of the city council, an appointive body may receive gifts, bequests or devises of property in the name of the city to carry out any of the purposes of the appointive body, which funds, if required by the terms of the gift, bequest or devise, shall be segregated from other funds for use with the approval of the city council. (Ord. 2017-05 § 1)


2.06.095 Budget, compensation and expenses.

Public funds are generally set aside in departmental budgets for appointive body expenses. Should an appointive body require additional funds, requests should be submitted to the department through the staff liaison. Regular and ad hoc members of the appointive bodies shall receive no compensation for services rendered. Members must receive permission and instructions from the respective staff liaison in order to be reimbursed for training or conferences and associated travel expenses related to official business. Procedures and criteria for approval of expenditures are established by the responsible department head and finance department. (Ord. 2017-05 § 1)


2.06.100 Reports to council.

Each appointive body shall report to the city council upon the request of the city council or city manager. Council expects quarterly reports, but there shall be no less than one report per fiscal year. Staff liaisons for appointive bodies shall submit copies of its minutes to the city recorder for review by council and shall prepare and submit such reports as from time to time may be requested by the city council. Unless otherwise expressly provided in the Lincoln City Municipal Code or Oregon Revised Statutes or Administrative Rules, all reports or recommendations of city appointive bodies shall be considered advisory in nature and shall not be binding on the city. (Ord. 2017-05 § 1)


2.06.105 Lobbying and representing the city.

Members shall only represent the opinion or position of the appointive body if specifically authorized by the full membership at a duly advertised public meeting. Unless specifically directed by the city council to state the city’s official position on federal, state or county legislative matters, no lobbying before other elected bodies or entities will be undertaken by members of appointive bodies. An individual member is free to voice a position on any issue as long as it is made clear that the speaker is not speaking as a representative of the city of Lincoln City or as a member of an appointive body. Appointive body members are prohibited from engaging in political activity in accordance with ORS 260.432. (Ord. 2017-05 § 1)


Chapter 2.07 CITY PUBLIC RECORDS POLICY

Sections:

2.07.010    Purpose.

2.07.020    Right to inspect public records.

2.07.030    Public records.

2.07.040    Public records exempt from inspection and copying.

2.07.050    Designated public records officer.

2.07.060    Procedures for making a public records request.


2.07.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this regulation is to establish city policy related to written requests for public records of the city of Lincoln City. This policy is required by ORS 192.324. The city of Lincoln City recognizes that, in response to a written public records request, the Oregon Public Records Law (ORS 192.311 through 192.338) gives members of the public the right to inspect and copy certain public records maintained by the city. The city also recognizes that certain records maintained by the city are exempt from public disclosure, or that disclosure may require balancing the right of the public to access the records against individual privacy rights, governmental interests, and confidentiality issues. Additionally, when the city receives a written request to inspect or copy public records, costs are incurred by the city in responding to the request. This public records policy seeks (A) to establish an orderly and consistent procedure for responding to public records requests; (B) to establish the basis for a fee schedule designed to reimburse the city for the actual costs incurred in responding to written public records requests; and (C) to inform citizens of the procedures and guidelines that apply to public records requests. (Ord. 2018-01 § 1)


2.07.020 Right to inspect public records.

Every person has a right, following a written request in accordance with this code, to a reasonable opportunity to inspect and/or copy non-exempt public records during normal city business hours. All records shall be inspected and copied at the city of Lincoln City place of business. Requests for any records of the city are processed and reviewed in the order they are received and under the procedures identified in the Oregon Public Records Law, city of Lincoln City Municipal Code, as well as the rules, forms and fees, adopted under authority of this city of Lincoln City public records policy. (Ord. 2018-01 § 1)


2.07.030 Public records.

The Oregon Public Records Law (ORS 192.311(5)(a)) defines “public record” very broadly as:

any writing containing information relating to the conduct of the public’s business, including but not limited to court records, mortgages, and deed records, prepared, owned, used or retained by a public body regardless of physical form or characteristics.

“Any writing” means any handwriting, typewriting, printing, photographing and every means of recording, including letters, words, pictures, sounds, or symbols, or combination thereof, and all papers, maps, files, facsimiles or electronic recordings (inclusive of email or a word processing document, and other types of electronic recordings). A public record includes any writing that relates to the conduct of the public’s business even if that writing is contained on a public officer’s privately owned computer. (Ord. 2018-01 § 1)


2.07.040 Public records exempt from inspection and copying.

There are numerous exemptions to public records law which protect, or conditionally protect, records or sensitive information within public records from disclosure. Many of these exemptions may be found in ORS 192.345 and 192.355. Others may be located in other Oregon Revised Statutes. A few specific exemptions worth special notice are as follows:

A. Personal Safety Exemption – ORS 192.368(1). If an individual requests in writing that a public body not disclose the phone number or address of the individual, the public body is prohibited from disclosing the information if the safety of the individual or family member would be in danger.

B. Public Records Relating to Pending Litigation – ORS 192.345(1). If a public body is involved in litigation, or if litigation is reasonably likely in the future, the public records relating to the litigation are exempt from disclosure.

C. Archaeological Sites or Objects – ORS 192.345(11). Information concerning the location of archaeological sites or objects are exempt from disclosure, unless requested by the governing body of an affected Indian tribe.

D. Personnel Disciplinary Actions – ORS 192.345(12). Public records of a discipline action or materials or documents supporting that action are exempt from disclosure.

E. Threatened or Endangered Species – ORS 192.345(13). Certain information regarding the habitat, location or population of any threatened or endangered species is exempt from disclosure.

F. Personal Privacy Exemption – ORS 192.355(2). Information of a personal nature, such as that kept in a medical or personal file, is exempt from disclosure if disclosure would be an unreasonable invasion of privacy, unless disclosure is in the public interest by clear and convincing evidence. Personal information includes home address, phone number, weight and age.

G. Public Employees Addresses, Dates of Birth and Telephone Numbers – ORS 192.355(3). The addresses, dates of birth and phone numbers of public employees and volunteers which are maintained by the public body in personnel files are exempt from disclosure.

H. Confidential Information Submitted by Citizens – ORS 192.355(4). Information submitted to a public body in confidence and not required to be submitted, where the information should reasonably be considered confidential, and the public body has in good faith obliged itself to keep the information confidential, is exempt from disclosure.

I. Records Deemed Confidential or Privileged under Federal and State Laws or Regulations – ORS 192.355(8) and (9). Examples include:

1. Privileged communications such as communications between the city attorney’s office and a city department or staff person are exempt from disclosure.

2. Social security numbers. No social security numbers should be disclosed without prior consultation with the city attorney. If a public record contains a social security number, the number should be blacked out prior to disclosure.

3. Copyrighted material. If the city maintains public records containing copyrighted material, the city will permit the person making the request to inspect the copyrighted material, and may allow limited copying of such material if allowed under federal copyright law. The city may require written consent from the copyright holder or an opinion from the person’s legal counsel before allowing copying of such materials. (Ord. 2018-01 § 1)


2.07.050 Designated public records officer.

A. The city recorder is the official records officer and custodian of all public records in the city. In the city recorder’s absence the deputy city recorder, if any, shall serve as the custodian and records officer. Except for Level 1 and Level 2 requests discussed in LCMC 2.07.060, the individual within the city of Lincoln City government to whom all public record requests shall be directed shall be the records officer. The records officer shall have overall responsibility for receiving, and responding to, applications to inspect public records.

B. Each department shall designate a staff person to serve as the records coordinator for that department. Each records coordinator shall receive training with regard to the state public records laws and city policy from the records officer and city attorney. The records coordinator from the respective department shall work with the records officer in completing any record request related to their respective departments. The records coordinators are expressly authorized to handle Level 1 record requests without consultation with the records officer.

C. The records officer, with the advice of the city attorney, shall be responsible for researching and presenting a recommended records management system to the information technology department director. The records management system shall include reasonable measures to preserve the integrity of the city of Lincoln City’s records and be consistent with the Oregon Administrative Rules on Records Retention. The IT director shall consider such recommendation, together with estimated costs of acquisition and maintenance of such system, and shall include city records management in the IT department budget for final approval by the manager and city council. All purchases and contract decisions shall be made in accordance with contracting authority specified in Chapter 2.05 LCMC.

D. The records officer may propose for adoption by council resolution reasonable public record rules necessary to protect the city’s public records. (Ord. 2018-01 § 1)


2.07.060 Procedures for making a public records request.

The following procedures shall be followed in submitting and responding to requests to inspect or receive copies of public records maintained by the city of Lincoln City:

A. Procedures Differ by Classification of the Request.

1. Level 1 Request. Does not require a written request. Requested document must be current and readily available, require no duplication, may or may not be subject to an identified fee or charge on the public records fee schedule, and must require no additional staff time or resources to be made available. These types of documents are intended for public distribution, such as information brochures, agendas, permit applications, job applications, election-related petitions, or solicitations for public comment. These types of documents may also include prepared documents for purchase (e.g., hard copy of comprehensive plan or parks master plan).

2. Level 2 Request. Must be made in writing. Must be submitted to records officer and referred to records coordinator; may be simultaneously submitted to records officer and department records coordinator. Department coordinator email addresses will be posted on the city website. Requested documents are not immediately available in prepared format. Request must clearly and correctly identify the document, may not require extensive staff research to locate the document (no more than 30 minutes), may not include more than five documents or 50 pages, or documents that are more than one year old. Requested document must be located in a single department or division, may not contain sensitive, confidential, or privileged information, and must not require attorney review prior to release. When estimate is over $25.00, written cost estimates will be noted on the form and requester must agree to pay before document retrieval begins. Documents are usually available within five business days. Payment is due upon receipt.

3. Level 3 Request. Must be made in writing to the records officer. This type of request is complex, involving multiple staff and/or departments or divisions. It involves extensive research or compilation of documents, and requires attorney review. The request also may require follow-up by staff to identify what is being requested. City staff furnishes written acknowledgment that the request has been received within five business days and as soon as possible after that (usually within one week), provides the requester a written time and cost estimate for proceeding with the request. The requester must submit written authorization to proceed and pay the estimated costs before any staff time is expended responding to the request.

B. Official Public Records Request Form. In order to facilitate public access to city records and to avoid unnecessary expenditure of staff time, a request to inspect or copy records shall be in writing on the official form provided by the records officer. The approved standard form is available for download on the city’s website at www.lincolncity.org. The standard form may be periodically revised and updated by resolution of the city council. The form shall be completed in full and signed by the requestor and shall specify with particularity the records requested, including dates, subject matter and such other detail as may be necessary to enable city personnel to readily locate the requested records.

C. Where to Submit Form and Fees. All public record requests shall be directed to the city recorder acting as records officer. A records request on an approved official city form may be submitted to the City Recorder, c/o City Administration, 801 S.W. Hwy 101 (P.O. Box 50) Lincoln City, Oregon 97367. Approved forms may also be faxed to 541-994-7232, or approved forms may be emailed to cityrecorder@lincolncity.org (ORS 192.324(7)(A)). A Level 2 request may be simultaneously submitted via email to the departmental records coordinator and records officer.

D. Applicable Fees. The city has established fees consistent with ORS 192.324(4), reasonably calculated to reimburse the city for the city’s actual cost of copying and making public records available in the format requested and said fees are set forth in the current fee schedule adopted by council resolution. The resolution shall be periodically adjusted to recover the actual cost incurred in responding to requests. The city shall recover all permissible actual costs, including but not limited to costs for searching, reviewing, copying; summarizing, compiling or tailoring public records, either in organization or media; or time spent by an attorney for the public body in reviewing the public records, redacting material from the public records or segregating the public records into exempt and nonexempt records. The cost for copies on the fee schedule is in addition to personnel cost calculated at the “loaded” employee hourly rate multiplied by time devoted to records request. No personnel cost is included for requests which take 15 minutes or less. The fee resolution is periodically updated by the city council in accordance with ORS 294.160. If a record is not included on the fee schedule, the city shall nevertheless charge the actual cost incurred in providing and copying the item. For Level 2 or Level 3 public record requests, the city will provide a written cost estimate to the applicant and must receive confirmation that the applicant wants the city to proceed with the request before work will be performed. Cost estimates over $25.00 must be paid as a deposit before the records will be made available for inspection or copied. If the actual time expended and cost incurred are less than estimated, the amount paid in excess of the actual cost shall be refunded to the applicant. If the actual time expended and cost incurred exceed the estimated cost, the applicant will pay the difference at the time the records are produced. If a request is of such magnitude and nature that compliance would disrupt the city’s normal operation, the city may impose such additional charges as are necessary to reimburse the city for its actual costs of locating and copying the records.

E. Definitions Related to Statutory Deadlines. For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be defined as follows:

“Business days” shall mean a day other than Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday and on which at least one paid employee of the public body that received the public records request is scheduled to and does report to work as defined in ORS 192.311.

“Acknowledge a public records request” or “acknowledge” means the city has either: (1) confirmed that the city is the custodian of the requested record; or (2) informed the requester that the city is not the custodian of the requested record; or (3) notified the requester that the city is uncertain whether the city is the custodian of the requested record.

“Complete a public records request” or “complete” means the city has either: (1) provided access to or copies of all requested records within the possession or custody of the city that the city does not assert are exempt from disclosure, or explains where the records are already publicly available; and/or (2) asserts any exemptions from disclosure that the city believes apply to any requested records, and if the city cites ORS 192.355(8) or 192.355(9) identifies the state or federal law that the city relied on in asserting the exemptions; and/or (3) the city complies with ORS 192.338 (i.e., the city separates the exempt and nonexempt material and makes the nonexempt material available for examination); and/or (4) the city provides a written statement that the city is not the custodian of the requested records; and/or (5) the city provides a written statement that the city is prohibited by federal or state law from acknowledging whether the record exists, including citation to such law or sanction; and (6) when the city asserts that one or more records are exempt from disclosure, the city response shall include a statement that “the requester may seek review of the city of Lincoln City’s determination pursuant to ORS 192.401, ORS 192.415, ORS 192.418, ORS 192.422, ORS 192.427 and ORS 192.431.”

F. Initial Time Frame for Acknowledgment or Completion. Upon receipt of a request to inspect or receive a copy of records by the records officer, the records officer shall have five business days after receiving the request to acknowledge receipt of the public records request or complete the city’s response to the request.

G. Time Frame for Completion or Alternative Estimated Completion Date. The city shall complete its response to a written public records request that is received by the records officer as soon as practicable and without unreasonable delay; specifically, as soon as possible, but not later than 10 business days after the date by which the city is required to acknowledge receipt (total 15 business days) the city shall: (1) complete the public records request; and/or (2) provide a written statement that the city is still processing the request and a reasonable estimated date by which the public body expects to complete its response based on the information currently available.

H. Time Frames Not Applicable in Certain Situations. The five- and 10-business-day time frames listed above do not apply if compliance by the city would be impracticable because the staff or volunteers necessary to complete a response to the public records request are unavailable; or compliance would demonstrably impede the city’s ability to perform other necessary services; or due to the volume of other public record requests being simultaneously processed by the city.

I. Tolling or Suspension of Time Frames.

1. If the city has informed the requester of public records of a fee or fee estimate to complete the records request, the time frames identified above are suspended until the requester has paid the fee or estimate in full, or the fee has been waived or reduced under applicable procedures or ordered waived or reduced on appeal.

2. If the city has in good faith requested additional information or clarification from a requester of public records, the city’s obligation to complete under the time frames identified above are suspended until the requester provides the requested information or clarification or affirmatively declines to provide that information or clarification.

J. Closing the Request.

1. If the city has informed the requester of public records of a fee or fee estimate to complete the records request, and the requester fails to pay the fee within 60 days of being informed or within 60 days of denial of a fee waiver or reduction, the city shall close the records request.

2. If the city has in good faith requested additional information or clarification from a requester of public records, and the requester fails to respond within 60 days of the request for information or clarification, the city shall close the request.

K. Certified Copies. Upon request, the records officer shall furnish a certified copy of a record. “Certified” means an affirmative declaration on the cover sheet or last sheet of the copy certifying that the copy is a true and correct copy of an original or duplicate original and signed by the records officer. Certified copies are subject to additional fees as set forth in the fee resolution.

L. Review of Original Records. If a request to inspect original records is made, the city shall permit such inspection; provided, that research fees are paid in advance. The records officer or a person designated by the records officer, or a records coordinator, shall be present at any time original records are reviewed. At no time shall an original record of the city be removed from the city’s files or the place at which the record is regularly maintained, except upon authorization of the records officer. If at any time during inspection of records any person attempts to alter, remove, or destroy any original record, the person’s inspection shall be terminated immediately and the records officer shall notify the police department and city attorney.

M. Fee Waiver or Reduction. Whenever the city manager determines that furnishing copies of public records in the city’s possession at a reduced fee or without cost would be in the public interest because making a copy of the record available primarily benefits the general public, the city manager may authorize the records officer to waive or reduce fees related to a particular records request. In addition, copies of the routine packet materials requested by the news media will be made available without charge. However, any request by the news media that requires more than one-half hour of staff time will be charged actual cost according to this code and the adopted fee resolution.

N. Appeal. A person who has submitted a written public records request in compliance with city policy may seek review of the following, in the same manner as a person petitions when inspection of a public record is denied under ORS 192.311 to 192.338:

1. The failure of the city to provide the response required by ORS Chapter 192 within the prescribed period. A failure of the city to timely respond shall be treated as a denial of the request unless the city demonstrates that compliance was not required. (See, e.g., subsections (H), (I), and (J) of this section.)

2. An estimate of time provided by the city under subsection (G) of this section, if the person believes that the estimated time frame for response is unreasonably long and will result in undue delay of disclosure.

3. Any other instance in which the person believes that the city has failed to comply with ORS Chapter 192.

4. The district attorney and the court have the same authority with respect to petitions under this section as when inspection of a public record is denied. (Ord. 2018-01 § 1)


Chapter 2.08 PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections:

2.08.010    Established.

2.08.015    Serving as the committee for citizen involvement.

2.08.020    Membership.

2.08.030    Appointment – Four-year term of office.

2.08.035    Qualifications.

2.08.040    – 

2.08.070    Repealed.

2.08.080    Powers and duties.

2.08.090    Repealed.


2.08.010 Established.

There is reestablished a city planning commission for the city. (Ord. 2017-05 § 3; Ord. 78-41 § 1)


2.08.015 Serving as the committee for citizen involvement.

After compliance with Goal 1 notice and explanation to the Department of Land Conservation and Development, the planning commission may act as the committee for citizen involvement (CCI). In the event the planning commission is selected to serve as the CCI, the commission shall act in accordance with council resolutions setting forth the citizen involvement program, as they may be amended. (Ord. 2017-05 § 3)


2.08.020 Membership.

The commission shall consist of seven members who are not officials or employees of the city. (Ord. 2017-05 § 3; Ord. 78-41 § 2)


2.08.030 Appointment – Four-year term of office.

A. Commission members shall be appointed by the city council. Planning commissioner terms shall commence on January 1st of the first year of each term. The term of office of a planning commissioner shall be four years, or until an incumbent’s successor is appointed and qualified. However, the initial reappointments under this chapter of some members shall be for shorter terms in order to establish an approximately equal number of expiring terms every calendar year.

B. All vacancies in office will be filled following an open application process. The process will include public notice by the city of the vacancy and request for applications. Following receipt of applications the city council will invite each applicant to be interviewed at the next regular meeting of the city council. Members shall be appointed by the city council following the interviews. (Ord. 2017-05 § 3; Ord. 84-13 § 1; Ord. 78-41 § 3)


2.08.035 Qualifications.

To be eligible for appointment to and continued service on the planning commission, a person at the time of appointment and throughout his or her term of service must be a qualified elector within the meaning of the state Constitution and reside in the city. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the city council may appoint two members to the commission who are qualified electors and reside in the urban growth boundary of the city, but do not reside in the city; provided, that the other five commission seats are filled by city residents. No more than two voting members of the commission may engage principally in the buying, selling, or developing of real estate for profit as individuals, or be members of any partnership, or officers or employees of any corporation, that engages principally in the buying, selling, or developing of real estate for profit. No more than two members shall be engaged in the same kind of occupation, business, trade, or profession. The members of the commission shall serve at the pleasure of the council. (Ord. 2017-05 § 3; Ord. 91-26 § 1)


2.08.040 Vacancies.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-05. (Ord. 91-26 § 2; Ord. 78-41 § 4)


2.08.050 Presiding officers.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-05. (Ord. 78-41 § 5)


2.08.060 Staff services.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-05. (Ord. 78-41 § 6)


2.08.070 Meetings.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-05. (Ord. 78-41 § 7)


2.08.080 Powers and duties.

The commission shall have the powers and duties which are now or may hereafter be assigned to it by the city Charter, comprehensive plan, ordinance, resolution or order of the city, and general laws of the state. For reference, ORS 227.090 provides:

ORS 227.090 Powers and duties of Commission.

(1) Except as otherwise provided by the City Council, a City Planning Commission may:

(a) Recommend and make suggestions to the Council and to other public authorities concerning:

(A) The laying out, widening, extending and locating of public thoroughfares, parking of vehicles, relief of traffic congestion;

(B) Betterment of housing and sanitation conditions;

(C) Establishment of districts for limiting the use, height, area, bulk and other characteristics of buildings and structures related to land development;

(D) Protection and assurance of access to incident solar radiation; and

(E) Protection and assurance of access to wind for potential future electrical generation or mechanical application.

(b) Recommend to the Council and other public authorities plans for regulating the future growth, development and beautification of the City in respect to its public and private buildings and works, streets, parks, grounds and vacant lots, and plans consistent with future growth and development of the City in order to secure to the City and its inhabitants sanitation, proper service of public utilities and telecommunications utilities, including appropriate public incentives for overall energy conservation, and harbor, shipping and transportation facilities.

(c) Recommend to the Council and other public authorities plans for promotion, development and regulation of industrial and economic needs of the community in respect to industrial pursuits.

(d) Advertise the industrial advantages and opportunities of the City and availability of real estate within the City for industrial settlement.

(e) Encourage industrial settlement within the City.

(f) Make economic surveys of present and potential industrial needs of the City.

(g) Study needs of local industries with a view to strengthening and developing them and stabilizing employment conditions.

(h) Do and perform all other acts and things necessary or proper to carry out the provisions of ORS 227.010 to 227.170, 227.175 and 227.180.

(i) Study and propose such measures as are advisable for promotion of the public interest, health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience and welfare of the City and of the area within six miles thereof.

(Ord. 2017-05 § 3; Ord. 78-41 § 8)


2.08.090 Rules of procedure.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-05. (Ord. 78-41 § 9)


Chapter 2.12 BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS

Sections:

2.12.010    Established.

2.12.020    Membership – Qualifications.

2.12.030    –

2.12.050    Repealed.

2.12.060    Powers and duties.

2.12.070    Repealed.


2.12.010 Established.

This chapter, in accordance with the Uniform Building Code, recognizes the establishment of a building board of appeals, and sets forth the term, qualification, and powers and duties of the building board of appeals. (Ord. 2017-05 § 4; Ord. 88-19 § 1)


2.12.020 Membership – Qualifications.

The building board of appeals shall consist of three members to serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. (Ord. 2017-05 § 4; Ord. 2010-01 § 2; Ord. 88-19 § 2)


2.12.030 Qualifications.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-05. (Ord. 2010-01 § 2; Ord. 91-23 § 1; Ord. 88-19 § 3)


2.12.040 Staff support.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-05. (Ord. 2010-01 § 2; Ord. 88-19 § 4)


2.12.050 Presiding officer.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-05. (Ord. 88-19 § 5)


2.12.060 Powers and duties.

The board shall have the following powers and duties:

A. To hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of the codes adopted by the city under LCMC 15.04.010;

B. The board shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official. (Ord. 2017-05 § 4; Ord. 95-8 § 1; Ord. 88-19 § 6)


2.12.070 Review process.

Repealed by Ord. 2010-01. (Ord. 95-8 § 2; Ord. 88-19 § 7)


Chapter 2.14 COMMITTEE FOR CITIZEN INVOLVEMENT (CCI)

Sections:

2.14.010    Established – Purpose.

2.14.020    Membership.

2.14.030    Powers and duties.

Code reviser’s note: Pursuant to LMC 2.08.015, the planning commission is selected to serve as the CCI.		  


2.14.010 Established – Purpose.

The committee for citizen involvement is hereby established and shall function to assist the city council in monitoring and evaluating city responsibility regarding Goal 1 of Oregon’s Statewide Planning Goals and Guidelines: Citizen Involvement. (Ord. 2017-05 § 5)


2.14.020 Membership.

The committee for citizen involvement is hereby established and shall consist of seven members. Membership should be broadly representative of geographic areas and interests related to land use and land use decisions. The governing body shall appoint two members who are qualified electors from each ward of the city and one qualified elector of the county who resides in the urban growth boundary of the city, but does not reside within the city limits. (Ord. 2017-05 § 5)


2.14.030 Powers and duties.

The CCI shall be directly responsible to the city council and shall have the following powers and duties:

A. Responsibility for assisting the city council with the development of a citizen involvement program that promotes and enhances citizen involvement in land use planning, assisting in the implementation of the citizen involvement in land use planning, assisting in the implementation of the citizen involvement program, and evaluating the process being used for citizen involvement.

B. The committee shall operate consistent with citizen involvement Resolution 93-12 and Resolution 94-33 until the comprehensive plan citizen involvement program is amended pursuant to the procedures in ORS 197.610. (Ord. 2017-05 § 5)


Chapter 2.16 TRAFFIC SAFETY COMMITTEE

(Repealed by Ord. 2007-02)


Chapter 2.18 VACATION RENTAL DWELLING LICENSE APPEALS BOARD

Sections:

2.18.010    Established.

2.18.020    Membership and qualifications of board members.

2.18.030    –

2.18.070    Repealed.

2.18.080    Powers and duties.

2.18.090    Repealed.

2.18.100    Interpretation.


2.18.010 Established.

A vacation rental dwelling license appeals board (“board”) is established with authority to hear all matters related to vacation rental dwelling (“VRD”) licenses including decisions on license issuance, renewal, revocation, or other city license action. (Ord. 2017-05 § 6; Ord. 2009-08 § 1)


2.18.020 Membership and qualifications of board members.

A. The city council is authorized to act as the VRD license appeals board.

B. The city council may also by motion or resolution delegate its authority to the planning commission to serve as the VRD license appeals board. (Ord. 2017-05 § 6; Ord. 2009-08 § 1)


2.18.030 Appointment – Terms of office.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-05. (Ord. 2009-08 § 1)


2.18.040 Vacancies.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-05. (Ord. 2009-08 § 1)


2.18.050 Presiding officers.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-05. (Ord. 2009-08 § 1)


2.18.060 Staff services.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-05. (Ord. 2009-08 § 1)


2.18.070 Meetings.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-05. (Ord. 2009-08 § 1)


2.18.080 Powers and duties.

The board shall have the powers and duties which are now or may hereafter be assigned to it by Lincoln City Charter, ordinance, resolution or order of the city, and general laws of the state. (Ord. 2017-05 § 6; Ord. 2009-08 § 1)


2.18.090 Rules of procedures.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-05. (Ord. 2009-08 § 1)


2.18.100 Interpretation.

In the event an interpretation of Lincoln City Charter, ordinance, or resolution is required, the board is authorized to take any steps necessary to authorize the interpretation, including forwarding the interpretation to city council for recommended adoption. The city council is not required to formally adopt an interpretation for the board decision to be final, unless the city attorney advises the city to adopt the interpretation as part of the final decision or order. In such event, the board decision will be deemed final upon council adoption of the interpretation. (Ord. 2017-05 § 6; Ord. 2009-08 § 1)


Chapter 2.20 PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD

Sections:

2.20.010    Membership – Qualifications.

2.20.020    Repealed.

2.20.030    Repealed.

2.20.040    Powers and duties.


2.20.010 Membership – Qualifications.

The parks and recreation board of the city shall consist of seven members appointed by the city council. To be eligible for appointment to and continued service on the parks and recreation board, a person at the time of appointment and throughout his or her term of service must be a resident of the city. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the council may appoint two members of the board who reside within the urban growth boundary of the city but do not reside in Lincoln City; provided, that the other seats on the board are filled by city residents. In addition, if any position that could be filled by a member who resides within the urban growth boundary has remained vacant, with no applicants deemed appropriate by the city council, for at least 60 days after being advertised as vacant, then the city council may fill the position with a member who resides within Lincoln County within the boundaries of the Lincoln County School District – North Area. Lincoln County voter registration records may be utilized to determine residency. (Ord. 2017-05 § 7; Ord. 2002-07 § 1; Ord. 2001-09A § 1; Ord. 91-25 § 1; Ord. 87-11 § 1; Ord. 199 § 1, 1973)


2.20.020 Jurisdiction.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-05. (Ord. 199 § 2, 1973)


2.20.030 Organization.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-05. (Ord. 199 § 3, 1973)


2.20.040 Powers and duties.

The parks and recreation board shall be advisory only and shall be empowered to study and recommend to the city council on the following matters:

A. The layout, adornment, ornamentation and improvement of city parks;

B. The creation or improvement of recreation programs, playgrounds, recreation centers and other places which have previously been, or may in the future be, dedicated to the purpose of public recreation;

C. The appointment of engineers, surveyors and all other necessary employees;

D. Rules and regulations for the use of the parks and recreation areas;

E. The acquisition of land for park and/or recreation purposes;

F. The disbursement of moneys appropriated for the maintenance and improvement of parks, recreation areas and recreation programs;

G. All other matters necessary and proper for the protection, care and improvement of the parks, recreation areas and recreation programs. (Ord. 2017-05 § 7; Ord. 199 § 4, 1973)


Chapter 2.24 VISITOR AND CONVENTION COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.24.010    Established.

2.24.020    Membership – Qualifications.

2.24.030    –

2.24.050    Repealed.

2.24.060    Powers and duties.

2.24.070    Repealed.

2.24.080    Grant review procedures and appeals process.


2.24.010 Established.

A visitor and convention committee (VCC) of the city is created for the purpose of improving the marketing of the tourist industry in the city. The committee is advisory to the visitor and convention bureau (VCB) and the city council. The visitor and convention bureau (VCB) uses an assumed business name of “Explore Lincoln City.” The visitor and convention committee (VCC) may alternatively be referred to as the “Explore Lincoln City Committee” or “ELCC.” (Ord. 2019-17 § 1; Ord. 2017-05 § 8; Ord. 2012-13 § 2)


2.24.020 Membership – Qualifications.

A. Qualifications. The committee shall consist of seven members. The council shall appoint persons who meet the qualifications of this subsection. Lincoln County voter registration records may be used to determine residency.

1. Two members of the committee shall be hotel operators as defined in LCMC 3.04.010. At least one of the members must be a city resident and one may reside within the boundaries of the Lincoln County School District – North Area.

2. Two members of the committee shall own or manage a business located within the city not related to the lodging industry. At least one member shall be a city resident and one may reside within the boundaries of the Lincoln County School District – North Area.

3. Three members shall represent the public. These members shall have relevant experience or expertise, including but not limited to the business or lodging industry, and may or may not own or operate a hotel or other business. At least one member shall be a city resident and two may reside within the boundaries of the Lincoln County School District – North Area.

4. Notwithstanding the qualifications described in this section, a committee member may change residency during the appointed term provided the member resides within the boundaries of the Lincoln County School District – North Area.

B. The council shall seek recommendations for appointment to the lodging industry positions from Lincoln City hotel owners or operators, and recommendations for appointments to the business positions from the city Chamber of Commerce, prior to appointment. (Ord. 2017-05 § 8; Ord. 2012-13 § 2)


2.24.030 Terms of office.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-05. (Ord. 2012-13 § 2)


2.24.040 Vacancies.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-05. (Ord. 2012-13 § 2)


2.24.050 Voting – Rules of procedure.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-05. (Ord. 2012-13 § 2)


2.24.060 Powers and duties.

The committee shall perform the following duties:

A. Advise the city council on programs relating to tourism, conventions, and visitor information;

B. After conducting a review, advise and make recommendations as desired to the city council on the visitor and convention bureau marketing plan prepared by the visitor and convention bureau director;

C. Review applications for grant funds for nonprofits in accordance with approved guidelines and make recommendations to the VCB director with regard to denial or award of funds;

D. Review applications for marketing partnership funds in accordance with approved guide-lines and make recommendations to the VCB director with regard to denial or award of funds;

E. The review of grant applications and recommendations by the committee to the director shall be in accordance with LCMC 2.24.080 and such forms, policies and procedures as are adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2019-17 § 2; Ord. 2017-05 § 8; Ord. 2012-13 § 2)


2.24.070 Reports to city council.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-05. (Ord. 2012-13 § 2)


2.24.080 Grant review procedures and appeals process.

A. Application and Completeness. Grant applications shall be submitted in strict compliance with the grant policies, procedures, guidelines and forms as adopted by resolution or motion of the city council (hereinafter “grant requirements”). Failure to submit a complete or appropriate application in accordance with grant requirements is a jurisdictional defect and will result in the application not being processed or presented to the committee. Staff will review any application submitted at least 72 hours before the deadline for completion and notify the applicant by email if the application is insufficient for processing. Any application submitted within 72 hours of the deadline will not be afforded this completeness review.

B. Policies and Procedures. The committee is charged with the review of grant applications. The committee will follow the adopted grant requirements and conduct the review in a professional manner, ranking the applications and recommending the top ranked applications with funding levels indicated to the director. The recommendations must be substantiated with reference to the criteria in the grant requirements. The VCB director is the decision maker on all grant award applications, unless recused, in which case the city manager shall designate an alternate decision maker for such applications. The VCB director’s decision is final, unless appealed as provided herein.

C. Appeal. A person, firm, corporation or other entity, however organized, and aggrieved by a grant funding decision of the director taken pursuant to this section may, within 15 calendar days after the date of notice of decision is mailed, appeal in writing to the city manager. The written appeal shall be accompanied by the following:

1. The name and address of the appellant;

2. An identification of the decision sought to be reviewed, including the date of the decision;

3. The reason the determination is incorrect, including the specific grounds relied upon for the alleged error (citing the applicable provision of the grant requirements);

4. An appeal fee as established by resolution of the city council.

5. Please note: Strict compliance with the above appeal requirements is required. Failure to strictly observe the requirements is a jurisdictional defect and results in summary dismissal of the appeal. The opportunity to appeal the decision of the director is only to correct an identified error in the processing of the subject grant application. Such appeal is not a de novo appeal where the applicant can reargue their case to a different decision maker.

6. The decision of the city manager is the final decision of the city of Lincoln City.

D. Reservation. The city of Lincoln City reserves the right to approve all, or a portion, of any grant request, or deny a request altogether, or deny all grant requests, regardless of availability of funds. (Ord. 2019-17 § 3)


Chapter 2.28 URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY

Sections:

2.28.010    Findings.

2.28.020    Powers and duties vested in city council.

2.28.030    Corporate name.

2.28.040    Terms of office of members.


2.28.010 Findings.

A. The city council of the city finds and declares that blighted areas, as defined in ORS 457.010, exist within the city.

B. The city council declares and recognizes that there is a need for an urban renewal agency to function within the city. (Ord. 88-14 §§ 1, 2)


2.28.020 Powers and duties vested in city council.

The city council further declares, pursuant to ORS 457.045(3), that all of the rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities granted to and vested in an urban renewal agency by the laws of the state shall be exercised by and vested in the city council of the city; provided, however, that any act of the governing body acting as the urban renewal agency shall be, and shall be considered, the act of the urban renewal agency only and not of the city council. (Ord. 88-14 § 3)


2.28.030 Corporate name.

The corporate name of the agency provided by this chapter shall be, and said agency shall be known as, the Urban Renewal Agency of the City of Lincoln City, Oregon. (Ord. 88-14 § 4)


2.28.040 Terms of office of members.

The term of office of each member of the urban renewal agency shall be concurrent with each member’s individual term of office as a member of the city council. (Ord. 88-14 § 5)




Chapter 2.32 POLICE RESERVE

Sections:

2.32.010    Findings.

2.32.020    Authorized.

2.32.030    Appointment and removal.

2.32.040    Oath of office – Powers and duties.

2.32.050    Badges.


2.32.010 Findings.

Inasmuch as the city presently has no police reserve to call upon in time of disaster or emergency, it is desirable that the police force be enlarged for the protection of the citizens and property of the city. (Ord. 29 § 5, 1965)


2.32.020 Authorized.

The chief of police of the city is authorized to organize a Lincoln City police reserve for the city, said police reserve to consist of not more than 12 in number, to serve without compensation, and to be residents of the city or to live within a distance of five miles of the city limits of the city. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1965)


2.32.030 Appointment and removal.

A. The chief of police of the city is authorized to provide and furnish forms for signature by applicants for membership in the police reserve of the city, and the selection for membership shall be made by such chief of police.

B. Any member of the Lincoln City police reserve may be removed by the chief of police with or without cause. (Ord. 29 § 2, 1965)


2.32.040 Oath of office – Powers and duties.

Any applicant selected for service in the police reserve of the city shall take and subscribe to the oath of office required of police officers of the city, and shall be subject to the directions and orders of the chief of police of the city and shall, during such service, have the powers and duties of a regular police officer of the city. (Ord. 29 § 3, 1965)


2.32.050 Badges.

Membership and authority as a member of the police reserve of the city shall be indicated by arm bands and/or appropriate insignia and badges to be designated, selected and furnished by the police department of the city. (Ord. 29 § 4, 1965)


Chapter 2.36 DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE TASK FORCE

Sections:

2.36.010    Established – Purpose.

2.36.020    Membership.

2.36.030    Terms of office – Removal.

2.36.040    Presiding officers.

2.36.050    Consultants and grants.

2.36.060    Powers and duties.

2.36.070    Limitation of authority.


2.36.010 Established – Purpose.

A drug and alcohol abuse task force is established as an advisory body to perform the functions described in this chapter and to carry out any other duties which the council may assign. (Ord. 88-4 § 1)


2.36.020 Membership.

The committee shall consist of seven or more members appointed by the mayor with the concurrence of the city council, to serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. To be eligible for appointment to and continued service on this committee, a person at the time of appointment and throughout his or her term of service, for terms commencing after July 1, 1991, must be a resident of Lincoln County. First preference for appointment to the committee will be given to city residents. (Ord. 91-24 § 1; Ord. 88-4 § 2)


2.36.030 Terms of office – Removal.

A. At time of appointment, the mayor shall assign the term of office to each committee member as follows: one for one year; two for two years; two for three years; and two for four years. Their successors and any additional appointments shall hold office for four years.

B. A member may be removed from the committee by the mayor with the concurrence of the city council at any time. (Ord. 88-4 § 3)


2.36.040 Presiding officers.

At its first meeting of each calendar year, the committee shall elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson, to serve one-year terms. (Ord. 88-4 § 4)


2.36.050 Consultants and grants.

The committee may retain consultants and accept grants with the approval of the city council. (Ord. 88-4 § 5)


2.36.060 Powers and duties.

The committee shall have the following powers and duties:

A. Assess public opinion regarding drug and alcohol abuse;

B. Solicit expert advice regarding drug and alcohol abuse;

C. Advise on the coordination of activities regarding drug and alcohol abuse;

D. Provide for means of information-sharing regarding drug and alcohol abuse;

E. Make recommendations on the establishment and implementation of programs related to drug and alcohol abuse;

F. Advise city council and staff on the establishment or implementation of educational programs on the subject of drugs and alcohol in the community;

G. Advise city council and staff on enforcement programs relating to drug and alcohol abuse;

H. Advise city council and staff on the establishment or implementation of additional regulations relating to drug and alcohol abuse;

I. Advise city council and staff on the establishment or implementation of rehabilitation programs for drug and alcohol treatment. (Ord. 88-4 § 6)


2.36.070 Limitation of authority.

The committee only has such authority as is specified in this chapter or as authorized by subsequent motions or resolutions of the council. (Ord. 88-4 § 7)


Chapter 2.40 MUNICIPAL COURT

Sections:

2.40.005    Code of judicial conduct.

2.40.010    Right to trial by jury.

2.40.020    Number of jurors.

2.40.030    Notice of request for jury trial – Waiver – Exceptions.

2.40.040    Jury list – Preparation – Eligibility and term of prospective jurors.

2.40.050    Jury list – Preparation supervised by municipal judge – Disqualified or unavailable persons.

2.40.060    Jury list – Certification.

2.40.070    Jury list – Selection of additional names.

2.40.080    Jury selection – Use of jury box.

2.40.090    Jury selection from jury list.

2.40.100    Veniremen – Time of selection.

2.40.110    Veniremen – Selection – Presence of defendant.

2.40.120    Veniremen – Selection procedure – Peremptory challenges.

2.40.130    Veniremen – Selection of alternates.

2.40.140    Veniremen – Selection of name of unavailable or unqualified person – Procedure.

2.40.150    Summons of veniremen – Duty to obey.

2.40.160    Venire panel – Notice to defendant.

2.40.170    Empaneling of jury – Challenges for cause.

2.40.180    Procedure when less than six veniremen remain after voir dire.

2.40.190    Jury verdict to be unanimous.

2.40.200    Compensation of jurors and veniremen.

2.40.210    Costs and disbursements.

2.40.220    Warrant service charge.


2.40.005 Code of judicial conduct.

A. Except as modified in subsection (B) of this section, the conduct of the municipal court judge shall be governed by the rules set forth in the Oregon Code of Judicial Conduct (OCJC) December 1, 2013 Edition, attached to the ordinance codified in this section as Exhibit A and made a part hereof by this reference.

B. The OCJC as adopted by reference is modified to remove Rule 6 (Advisory Opinions) and to remove Rule 1.2.D. (exclusion of municipal judges). In addition, Rule 1.2.C. is modified to add municipal court judges to the list of judges exempt from rules identified therein. (Ord. 2016-03 § 1)


2.40.010 Right to trial by jury.

Any person accused of an offense defined and made punishable by the Lincoln City Charter, any provision of this chapter, or any other ordinance of the city shall have the right of trial by jury in the municipal court, where the penalty portion of said offense includes the possibility of a jail sentence, and only when such a penalty is involved, except where such person is held to answer for contempt of court. (Ord. 263 § 1, 1976)


2.40.020 Number of jurors.

The jury shall consist of six persons selected and empaneled as provided in LCMC 2.40.040 through 2.40.140. (Ord. 263 § 2, 1976)


2.40.030 Notice of request for jury trial – Waiver – Exceptions.

A. The defendant or his attorney shall request a trial by jury in writing or in open court not more than 10 days from the date of entry of the defendant’s plea to the complaint by which he is charged.

B. The right to trial by jury shall be deemed waived if the defendant fails to comply with the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, and the municipal judge shall, after the time provided for such notice of desire for jury trial has passed with no such notice being given, set the cause for trial without jury.

C. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (B) of this section, the municipal judge may, upon good cause shown and in the interests of justice, set a cause down for trial by jury upon request of the defendant made within the time in which a jury may be selected as provided in LCMC 2.40.120. (Ord. 263 § 3, 1976)


2.40.040 Jury list – Preparation – Eligibility and term of prospective jurors.

A. Except as provided in LCMC 2.40.070, a jury list shall be prepared and certified once each year on the last day of June, unless circumstances make such preparation not feasible, in which case the list shall be prepared as soon thereafter as possible.

B. Any person whose name is selected for the jury list shall be subject to selection for service as a juror from the effective date of the list as provided in LCMC 2.40.060 until the effective date of next term’s list, even though the date set for trial may be after certification of the next term’s list.

C. The jury list shall be composed of 120 qualified persons selected by lot in the manner prescribed by ORS 54.060, except as to date, and shall be composed of names of residents of the city. These names shall be taken from the most recent voter registration list, selecting 20 names from each voting precinct. (Ord. 263 § 4, 1976)


2.40.050 Jury list – Preparation supervised by municipal judge – Disqualified or unavailable persons.

The municipal judge shall order and supervise the selection of names for the jury list. In preparing the jury list, names drawn of persons known or believed to be disqualified as jurors who are exempt from jury duty under the provisions of the law of the state or who are believed to be unavailable shall be discarded. The list shall contain the name and residence address of each person named therein. (Ord. 263 § 5, 1976)


2.40.060 Jury list – Certification.

A. When the jury list is complete, and the municipal judge is satisfied that there are no persons thereon whom he knows to be incompetent to serve as jurors, he shall certify the list in substantially the following form:

I (name of judge), certify that I am the duly appointed and acting municipal judge of the city of Lincoln City, Oregon; and that the foregoing jury list is composed of the names of persons selected in accordance with the provisions of Lincoln City Ordinance No.________________.

B. Upon certification of the jury list, the judge shall cause the same to be filed in the records of the municipal court. At that time, the list shall become effective and all jurors shall be chosen from that list until the effective date of the jury list for the next term.

C. Upon selection of additional names as provided in LCMC 2.40.070, the municipal judge shall certify the list of those additional names and file the same as provided in this section. From that time, such jurors may be chosen to serve as though they had been on the original list for that term. (Ord. 263 § 6, 1976)


2.40.070 Jury list – Selection of additional names.

Whenever the number of competent and qualified jurors falls below 50, the municipal judge may, if he deems necessary, order and supervise the selection of any additional 50 persons to add to the current jury list. Such persons shall be selected and subject to service as though they had been selected at the beginning of that term. (Ord. 263 § 7, 1976)


2.40.080 Jury selection – Use of jury box.

The municipal judge, or, under his direction, his clerk, shall keep a secured jury box. After the jury list has been made, the municipal judge shall prepare and deposit in such box separate ballots or slips containing the name, place of residence and occupation of each person on the jury list. (Ord. 263 § 8, 1976)


2.40.090 Jury selection from jury list.

When a jury is demanded in the municipal court, the jury shall be drawn and selected from the jury list. (Ord. 263 § 9, 1976)


2.40.100 Veniremen – Time of selection.

After receipt of notice of desire for jury trial, and not less than 10 days prior to the date set for trial, the municipal judge shall set a time for selection of the veniremen, giving notice thereof to the defendant or his attorney, and the city attorney. (Ord. 263 § 10(1), 1976)


2.40.110 Veniremen – Selection – Presence of defendant.

The defendant or his attorney shall be present at the time set for selection of the veniremen unless he specifically and in writing or in open court waives his right to be present. Failure to appear or waive appearance as provided in this section shall be deemed a waiver by the defendant of his right to be present at or participate in the selection of the venire panel. (Ord. 263 § 10(2), 1976)


2.40.120 Veniremen – Selection procedure – Peremptory challenges.

A. At the time set for selection of the veniremen, the municipal judge or his clerk shall, in the presence of the defendant or his attorney and the city attorney, draw at random from the jury box 12 of the lots representing persons on the jury list. If at that time it appears that any person whose lot is drawn has died, moved from the city, become incompetent, or is otherwise known to be unable to sit as a juror for the cause at issue, and both parties or the judge are convinced thereof, that lot shall be disposed of as provided in LCMC 2.40.140 and a new lot drawn. Should the defendant waive his appearance at the time for selection of principal veniremen, only nine names shall be drawn.

B. From the 12 names so drawn, the defendant and the city attorney may each exercise no more than three peremptory challenges apiece. Such challenges shall be exercised alternately, commencing with the defendant. Should the defendant waive his appearance, the city attorney may still exercise any and all of his three peremptory challenges from the nine names then drawn.

C. The six names remaining after both parties have exercised their peremptory challenges shall be summoned as the principal veniremen unless they are later excused from appearance or cannot be served with summons. In case either party does not exercise all his peremptory challenges, the principal veniremen may be summoned from the names remaining.

D. The court on its own motion may direct that six additional names be drawn from the jury box from which alternate veniremen may be selected. When six such names are drawn, each party may exercise one additional peremptory challenge from those names only.

E. No peremptory or any other challenge save for cause shall be allowed other than as provided in this section. (Ord. 263 § 11, 1976)


2.40.130 Veniremen – Selection of alternates.

If, after the principal and alternate veniremen have been selected, it is found that one or more of said veniremen are dead, absent from the city, incapacitated or otherwise unable to serve, the municipal judge or his clerk may draw such an additional number of names from the jury box at random as may be necessary to secure the attendance of nine veniremen at the time set for trial. The defendant and the city attorney need not be represented at or given notice of the time of such selection; and such names may be drawn at any time after selection of the principal and alternate veniremen, without further notice to the defendant or city attorney. (Ord. 263 § 12, 1976)


2.40.140 Veniremen – Selection of name of unavailable or unqualified person – Procedure.

A. When it appears to the municipal judge that the person whose name is drawn is dead or resides out of the city, the ballot shall be destroyed.

B. If it appears to the municipal judge or he has good reason to believe that a person whose name is drawn is temporarily absent from the city, is ill or is so engaged as to be unable to attend at the time of the trial without great inconvenience, the ballot shall be laid aside and the name not placed on the jury list for the trial for which the jury is being selected; but such ballot shall be returned to the jury box after the drawing is completed. (Ord. 263 § 13, 1976)


2.40.150 Summons of veniremen – Duty to obey.

A. When the principal venire panel is selected, the municipal judge shall issue summons for each of such veniremen, and for three alternates, selected as provided in LCMC 2.40.120 and 2.40.130.

B. The summons for each juror shall be forwarded to the chief of police, together with an order signed by the municipal judge commanding him to summon particular persons to serve as jurors and make true return thereupon. Summons to serve as a juror shall be served personally upon the person summoned.

C. Any person summoned to appear as a juror and disregarding such summons may be adjudged in contempt of court, and shall be punished upon a finding thereof by a fine not exceeding $25.00. (Ord. 263 § 14, 1976)


2.40.160 Venire panel – Notice to defendant.

Not less than three court days prior to the date set for trial, the municipal judge or his clerk shall mail to the defendant or to his attorney a list of the nine persons summoned to appear as principal and alternate veniremen, listed in the order in which they were drawn, and including their addresses, occupations where available, and whether or not the summons issued for each has been returned as served. (Ord. 263 § 15, 1976)


2.40.170 Empaneling of jury – Challenges for cause.

Challenges to a venireman at trial shall be for cause only, upon a showing from his own testimony on voir dire that there is a reasonable doubt as to his ability to act as a fair and impartial arbiter of the facts, to give the matter in issue his full and unbiased consideration, or to accord each witness his complete and open attention. Challenge for cause may be made by the defendant upon close of his questions on voir dire, or by the city attorney upon close of his questions on voir dire. The court shall excuse such venireman for cause upon challenge of either party or upon its own motion where it appears to the court that grounds exist therefor. (Ord. 263 § 16, 1976)


2.40.180 Procedure when less than six veniremen remain after voir dire.

If, after completion of voir dire and the taking of any challenges, less than six veniremen remain, the court may take either of the following courses of action:

A. Upon its own motion, or the motion of either party, order the chief of police or any police officer of the city, save those called as witnesses for the trial, to go out upon the streets and bring before the court a number of qualified persons up to three to appear as veniremen, and if qualified after voir dire examination, to sit as jurors;

B. Upon its own motion, or the motion of either party, continue the cause for trial on a later date with a new jury, excusing those veniremen still remaining. (Ord. 263 § 17, 1976)


2.40.190 Jury verdict to be unanimous.

The verdict of the jury empaneled to try any cause shall be unanimous. (Ord. 263 § 18, 1976)


2.40.200 Compensation of jurors and veniremen.

A. Persons summoned as veniremen who appear at the time set for trial and are not empaneled to sit as jurors shall receive as compensation for such appearance the sum of $10.00.

B. Persons empaneled to serve as jurors shall receive as compensation the sum of $10.00 per day of such service. (Ord. 79-9 § 1; Ord. 263 § 19, 1976)


2.40.210 Costs and disbursements.

In all cases tried before the municipal court, both with a jury and without a jury, the judge shall add the costs and disbursements to the fine, penalty or sentence imposed in the sum of not less than $5.00. After conviction in any case where a jury has been summoned, the cost of the fees to such jurors may not be taxed to the defendant as part of the costs. (Ord. 81-25 § 1; Ord. 263 § 21, 1976)


2.40.220 Warrant service charge.

There is established a “warrant service charge” in the designated amount of $15.00 to be collected by the municipal court of the city for failure of a person to appear in municipal court as required by a complaint having been filed in said court. (Ord. 87-16 § 1)


Chapter 2.44 REWARDS FOR CRIME INFORMATION

Sections:

2.44.010    Reward for information.

2.44.020    Exception – Public officials.

2.44.030    Apportionment among several persons.

2.44.040    Amount of reward – Determination and approval.


2.44.010 Reward for information.

Any person who communicates information to the city leading to the arrest and conviction of a person or persons for damaging any city property, equipment, signs or parks shall be given a reward, payable by the city, and in an amount to be determined by the city, but not to exceed $500.00. (Ord. 78-20 § 1)


2.44.020 Exception – Public officials.

No public official may claim this reward for the performance of a service which it was his duty to perform. (Ord. 78-20 § 2)


2.44.030 Apportionment among several persons.

When several persons’ efforts contribute to produce the information leading to the arrest and conviction, the reward will be apportioned among those contributing according to the value of their contribution as determined by the city council. (Ord. 78-20 § 3)


2.44.040 Amount of reward – Determination and approval.

The amount of the reward shall be determined and payment shall be approved by a motion of the city council. (Ord. 78-20 § 4)


Chapter 2.52 RETENTION OF RECORDS

Sections:

2.52.010    Period of retention.

2.52.020    Destruction – Procedure.


2.52.010 Period of retention.

A. City records shall be retained in accordance with the schedules prepared by the state archivist and adopted by the state in Chapter 166, Division 40 of the Oregon Administrative Rules, as they now or hereafter exist.

B. City records, of a nature which are not set forth in the schedules referred to in subsection (A) of this section, shall be retained for a period of time consistent with the intent of the retention schedules of a similar nature. (Ord. 78-45 § 1)


2.52.020 Destruction – Procedure.

Whenever any officer of the city has accumulated records that have been retained beyond the period of time recommended above, the officer shall describe and list them on a form entitled “Certificate of Records Authorized to Be Destroyed.” This certificate shall include the signed approval of the city manager, city recorder, and the city attorney, after which the records described thereon may be destroyed. The original of this certificate must be filed permanently in the city recorder’s office and a copy retained permanently by the department using same. The form of the “Certificate of Records Authorized to Be Destroyed” shall be approved by resolution of city council. (Ord. 2019-35 § 1; Ord. 78-45 § 2)


Chapter 2.54 DRIFTWOOD PUBLIC LIBRARY

Sections:

2.54.010    Establishment of public library.

2.54.020    Purpose.

2.54.030    Financing of public library.

2.54.040    Library board – Established – Membership.

2.54.050    Financial interest – Expense reimbursement.

2.54.060    Board chairperson and secretary.

2.54.070    Library board powers and responsibilities.


2.54.010 Establishment of public library.

Lincoln City’s library was established by Resolution No. 93 and reestablished by Resolution No. 80-09 as a public library in the city, under the provisions of Oregon laws relating to public libraries, specifically ORS 357.400 through 357.621. The library is named the Driftwood Public Library. (Ord. 2003-22 § 1)


2.54.020 Purpose.

The purpose of the Driftwood Public Library is to provide and make accessible to all residents of the city library and information services suitable to persons of all ages. (Ord. 2003-22 § 1)


2.54.030 Financing of public library.

The Driftwood Public Library shall be financed through revenues from the general fund of the city. (Ord. 2003-22 § 1)


2.54.040 Library board – Established – Membership.

The library board is hereby established and shall consist of eight members. One of the members shall be a student who is registered at and regularly attending high school within the city at the time of appointment and throughout his or her term of service. To be eligible for appointment to and continued service on the library board, a person, at the time of appointment and throughout his or her term of service, must be a resident of the city, except that two members may be residents within the urban growth boundary of the city and the student member may be a resident of Lincoln County within the boundaries of the Lincoln County School District – North Area. Voter registration records may be used to determine residency of adult members.

Notwithstanding any other provision of the code, the term of office of the high school student member shall be one year, commencing July 1st of each year. (Ord. 2017-05 § 9; Ord. 2007-04 § 1; Ord. 2007-03 § 1; Ord. 2003-22 § 1)


2.54.050 Financial interest – Expense reimbursement.

No member of the library board or the city council shall have any financial interest, either directly or indirectly, in any contract to which the Driftwood Public Library is a party, nor receive a salary or any payment for material or services provided to the board. (Ord. 2017-05 § 9; Ord. 2003-22 § 1)


2.54.060 Board chairperson and secretary.

The library director shall serve as secretary to the library board and keep a record of its actions. (Ord. 2017-05 § 9; Ord. 2003-22 § 1)


2.54.070 Library board powers and responsibilities.

A. The library board shall be an advisory board to the city council.

B. The library board shall make recommendations and advise the city council in the following matters:

1. The creation and revision of library policy, rules, and regulations.

2. Providing assistance to the library director in long range planning and preparation of the annual budget recommendations to the city manager for presentation to the city council.

3. Making recommendations to library director on program development.

4. Making recommendations to the library director in the case of a materials challenge (i.e., when a citizen asks the library director to withdraw an item from general use).

5. Acting as the library’s ambassadors to the community at large by fostering interest in library services and providing a point of contact for complaints or requests for service.

C. The library board shall have no power or responsibility for:

1. Entering into contracts.

2. Financial matters, except to act in an advisory capacity in the formulation of an annual budget.

3. Personnel. (Ord. 2017-05 § 9; Ord. 2003-22 § 1)


Chapter 2.56 RECOVERY OF LIBRARY MATERIALS

Sections:

2.56.010    Purpose.

2.56.020    Willful detention of library property unlawful.

2.56.030    Violation – Penalty.


2.56.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide a method for recovering materials on loan from the Lincoln City library which are not returned within the allowable time period established by the city library regulations. (Ord. 87-21 § 1)


2.56.020 Willful detention of library property unlawful.

It is unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously detain any library materials for 30 days after notice in writing from the librarian given after expiration of the time for which, by the regulations of the library, such materials may be kept. Such notice shall advise the offender that failure to return the materials within the time requested shall result in the issuance of a citation for a Class C violation and the amount of the current maximum fine which the municipal court may impose upon conviction. (Ord. 2015-10 § 5; Ord. 87-21 § 3)


2.56.030 Violation – Penalty.

A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter commits a Class C violation. Such conviction and payment of the fine shall not be construed to constitute payment for library material, nor shall a person convicted under this section be relieved of any obligation to return to the library such material.

B. The procedures of Chapter 1.16 LCMC relating to city violations shall be followed for violations of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-10 § 5; Ord. 87-21 §§ 2, 4)


Chapter 2.60 PERSONNEL SYSTEM

(Reserved)


Chapter 2.64 ARTS COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.64.010    Established.

2.64.020    Membership – Qualifications.

2.64.030    –    

2.64.050    Repealed.

2.64.060    Powers and duties.


2.64.010 Established.

An arts committee of the city is hereby established to act as an advisory committee to the city council on matters related to art, to act as an advisory committee to the city on the acquisition of public works of art under the percent for art program established by Chapter 3.24 LCMC, and to perform such other arts-related functions as the city council may designate from time to time. (Ord. 2017-05 § 10; Ord. 2004-14 § 2)


2.64.020 Membership – Qualifications.

The arts committee shall consist of seven members representing a broad perspective of arts and community interests, appointed by the city council. At least three of the members must be residents of the city. Three of the members may be residents within the boundaries of the Lincoln County School District – North Area even though not residents of the city. One member may be a representative of an “arts organization” provided the “arts organization” is located within 30 miles of Lincoln City. Lincoln County voter registration records may be used to determine residency. To be eligible for appointment to and continued service on the arts committee, a person or organization at the time of appointment and throughout his or her term of service must meet the residency requirement. (Ord. 2017-05 § 10; Ord. 2016-11 § 1; Ord. 2013-02 § 1; Ord. 2004-14 § 2)


2.64.030 Terms of office.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-05. (Ord. 2004-14 § 2)


2.64.040 Vacancies.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-05. (Ord. 2004-14 § 2)


2.64.050 Rules of procedure.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-05. (Ord. 2013-02 § 2; Ord. 2004-14 § 2)


2.64.060 Powers and duties.

The arts committee may exercise the following powers and perform the following duties:

A. Make recommendations to the city council on matters related to art.

B. Make recommendations to the city on the acquisition of public works of art under the percent for art program established by Chapter 3.24 LCMC. This may include, but need not be limited to, recommending criteria and procedures for the selection of works of art to be acquired under the program and recommending specific works of art for acquisition based on those criteria and procedures.

C. Make recommendations to the city on the siting, cataloging, maintenance, preservation, and disposition of works of art acquired by the city.

D. Make recommendations to the city on means and sources for funding or otherwise facilitating city acquisition of works of art in addition to those acquired under the percent for art program established by Chapter 3.24 LCMC.

E. Exercise specific powers and perform specific duties as may be delegated or assigned to it from time to time by the city council. (Ord. 2017-05 § 10; Ord. 2004-14 § 2)


Chapter 2.66 COMMUNITY SUSTAINABILITY COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.66.005    Established – Membership.

2.66.020    Powers and duties.


2.66.005 Established – Membership.

The community sustainability committee is established and shall consist of five voting members including no less than three members who are current residents of the city and up to two members who live outside the city but within the city urban growth boundary. The committee shall also consist of certain nonvoting ex officio members, the planning and community development department director, or designee, serving as the primary staff liaison and secretary of the commission. (Ord. 2017-05 § 2)


2.66.020 Powers and duties.

The community sustainability committee shall be advisory only and shall be empowered to study and recommend to the council on the subject of education and promotion of wise and efficient use and conservation of energy and natural resources by the city of Lincoln City and all its citizens and visitors. In doing so, the committee shall recommend to the city council the adoption of ordinances, rules, regulations, policies, implementation strategies and funding related to the community portion of the 2007 Lincoln City Sustainability Plan (adopted by Resolution 2007-29) and supported in Resolutions 2007-30 and 2007-31. Such implementation includes but is not limited to:

A. Promotion of environmentally, socially, and economically improved alternatives for development, operations, and maintenance in the Lincoln City community at large;

B. Education and awareness of energy and resource conservation issues;

C. Green building codes and green power generation;

D. Recycling, composting, source reduction and solid waste/landfill reduction issues;

E. Electric and water conservation issues;

F. Planting of native vegetation, invasive species removal, nonpoint pollution/watershed protection; and

G. Mass transit, affordable housing and alternative transportation. (Ord. 2017-05 § 2)


Chapter 2.68 TRANSIENT LODGINGS TAX REVIEW COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.68.010    Established – Membership.

2.68.020    Powers and duties.


2.68.010 Established – Membership.

A transient lodgings tax review committee is created to be composed of a business person with financial, bookkeeping or accounting experience, an operator, as defined in LCMC 3.04.010, and three lay members who are city residents. The business person need not be a city resident if his or her offices are located within the city limits and he or she resides within 12 miles of the city limits. The operator position need not be a city resident if the operator is a proprietor of a hotel located within the city and the position has remained vacant for 60 days after the position became open. Preference for appointment to the committee shall be given to city residents. (Ord. 2017-05 § 11; Ord. 2002-13 § 1; Ord. 92-11 § 1; Ord. 91-16 § 7; Ord. 89-8 § 16. Formerly 3.04.180)


2.68.020 Powers and duties.

The transient lodgings tax review committee shall have power and it shall be its duty:

A. To hear and determine appeals of orders or decisions of the tax administrator (finance director or other persons designated in Chapter 3.04 LCMC) made upon petitions for redetermination of tax. The committee may affirm, modify, or reverse such orders or decisions or dismiss the appeals therefrom, as may be just, and shall prescribe such forms, rules and regulations relating to appeals as it may deem necessary. In the review of the tax administrator decision or order, the committee may take such evidence and make such investigation as it may deem necessary. It shall give notice of its determinations in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a tax administrator’s decision and shall file a copy of each such determination with the tax administrator with certification thereon of the date of service thereof. Such determination shall become final 20 days thereafter and shall thereupon become due and payable, subject to interest and penalties, and enforceable by the tax administrator in like manner as an order or decision of the tax administrator;

B. To make recommendations to the tax administrator on all forms, rules and regulations in the administration and enforcement of the TRT tax and Chapter 3.04 LCMC;

C. To hear and determine, in such manner as shall be just, any protest which may be made by any person who may be interested to any form, rule, or regulation approved or prescribed by the committee;

D. To grant, for good cause, applications for extensions of time in excess of one month for making any return or payment of tax, and to prescribe rules therefor;

E. To make such investigations as it deems advisable regarding the imposition and administration of the transient lodgings tax and report its findings to the city council; to act in an advisory capacity to the legislative body on matters pertaining to the transient lodgings tax and enforcement problems; and to recommend to the council the adoption, amendment, or repeal of legislation pertaining thereto;

F. The committee shall keep its files in the office of the tax administrator and shall meet at a location to be specified by the tax administrator. (Ord. 2017-05 § 11; Ord. 91-16 § 8; Ord. 89-8 § 16(a). Formerly 3.04.190)


Chapter 2.70 BUDGET COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.70.010    Established – Operation.


2.70.010 Established – Operation.

There is hereby established a city of Lincoln City budget committee consistent with ORS 294.414 and applicable administrative rules. State statutes and rules shall govern the operation of the budget committee and the powers exercised by the committee, and, when not inconsistent with Oregon law, the rules and procedures in Chapter 2.06 LCMC shall govern. No appointive officer (including members of other appointive bodies) may serve on the budget committee. All current members serving on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall continue as members, subject to expiration of their current terms. (Ord. 2017-05 § 13)


Chapter 2.72 EMERGENCY OPERATIONS

Sections:

2.72.010    Purpose.

2.72.015    Adoption of emergency operations plan.

2.72.020    Definition of emergency.

2.72.030    Authority.

2.72.040    Declaration of emergency – Who may declare emergency.

2.72.050    Appointment of emergency manager and order of succession.

2.72.060    Terms of emergency declaration.

2.72.070    Authorized emergency orders.

2.72.080    Acquisition of resources.

2.72.090    Authority over removal of disaster debris or wreckage – Authorizations required.

2.72.300    Penalty.

2.72.310    Responsibility for emergency management.

2.72.320    Interpretation.


2.72.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for formal adoption of the updated emergency operations plan (February 2018) and to provide for code authority and procedures for emergency operations to minimize injury to persons, property, and the environment and to preserve the established civil authority in the event that a state of emergency exists within the city of Lincoln City. This code is intended to grant as broad a power as permitted by statutory and constitutional authority. (Ord. 2018-03 § 1)


2.72.015 Adoption of emergency operations plan.

The emergency operations plan (February 2018) as set forth in Exhibit A, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and made a part hereof by this reference, is hereby adopted as the emergency operations plan for the city of Lincoln City. Between code updates, the council is expressly authorized to periodically update the attached plan by resolution of the council. (Ord. 2018-03 § 1)


2.72.020 Definition of emergency.

A state of emergency exists whenever any part of the city of Lincoln City is suffering or in imminent danger of suffering from a tornado, storm, high water, wind-driven water, earthquake, tsunami, volcanic eruption, landslide, mudslide, snow or ice storm, drought, fire, explosion, health hazard, infestation, toxic substance, civil disorder, disruption of community services, or any other catastrophe whereby extraordinary measures must be taken to save lives, to protect public health, safety and welfare, to minimize destruction of property or the environment, or to avert or lessen the threat of a major disaster. (Ord. 2018-03 § 1)


2.72.030 Authority.

In addition to local home rule authority, under ORS Chapter 401, local jurisdictions have the authority and responsibility for responding to emergencies. (Ord. 2018-03 § 1)


2.72.040 Declaration of emergency – Who may declare emergency.

A. When, in the judgment of the city council, a state of emergency exists, the city council shall so declare in writing and publicize the existence of same.

1. If the city council is in session or reasonably may be called into an emergency or special session in a timely manner, the city manager, or any duly authorized municipal, county, state or federal official, may request the council to declare the existence or threatened existence of an emergency. For the purposes of requesting the council to declare the existence or threatened existence of any emergency, “city manager” includes any acting city manager or city manager pro tem.

2. If the city council is not in session or available, the city manager is expressly authorized to issue such declaration, subject to council ratification and confirmation, modification or rejection at a public meeting as soon as practicable, but not more than seven days after the declaration.

3. If the city manager is not available, or in such person’s absence, the chief of police is expressly authorized to issue such a declaration, subject to council ratification and confirmation, modification or rejection at a public meeting as soon as practicable.

B. Declarations of emergency issued by any person other than the city council shall be presented as soon as practical to the city council for ratification and confirmation, modification or rejection. Any declaration rejected by a vote of the city council shall be void. Declarations shall be considered in full force and effect until the council declares the emergency has been terminated due to order having been restored in the affected area of the city. In all cases, when the basis for the declaration of emergency no longer exists, the city council shall terminate the declaration.

C. All declarations of emergency shall be signed and shall address the required terms as set forth in LCMC 2.72.060. A declaration may be transmitted by facsimile or over the internet as may be required under the circumstances, and any facsimile signature shall be accepted as if an original, but the originally signed document shall be filed with the city recorder and a copy to the emergency manager as soon as practicably possible.

D. The emergency manager shall be informed of the adoption of a signed declaration of emergency as soon as possible. The emergency manager shall cause any declaration of emergency to be delivered, as appropriate, to the Lincoln County emergency management director, the State of Oregon Director of Emergency Management, state and local public health officials, the Governor’s office, and news media.

E. A person authorized to issue a declaration of emergency shall be considered unavailable if such person is not able to sign and authorize said declaration after hearing or reading all of the terms of the declaration and any orders contained therein. (Ord. 2018-03 § 1)


2.72.050 Appointment of emergency manager and order of succession.

A. Unless or until other appointment by the city council, the emergency manager shall be the first of the following persons available and willing to act:

1. The city manager; if unavailable or unwilling, then

2. The police chief; if unavailable or unwilling, then

3. The public works director.

B. Except when the city manager temporarily or permanently abdicates the city manager’s position as emergency manager or the city council takes superseding action, the emergency manager is hereby appointed the acting city manager with all the powers inherent in said position. Unless prior to an emergency declaration the city council appoints an acting city manager with authority to act as emergency manager, the provision of this section shall control the order of succession.

C. The emergency manager may appoint one or more deputy managers, reporting to the emergency manager, as is consistent with good incident command principles. (Ord. 2018-03 § 1)


2.72.060 Terms of emergency declaration.

An emergency declaration shall state in writing:

A. A description of the nature of the emergency; and

B. The geographic boundaries of the area where the emergency exists as well as the portions lying within the city’s boundaries and areas to be subject to emergency powers/controls; and

C. An estimate of the number of individuals at risk, injured or killed; and

D. A description of the actual or likely damage caused by the emergency; and

E. A statement of the type of assistance or resources required to respond to the emergency; and

F. An estimate of the length of time during which the designated area will remain under the emergency declaration; and

G. Any special regulations or emergency measures, powers or orders imposed as a result of the declared emergency; and

H. Bear the signature of the authorized person making the declaration and the date and time thereof; and

I. The emergency declaration may be amended and updated as necessary, and shall be amended when necessary to reflect needed assistance of state, county and federal authorities consistent with Plan Chapter 1.7.2. (Ord. 2018-03 § 1)


2.72.070 Authorized emergency orders.

Upon the declaration of an emergency, and during the existence of such emergency, the terms of any such declaration may include any of the following or such other terms of emergency orders which are not prohibited by law, allowing the city of Lincoln City to:

A. Redirect funds for emergency use.

B. Suspend standard procurement procedures to obtain necessary goods, services and/or equipment.

C. Prohibit “price gouging.” Specifically, no person or business may sell or attempt to sell any goods or services for a price in excess of the “normal market price,” which shall mean that person’s or business’s average of the regular price of the goods or services for the 30 days preceding the declaration of the state of emergency.

D. Implement mutual aid agreements, and to enter into any new such agreements or amend existing agreements, under the signature of the emergency manager.

E. Turn off water, gas or electricity.

F. Restrict, regulate or prohibit vehicular or pedestrian traffic for such distance or degree as may be deemed necessary under the circumstances, including the closing to the public of any or all public places, including streets, alleys, public ways, schools, parks, beaches, amusement areas and public buildings.

G. Enter or pass through private property for the purpose of responding to the emergency and/or for the conduct of damage assessment.

H. Evacuate persons from the area designated as an emergency area. A mandatory evacuation order may be authorized by the emergency manager only when necessary for public safety or for the efficient conduct of activities that minimize or mitigate the effects of the emergency.

I. Establish a curfew during specified hours in specified geographic areas and locations.

J. Prohibit or limit the number of persons who may gather or congregate upon any public street, public place, or any outdoor place within the area designated as an emergency area.

K. Assist in the implementation of any order of the federal government, the Governor, State Public Health Director, or local public health representative related to public health or public health emergency, as directed, pursuant to ORS 431.270, 431.264, 433.411 or 401.055, or order.

L. Prohibit possession of loaded firearms, weapons or explosives or any instrument which is capable of producing harm to person or property on public streets, public places or any outdoor place; provided, that any such order shall not apply to firearms possessed by individuals specified in ORS 166.173.

M. Prohibit or restrict the sale, distribution or giving away of gasoline or other flammable liquids, except that such prohibition normally shall not extend to the filling of a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle or equipment responding to emergency circumstances, nor to any police or military or other official acting under color of government authority.

N. Curtail or suspend commercial activity.

O. Prohibit or restrict the sale of alcoholic beverages or other intoxicants.

P. Designate any developed or undeveloped city property for temporary emergency operations uses, including but not limited to use as an emergency facility, shelter, overnight shelter, bivouac, mess hall, temporary campground, staging area, inoculation center, distribution center, or similar emergency operation uses. Private or other public property may similarly be designated by the city, with the permission of the property owner, for such emergency uses. The duration of such authorized uses is only during the period of the emergency and for a reasonable period of time after the end of the declared emergency.

Q. Make application to Lincoln County or any other municipal entity for further assistance by way of any existing or newly negotiated mutual aid or intergovernmental agreement, and to make application for a Governor’s declaration of emergency or other such emergency assistance as becomes available under local, state or federal law.

R. Order such other measures as are found to be necessary for the protection of life, property, infrastructure, the environment, or for the recovery from the emergency. Such other measures shall be set forth in writing on the emergency declaration, or added to the declaration when such measures become necessary.

S. On a case-by-case basis, the emergency manager may authorize a written exemption from any emergency measure or order for an individual or group of volunteer emergency responders. (Ord. 2018‑14 § 1; Ord. 2018-03 § 1)


2.72.080 Acquisition of resources.

Under this section, the city council and emergency manager is authorized to extend government authority to nongovernmental resources (i.e., personnel, equipment and land) which may support regular government forces during an emergency and may enter into agreements with other public and private agencies for use of resources. Any citizen so commandeered shall be entitled during the period of such service to all the privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided under ORS Chapter 401, including ORS 401.395, 401.405, 401.515 and 401.424. When real or personal property is taken under power granted by this section, the owner of the property shall be entitled to reasonable compensation. When volunteers or commandeered persons are engaged during an emergency, records of such person’s identity and the date and type of work or services provided shall be maintained. (Ord. 2018-03 § 1)


2.72.090 Authority over removal of disaster debris or wreckage – Authorizations required.

A. The city may, through the use of city departments or otherwise, clear or remove from publicly or privately owned land or water, debris and wreckage which may threaten public health or safety, or public or private property, and to accept funds from the federal, state and county governments for the purpose of removing such debris.

B. Authority under this section shall not be exercised unless the owner of private property shall first provide a written unconditional authorization for removal or such debris or wreckage from said owner’s property and provide an agreement to indemnify the city of Lincoln City, Lincoln County, the state of Oregon and the United States against any claim arising from such removal.

C. The purpose of requirements under this section includes compliance with federal and state law for financial reimbursement. If, in the judgment of the emergency manager for the city, the safety of the public or private property requires clearing of any private property in circumstances where it is documented that because of the circumstances of the state of emergency the lawful owner has died, or is incapacitated, or is absent and cannot be reasonably found within the time required to act to protect public health or any other property, the city may document such circumstances and proceed under this section as if the owner had given the required authorization. However, no more than the minimal essential work shall be undertaken without compliance with normal procurement procedures.

D. Under the provisions of ORS Chapter 401, state resources are available when the appropriate response to an emergency is beyond the capability of the county in which it occurs. (Ord. 2018-03 § 1)


2.72.300 Penalty.

Any person, firm, corporation, association or entity that violates any emergency regulation, measure or order taken by the city council or their designee under authority of this chapter shall be subject, upon conviction, to a civil fine as a Class A violation (maximum fine per offense $2,000) and subject to citation in accordance with Chapter 1.16 LCMC. Each day of violation shall be deemed a separate offense for purposes of imposition of penalty. Where the Oregon Revised Statutes provide for a penalty for the act, commission or omission, the penalty prescribed herein shall be no greater than prescribed by Oregon law. (Ord. 2018-03 § 1)


2.72.310 Responsibility for emergency management.

In accordance with ORS Chapter 401, the emergency management agency of the city of Lincoln City shall be the emergency manager as established in the city of Lincoln City emergency operations plan, as currently adopted or amended hereafter. In addition to any duties required under the circumstances, and/or duties or powers accorded under any adopted emergency management plan, the emergency manager shall:

A. Direct coordination and cooperation between city departments, staff and outside districts and governments in responding to the emergency; and

B. Carry out the enforcement of any emergency orders under any declaration of emergency; and

C. In performance of such duties, organize and register volunteers, maintain financial records by log or otherwise, and recommend hiring of new employees to the city manager or the city manager’s designate. (Ord. 2018-03 § 1)


2.72.320 Interpretation.

This chapter shall be interpreted in a manner that will give greatest effect to its purpose and intent. In the event any provision of this chapter is determined to conflict with the Lincoln City Charter, the Charter shall control. (Ord. 2018-03 § 1)


Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE

Chapters:

3.02    City of Lincoln City Finance Policies

3.04    Transient Room Tax

3.08    Capital Construction Fund

3.12    Water System Replacement Capital Reserve Fund

3.16    Sewer System Replacement Capital Reserve Fund

3.24    Percent for Art Program

3.26    Recreational Marijuana Taxation

3.28    Repealed


Chapter 3.02 CITY OF LINCOLN CITY FINANCE POLICIES

Sections:

3.02.010    Tax-exempt bond post-issuance compliance policy.

3.02.020    Continuing disclosure controls policy.


3.02.010 Tax-exempt bond post-issuance compliance policy.

A. Purpose.

1. The purpose of this policy is to ensure that the city of Lincoln City (the “issuer”) complies with applicable requirements of federal tax law necessary to preserve the tax status of interest on tax-exempt obligations issued by the issuer. This policy is designed to set forth compliance procedures so that the issuer utilizes the proceeds of all issues of bonds, certificates of participation, bond anticipation notes, and tax and revenue anticipation notes (collectively referred to as “bonds”) in accordance with applicable federal tax requirements, and complies with all other applicable federal requirements with respect to outstanding bonds.

2. To comply with applicable federal tax requirements, the issuer must confirm that the requirements are met at the time each bond issue is issued and throughout the term of the bonds (until maturity or redemption). Generally, compliance should include retention of records relating to the expenditure of the proceeds of each bond issue, the investment of the proceeds of each bond issue, and any allocations made with respect to the use of the proceeds of each bond issue, sufficient to establish compliance with applicable federal tax requirements, including records related to periods before the bonds are issued (e.g., in the case of reimbursement of prior expenditures) until six years after the final maturity or redemption date of any issue of bonds.

B. Procedures.

1. Responsible Official. The city manager of the issuer will identify the officer or other employee(s) of the issuer (the “bond compliance officer”) who will be responsible for each of the procedures listed below, notify the current holder of that office of the responsibilities, and provide that person a copy of these procedures. The initial bond compliance officer shall be the finance director of the city of Lincoln City; the city manager may change this appointment by written order. Upon employee transitions, the city manager of the issuer will advise any newly designated bond compliance officer of his/her responsibilities under these procedures and will ensure the bond compliance officer understands the importance of these procedures. If employee positions are restructured or eliminated, the city manager of the issuer shall reassign responsibilities as necessary.

2. Issuance of Bonds.

a. Bond Counsel. The issuer will retain a nationally recognized bond counsel law firm (“bond counsel”) to assist the issuer in issuing bonds. In connection with any tax-exempt bond issue, bond counsel will deliver a legal opinion which will be based in part on covenants and representations set forth in the issuer’s tax certificate (or other closing documents containing the tax representation) (the “tax certificate”) and other certificates relating to the bonds, including covenants and representations concerning compliance with post-issuance federal tax law requirements that must be satisfied to preserve the tax-exempt status of tax-exempt bonds. As described more fully below, the issuer will also consult with bond counsel and other legal counsel and advisors, as needed, following issuance of each bond issue to ensure that applicable post-issuance requirements in fact are met, so that tax-exempt status of interest will be maintained for federal income tax purposes so long as any bonds remain outstanding. The bond compliance officer and/or other designated issuer personnel will consult with bond counsel and other legal counsel and advisors, as needed, throughout the bond issuance process to identify requirements and to establish procedures necessary or appropriate so that that tax-exempt status of interest will be maintained. Those requirements and procedures shall be documented in a tax certificate and other certificates and/or other documents finalized at or before issuance of the bonds. If there is no document in the transcript titled “tax certificate,” the bond compliance officer and/or other designated issuer personnel will consult with bond counsel prior to the closing of the financing to understand which document(s) in the transcript contain the tax representations and covenants. The requirements and procedures in the tax certificate shall include future compliance with applicable arbitrage rebate requirements and all other applicable post-issuance requirements of federal tax law throughout (and in some cases beyond) the term of the bonds.

b. Documentation of Tax Requirements. The federal tax requirements relating to each bond issue will be set forth in the tax certificate executed in connection with the bond issue, which will be included in the closing transcript. The certifications, representations, expectations, covenants and factual statements in the tax certificate relate primarily to the restriction on use of the bond-financed facilities by persons or entities other than the issuer, changes in use of assets financed or refinanced with bond proceeds, restrictions applicable to the investment of bond proceeds and other moneys relating to the bonds, arbitrage rebate requirements, and economic life of the bond-financed assets.

c. Information Reporting. The bond compliance officer and/or other designated issuer personnel will assure filing of information returns on IRS Form 8038-G no later than the fifteenth day of the second calendar month in the calendar quarter following the calendar quarter in which an issue of bonds is issued. The issuer will confirm that the IRS Form 8038-G is accurate and is filed in a timely manner with respect to all bond issues, including any required schedules and attachments. The IRS Form 8038-G filed with the IRS, together with an acknowledgement copy (if available) or IRS Notice CP152, will be included as part of the closing transcript for each bond issue, or kept in the records related to the appropriate issue of bonds.

3. Application of Bond Proceeds.

a. Use of Bond Proceeds. The bond compliance officer and/or other designated issuer personnel shall:

i. Monitor the use of bond proceeds and the use of the bond-financed assets (e.g., facilities, furnishings or equipment) throughout the term of the bonds (and in some cases beyond the term of the bonds) to ensure compliance with covenants and restrictions set forth in the applicable tax certificate;

ii. Maintain records identifying the assets or portion of assets that were financed or refinanced with proceeds of each issue of bonds;

iii. Consult with bond counsel and other legal counsel as needed in the review of any contracts or arrangements involving use of bond-financed facilities to ensure compliance with all covenants and restrictions set forth in the applicable tax certificate;

iv. Maintain records for any contracts or arrangements involving the use of bond-financed facilities as might be necessary or appropriate to document compliance with all covenants and restrictions set forth in the applicable tax certificate; and

v. Communicate as necessary and appropriate with personnel responsible for the bond-financed assets to identify and discuss any existing or planned use of the bond-financed assets, to ensure that those uses are consistent with all covenants and restrictions set forth in the applicable tax certificate.

b. Timely Expenditure of Bond Proceeds. At the time of issuance of any bonds issued to fund original expenditures, the issuer must reasonably expect to spend at least 85 percent of all proceeds expected to be used to finance such expenditures (which proceeds would exclude proceeds in a reasonably required reserve fund) within three years after issuance of such bonds. (In the case of short-term working capital financings (e.g., TRANs), the issuer’s actual maximum cumulative cash flow deficit as of the close of the six-month period commencing on the issue date must be at least equal to 100 percent of the issue price of the notes (under the six-month rebate exception, excluding the reasonable working capital reserve) or 90 percent of the issue price of the notes (under the statutory safe harbor exception) in order for the notes to be exempt from the rebate requirements.)

In addition, for such bonds, the issuer must have incurred or expect to incur within six months after issuance original expenditures of not less than five percent of such amount of proceeds, and must expect to complete the bond-financed project (the “project”) and allocate bond proceeds to costs with due diligence. (These requirements do not apply to short-term working capital financings (e.g., TRANs)). Satisfaction of these requirements allows project-related bond proceeds to be invested at an unrestricted yield for three years. (Proceeds of working capital financings (e.g., TRANs) may be invested at an unrestricted yield for 13 months.) Bonds issued to refinance outstanding obligations are subject to separate expenditure requirements, which shall be outlined in the tax certificate relating to such bonds. The issuer’s finance staff will monitor the appropriate capital project accounts

(and, to the extent applicable, working capital expenditures and/or refunding escrow accounts) and ensure that bond proceeds are spent within the applicable time period(s) required under federal tax law.

c. Capital Expenditures. In general, proceeds (including earnings on original sale proceeds) of bonds issued to fund original expenditures, other than proceeds deposited in a reasonably required reserve fund or used to pay costs of issuance, should be spent on capital expenditures. (Proceeds of working capital financings (e.g., TRANs) need not be spent for capital expenditures.) For this purpose, capital expenditures generally mean costs to acquire, construct, or improve property (land, buildings and equipment), or to adapt the property to a new or different use. The property financed or refinanced must have a useful life longer than one year. Capital expenditures include design and planning costs related to the project, and include architectural, engineering, surveying, soil testing, environmental, and other similar costs incurred in the process of acquiring, constructing, improving or adapting the property. Capital expenditures do not include operating expenses of the project or incidental or routine repair or maintenance of the project, even if the repair or maintenance will have a useful life longer than one year.

4. Use of Bond-Financed Assets.

a. Ownership and Use of Project. For the life of a bond issue, the project must be owned and operated by the issuer (or another state or local governmental entity). At all times while the bond issue is outstanding, no more than 10 percent (or $15,000,000, if less) of the bond proceeds of the project may be used, directly or indirectly, in a trade or business carried on by a person other than a state or local governmental unit (“private use”). (This 10 percent limitation is limited to five percent in cases in which the private use is either unrelated or disproportionate to the governmental use of the financed facility.) In addition, not more than five percent (or $5,000,000, if less) of the proceeds of any bond issue may be used, directly or indirectly, to make a loan to any person other than governmental persons. Generally, private use consists of any contract or other arrangement, including leases, management contracts, operating agreements, guarantee contracts, take or pay contracts, output contracts or research contracts, which provides for use by a person who is not a state or local government on a basis different than the general public. The project may be used by any person or entity, including any person or entity carrying on any trade or business, if such use constitutes “general public use.” General public use is any arrangement providing for use that is available to the general public at either no charge or on the basis of rates that are generally applicable and uniformly applied.

b. Management or Operating Agreements. Any management, operating or service contracts whereby a nonexempt entity is using assets financed or refinanced with bond proceeds (such as bookstore, cafeteria or dining facility, externally managed parking facilities, gift shops, etc.) must relate to portions of the project that fit within the allowable private use limitations or the contracts must meet the IRS safe harbor for management contracts. Any replacements of or changes to such contracts relating to bond-financed assets or facilities, or leases of such assets or facilities, should be reviewed by bond counsel. The bond compliance officer shall contact bond counsel if there may be a lease, sale, disposition or other change in use of assets financed or refinanced with bond proceeds.

c. Useful Life Limitation. The weighted average maturity of the bond issue cannot exceed 120 percent of the weighted average economic life of the bond-financed assets. In other words, the weighted average economic life of the project must be at least 80 percent of the weighted average maturity of the bond issue. Additional state law limitations may apply as well.

5. Investment Restrictions – Arbitrage Yield Calculations – Rebate.

a. Investment Restrictions. Investment restrictions relating to bond proceeds and other moneys relating to the bonds are set forth in the tax certificate. The issuer’s finance staff will monitor the investment of bond proceeds to ensure compliance with applicable yield restriction rules.

b. Use and Control of Bond Proceeds. Unexpended bond proceeds (including reserves) may be held directly by the issuer or by the trustee for the bond issue under an indenture or trust agreement. The investment of bond proceeds shall be managed by the issuer. The issuer shall maintain appropriate records regarding investments and transactions involving bond proceeds. The trustee, if appropriate, shall provide regular statements to the issuer regarding investments and transactions involving bond proceeds.

c. Arbitrage Yield Calculations. Investment earnings on bond proceeds should be tracked and monitored to comply with applicable yield restrictions and/or rebate requirements. Any funds of the issuer set aside or otherwise pledged or earmarked to pay debt service on bonds should be analyzed to assure compliance with the tax law rules on arbitrage, invested sinking funds, and pledged funds (including gifts or donations linked or earmarked to the bond-financed assets).

d. Rebate. 

i. The issuer is responsible for calculating (or causing the calculation of) rebate liability for each bond issue, and for making any required rebate payments. Unless bond counsel has advised the issuer that the bonds are exempt from the rebate requirements described in this section, the issuer will retain an arbitrage rebate consultant to perform rebate calculations that may be required to be made from time to time with respect to any bond issue. The issuer is responsible for providing the arbitrage rebate consultant with requested documents and information on a prompt basis, reviewing applicable rebate reports and other calculations and generally interacting with the arbitrage rebate consultant to ensure the timely preparation of rebate reports and payment of any rebate.

ii. The reports and calculations provided by the arbitrage rebate consultant are intended to assure compliance with rebate requirements, which require the issuer to make rebate payments, if any, no later than the fifth anniversary date and each fifth anniversary date thereafter through the final maturity or redemption date of a bond issue. A final rebate payment must be made within 60 days of the final maturity or redemption date of a bond issue.

iii. The issuer will confer and consult with the arbitrage rebate consultant to determine whether any rebate spending exceptions may be met. Rebate spending exceptions are available for periods of six months, 18 months and two years. The issuer will review the tax certificate and/or consult with the arbitrage rebate consultant or bond counsel for more details regarding the rebate spending exceptions.

iv. In the case of short-term working capital financings, such as tax and revenue anticipation notes, if there is concern as to whether or not the issuer has met its requisite maximum cumulative cash flow deficit with respect to its short-term working capital notes, the services of a rebate analyst should be engaged to determine whether either the six-month spending exception or the statutory safe harbor exception to the rebate rules is met (in which case no rebate would be owed) or whether the proceeds of the notes are subject, in whole or in part, to rebate.

v. Copies of all arbitrage rebate reports, related return filings with the IRS (i.e., IRS Form 8038-T), copies of cancelled checks with respect to any rebate payments, and information statements must be retained as described below. The responsible official of the issuer described in subsection (A) of this section will follow the procedures set forth in the tax certificate entered into with respect to any bond issue that relate to compliance with the rebate requirements.

6. Record Retention.

a. Allocation of Bond Proceeds to Expenditures. The issuer shall allocate bond proceeds to expenditures for assets, and shall trace and keep track of the use of bond proceeds and property financed or refinanced therewith.

b. Record Keeping Requirements. Copies of all relevant documents and records sufficient to support an assertion that the tax requirements relating to a bond issue have been satisfied will be maintained by the issuer for the term of a bond issue (including refunding bonds, if any) plus six years, including the following documents and records:

i. Bond closing transcripts;

ii. Copies of records of investments, investment agreements, credit enhancement transactions, financial derivatives (e.g., an interest rate swap), arbitrage reports and underlying documents, including trustee statements;

iii. Copies of material documents relating to capital expenditures financed or refinanced by bond proceeds, including (without limitation) purchase orders, invoices, trustee requisitions and payment records, as well as documents relating to costs reimbursed with bond proceeds and records identifying the assets or portion of assets that are financed or refinanced with bond proceeds;

iv. All contracts and arrangements involving private use, or changes in use, of the bond-financed property;

v. All reports and documents relating to the allocation of bond proceeds and private use of bond-financed property; and

vi. Itemization of property financed with bond proceeds, including placed in service dates.

vii. In the case of short-term working capital financings, such as tax and revenue anticipation notes, information regarding the issuer’s revenue, expenditures and available balances sufficient to support the issuer’s maximum cumulative cash flow deficit.

C. Post-Issuance Compliance.

1. In General. 

a. The issuer will conduct periodic reviews of compliance with these procedures to determine whether any violations have occurred so that such violations can be remedied through the “remedial action” regulations (Treas. Reg. Section 1.141-12) or the Voluntary Closing Agreement Program (VCAP) described in IRS Notice 2008-31 (or successor guidance). If any changes or modifications to the terms or provisions of a bond issue are contemplated, the issuer will consult bond counsel. The issuer recognizes and acknowledges that such modifications could result in a “reissuance” of the bonds for federal tax purposes (i.e., a deemed refunding) and thereby jeopardize the tax-exempt status of the bonds after the modifications.

b. The bond compliance officer and/or other designated issuer personnel will consult with bond counsel and other legal counsel and advisors, as needed, following issuance of each issue of the bonds to ensure that all applicable post-issuance requirements in fact are met, so that interest on the bonds will be excluded from gross income for federal income tax purposes so long as any bonds remain outstanding. This will include, without limitation, consultation in connection with future contracts with respect to the use of bond-financed assets and future contracts with respect to the use of output or throughput of bond-financed assets.

c. Whenever necessary or appropriate, the issuer will engage an expert advisor as arbitrage rebate consultant to assist in the calculation of arbitrage rebate payable in respect of the investment of bond proceeds.

2. Monitoring Private or Other Use of Financed Assets. The issuer will maintain records identifying the assets or portion of assets that are financed or refinanced with proceeds of a bond issue, including the uses and the users thereof (including terms of use and type of use). Such records may be kept in any combination of paper or electronic form. In the event the use of bond proceeds or the assets financed or refinanced with bond proceeds is different from the covenants, representations or factual statements in the tax certificate, the issuer will promptly contact and consult with bond counsel to ensure that there is no adverse effect on the tax-exempt status of the bond issue and, where appropriate, will remedy any violations through the “remedial action” regulations (Treas. Reg. Section 1.141-12), the Voluntary Closing Agreement Program (VCAP) described in IRS Notice 2008-31 (or successor guidance), or as otherwise prescribed by bond counsel.

3. Ongoing Training. Training shall be made available to the compliance officer to support the compliance officer’s understanding of the tax requirements applicable to the bonds. Such training may include, but would not be limited to, attending training sessions at local conferences such as OMFOA and/or OASBO, participation in IRS teleconferences, reading technical guidance materials provided by educational organizations, the IRS, and/or bond counsel, and discussing questions and issues with the issuer’s bond counsel and/or arbitrage rebate consultant.

4. Annual Tax-Exempt Bond Compliance Checklist. The bond compliance officer will complete the attached Exhibit A “Annual Tax-Exempt Bond Compliance Checklist” with respect to all outstanding bonds on or before June 30th of each annual period. The bond compliance officer will retain a copy of each completed and signed checklist in a file that is retained in accordance with the document retention requirements described in subsection (B)(6) of this section (Record Retention).

Exhibit A

Form of Annual Tax-Exempt Bond Compliance Checklist

(to be completed by the “Bond Compliance Officer” as described in the Tax-Exempt Bond Post-Issuance Compliance Policy)

Date Completed:____________________

	 	Yes	No

	Has there been a sale of all or any portion of a facility financed with tax-exempt bonds (a “Project”)?	 	 

	Has there been a lease of all or any portion of a Project to any party other than a state or local government?	 	 

	Has the Issuer entered into a new, or amended an already existing, management or service contract related to a Project?	 	 

	Has the Issuer entered into a naming rights agreement relating to all or any portion of a Project?	 	 

	Has the Issuer entered into any other arrangement with an entity, other than a state or local government, that provided legal rights to that entity with respect to a Project? 	 	 

	Will there be a rebate/yield restriction arbitrage computation date during the upcoming annual period?	 	 

	Is the Issuer in compliance with the record retention requirements as described in Section IV of the Tax-Exempt Bond Compliance Procedures?	 	 

If an answer to any question above is “Yes”, or the answer is unclear, the Bond Compliance Officer shall consult with the Issuer’s bond counsel to determine (i) if the event could adversely impact the tax-exemption of the Issuer’s outstanding tax-exempt bonds and/or (ii) whether any action needs to be taken during the upcoming annual period to ensure compliance with the tax-exempt bond restrictions.

The undersigned is the “Bond Compliance Officer” as described in the Tax-Exempt Bond Compliance Procedures and has completed the above checklist to the best of the knowledge of the undersigned.

_________________________________

	Signature of	___________	- Bond Compliance Officer

	(print name)

(Ord. 2014-15 § 1)


3.02.020 Continuing disclosure controls policy.

A. Purpose – Applicability. The city of Lincoln City, Oregon (the “issuer”) has issued borrowings in the public securities market and has been required to execute “continuing disclosure certificates,” “undertakings” or “continuing disclosure agreements” (collectively, “CDAs”) and to agree to make certain kinds of information available to participants in the public securities market. To assist its compliance with its CDAs, the issuer has adopted these procedures and incorporated them into the municipal code.

This policy narrowly focuses on the issuer’s obligations under its CDAs. The issuer has many other obligations in connection with its borrowings that are not addressed herein.

B. Definitions. Terms used in these procedures shall have the meanings set forth below:

1. “Alternate bond compliance officer” means the city manager of the issuer.

2. “Annual reports” means the financial information and operating data (including audited financial statements) required to be filed on an annual basis pursuant to the CDAs.

3. “Bond compliance officer” means the finance director of the issuer.

4. “CDAs” means the issuer’s continuing disclosure certificates, continuing disclosure agreements and undertakings relating to its outstanding securities entered into pursuant to the Rule.

5. “Compliance officer” means the bond compliance officer, or the alternate bond compliance officer if the bond compliance officer is not available to perform the duties of the compliance officer under these procedures.

6. “Disclosure group” means the group described in subsection (E) of this section that assists the issuer in complying with these procedures.

7. “EMMA” means the electronic municipal market access system maintained by the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board.

8. “Filing” means the filings of annual reports, specified events and other information that the issuer submits to EMMA in accordance with the issuer’s CDAs, in accordance with the Rule or other applicable law, or voluntarily.

9. “Procedures” means these continuing disclosure controls and procedures of the issuer.

10. “Rule” means Rule 15c2-12 of the Securities and Exchange Commission, adopted under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, 17 CFR Section 240.15c2-12.

11. “Specified events” means the list of specific events that the issuer is required by each CDA to report on EMMA very promptly, usually within 10 days. “Specified events” are often referred to as “material events.”

C. Components of CDAs.

1. The bond compliance officer and the alternate bond compliance officer will review the exact language of each CDA at least once each fiscal year and after each new CDA is executed. Each CDA is different and the exact language in each governs the issuer’s contractual obligations under that CDA.

2. Most CDAs require the issuer to make two kinds of filings: annual reports and specified events.

a. Annual Reports. Annual reports usually must be filed on EMMA within a certain period of time after the end of each fiscal year. The nature of the annual report that is required by each CDA is described in that CDA, but annual reports generally consist of:

i. The issuer’s audited financial statements;

ii. Additional financial information and operating data of the type specifically described in each CDA.

b. Specified Events. Recent CDAs require issuers to report certain specified events within 10 business days, although older CDAs may only require notice “in a timely manner.” These procedures assume that filing for a specified event must be made within 10 business days after the specified event occurs.

3. Compliance officers and members of the disclosure group must bear in mind that any filings must be accurate in all material respects. In submitting filings to EMMA or to third parties, the issuer is subject to the general antifraud provisions of the federal securities laws, which require that there be no material misstatements or material omissions. The SEC has stated, in the context of an enforcement action against a municipal securities issuer, that “[i]nformation is material if there is a substantial likelihood that a reasonable investor would consider it important to an investment decision.” With respect to omissions (as opposed to misstatements), the standard is whether such omission resulted in a failure “to state a material fact necessary in order to make the statements made, in the light of the circumstances under which they were made, not misleading.” In light of such standard, when the compliance officer circulates for comment to the disclosure group a draft of a filing, it shall be accompanied by the following cautionary note:

Federal securities laws require that the information be complete, accurate, and in no way misleading. Please review carefully and critically the information that you are providing to be certain, to the best of your knowledge after reasonable inquiry of the appropriate persons, that it is accurate, complete, and not misleading. Please be certain that the source documentation is reliable and auditable, should any future inquiry arise. Please provide a copy of all source documentation. Please describe any exceptions or other caveats to the information you are providing.

Please review the information in its entirety, rather than simply updating that which has already been provided, to determine whether any material changes have occurred or if any new or additional information should be included to make the information that you are providing not misleading and as complete and accurate as possible.

D. Roles of Parties.

1. The bond compliance officer is primarily responsible for ensuring that the issuer complies with its CDAs and follows these procedures.

2. The alternate bond compliance officer shall assist the bond compliance officer and shall act as the bond compliance officer if the bond compliance officer is not available to perform the bond compliance officer’s functions under these procedures.

3. The disclosure group includes other officers or employees of the issuer who may assist the bond compliance officer and the alternate bond compliance officer in ensuring that the issuer complies with its CDAs and these procedures.

4. The bond compliance officer and the alternate bond compliance officer shall each report their actions under these procedures to each other and to any members of the disclosure group. Reports shall be made promptly and in writing.

E. Disclosure Group.

1. The disclosure group shall include:

a. Bond compliance officer;

b. Alternate bond compliance officer;

c. City attorney;

d. Any officer or employee of the issuer who is appointed as a member of the disclosure group by the compliance officer.

2. Not later than 60 days after the beginning of each fiscal year the compliance officer shall determine whether additional members should be appointed to the disclosure group to assist the issuer in carrying out these procedures. The compliance officer may appoint anyone the compliance officer believes would assist the issuer in carrying out these procedures. If issuer officers or employees have special knowledge relating to matters that the issuer is required by its CDAs to report on EMMA, the compliance officer should consider appointing those people to the disclosure group. For example, if the issuer has water revenue bonds outstanding and the issuer is required to report financial information relating to the water system that is not contained in the issuer’s audited financial statements, the compliance officer should consider appointing someone who has direct knowledge of the financial performance of the water system.

3. The issuer may create distinct disclosure groups for each credit.

4. When the compliance officer appoints a person as a member of the disclosure group, the compliance officer shall provide that person with a written copy of this section and a copy of all then-outstanding CDAs, and shall notify all other members of the disclosure group of the appointment.

F. Annual Reports.

1. Promptly after adoption of these procedures the compliance officer shall review all existing CDAs and draft a chart outlining the filing deadlines, the material to be included with each annual report filing for each CDA, and the specified events for each CDA. The chart shall be updated every time the issuer enters into a CDA, and each time a CDA ceases to be in effect. A copy of the updated chart shall be provided to each member of the disclosure group for review before the updated chart is finalized. When each chart is finalized a copy shall be provided to each member of the disclosure group promptly.

2. Each fiscal year the compliance officer shall calendar the deadlines for each annual report filing, with appropriate reminder notifications for each member of the applicable disclosure group. The calendar and notifications shall also appear on a centralized calendar in the city recorder’s office and finance department.

3. Not less than 25 days before each filing deadline, the compliance officer shall circulate a draft filing for review by the disclosure group.

4. The members of the disclosure group shall review the draft filing, and shall advise the compliance officer of any changes the member recommends.

5. The compliance officer shall take any recommended changes into account, finalize and timely make the filing, and provide a copy of the final filing to each member of the disclosure group.

G. Specified Event Filings.

1. If any member of the disclosure group becomes aware of the occurrence of an event that may qualify as a specified event, that member shall notify the disclosure group immediately.

2. Each member of the disclosure group shall provide a recommendation to the compliance officer regarding the reporting of that event. If the compliance officer determines that the event is a specified event, the compliance officer shall circulate a draft specified event filing to the disclosure group for review within two business days.

3. All available members of the disclosure group shall provide comments to the compliance officer on the draft specified event filing within one business day after the compliance officer circulates the draft filing.

4. The compliance officer shall consider any recommendations of the disclosure group, finalize the specified event filing, and file it on EMMA. Unless the compliance officer determines that the applicable CDAs do not require the filing to be made within 10 business days, the compliance officer shall file the specified event filing within 10 business days after the specified event occurs.

H. Omissions and Voluntary Submissions.

1. If any member of the disclosure group becomes aware of the occurrence of an event that is not a specified event, but that the member believes should be disclosed promptly on EMMA and not as part of the annual report, including notice of a failure of the issuer to comply with its obligations under a CDA or the Rule, that member shall notify the disclosure group immediately.

2. Each member of the disclosure group shall provide a recommendation to the compliance officer regarding the reporting of that event. If the compliance officer determines that the issuer should disclose the event on EMMA promptly and not as part of the annual report, the compliance officer shall circulate a draft filing to the disclosure group for review within 10 business days.

3. All members of the disclosure group shall provide comments to the compliance officer on the draft filing within five business days after the compliance officer circulates the draft filing.

4. The compliance officer shall consider any recommendations of the disclosure group, finalize the voluntary submission filing, and file it on EMMA within 10 business days after recommendations on the filing are due to the compliance officer from the disclosure group.

I. Training.

1. The compliance officer shall be responsible for familiarizing the disclosure group and any other appropriate issuer officials and employees with these procedures and the issuer’s continuing disclosure obligations.

2. The compliance officer shall arrange for a training session to be conducted at least once each fiscal year for all members of the disclosure group and for any other issuer employee identified by the compliance officer as having significant responsibility for collecting or analyzing information included in the filings. The compliance officer shall provide appropriate training to any new member of the disclosure group who is appointed during a fiscal year after the annual training session for that fiscal year has been held, not later than two months after the person is appointed as a member of the disclosure group. To the extent practical, training shall be provided with the assistance of an outside party experienced in the responsibilities of municipal issuers under federal securities laws, such as bond counsel.

3. Training sessions shall cover, at a minimum:

a. These procedures;

b. The issuer’s disclosure obligations under its CDAs; and

c. Any changes in laws or regulations and significant new cases or enforcement actions since the date of the most recent prior training session. (Ord. 2016-16 § 1)


Chapter 3.04 TRANSIENT ROOM TAX

Sections:

3.04.010    Definitions.

3.04.020    Tax imposed by Charter.

3.04.030    Collection of tax by operator – Rules for collection.

3.04.040    Operator’s duties.

3.04.050    Exemptions.

3.04.060    Registration of operator.

3.04.070    Payment of tax.

3.04.080    Delinquency.

3.04.090    Deficiency determinations.

3.04.100    Fraud, refusal to collect or evasion.

3.04.110    Operator delay.

3.04.120    Redeterminations.

3.04.130    Security for collection of tax.

3.04.140    Lien.

3.04.150    Refunds.

3.04.160    Collection fee.

3.04.170    Administration.

3.04.180    Recodified.

3.04.190    Recodified.

3.04.200    Repealed.

3.04.210    Repealed.

3.04.220    Appeals.

3.04.230    Appeals to city council.

3.04.240    Violation.

3.04.250    Violations – Penalty.


3.04.010 Definitions.

Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter.

“Accrual accounting” means the operator enters the rent due from a transient on his records when the rent is earned, whether or not it is paid.

“Cash accounting” means the operator does not enter the rent due from a transient on his records until rent is paid.

“City council” means the city council of the city of Lincoln City, Oregon.

“Furnishings of rooms” means articles of furniture for the interior of the building and moveable articles used in preparing an area for occupancy or use, including cribs and rollaway beds, but excluding items such as VCRs, video tape players or movie rentals.

“Hotel” means any structure or any portion of any structure which is occupied or intended or designed for transient occupancy for 30 days or less for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, motel, inn, condominium, tourist home or house, vacation rental dwelling, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, public or private dormitory, fraternity, sorority, public or private club, and also means space in a mobile home, manufactured home, trailer or recreational vehicle park or similar structure or space or portions thereof so occupied, provided such occupancy is for less than a 30-day period.

“Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, for lodging or sleeping purposes of any room or rooms in a hotel, or space in a campground or trailer or recreational vehicle park or portion thereof.

“Operator” means the person who is the proprietor of the hotel in any capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall be considered to be compliance by both.

“Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, fraternity, sorority, public or private dormitory, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, governmental body, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

“Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received by the operator, for the occupancy of space in a hotel, valued in money, goods, labor, credits, property or other consideration valued in money, without any deduction. Extra person charges, cleaning fees, charges for pets and charges for additional items of room furnishings shall be considered rent. The acceptance of donations by the operators where no fixed rental fee is charged shall be deemed “consideration 

charged.” The portion of any advance deposit that is returned due to nonoccupancy of space shall not be deemed rent, but the amount of any advance deposit that is forfeited or applied against rent shall be deemed rent at the time of forfeiture or at the time of crediting against rent. As regards transient lodging intermediaries, such as online travel companies, rent shall be the retail sale price of the rooms to the purchaser and not the discounted price which the company has paid for the room. The effect of this definition is that the tax must be computed on the total retail price, including all charges other than taxes, paid by a person for occupancy of the transient lodging.

“Rent package plan” means a rent plan under which the space may be rented separately and not included in a package plan, but the transient has elected to pay a single rate under a plan in which the consideration charged is for both space and other items such as, but not limited to, food. For a rent package plan, the amount applicable to rent for determination of transient room tax under this chapter shall be the charge for rent when the space is rented separately and not included in a rent package plan.

“Tax” means either the tax payable by the transient or the aggregate amount of taxes due from an operator during the period for which he is required to report his collections.

“Tax administrator” means the finance director of the city of Lincoln City, Oregon.

“Transient” means any individual who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy in a hotel for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. The day a transient checks out of the hotel shall not be included in determining the 30-day period if the transient is not charged rent for that day by the operator. Any such individual so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 30 days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy, or the tenancy actually extends more than 30 consecutive days. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be considered. A person who pays for lodging on a monthly basis, irrespective of the number of days in such month, shall not be deemed a transient; but an individual who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy for a period of 30 calendar days or less shall be deemed a transient notwithstanding that another person not exercising or entitled to exercise occupancy pays or is responsible for paying rent monthly or for a period of more than 30 days.

“Transient lodgings tax review committee” means a committee composed of a business person, an operator and three lay members appointed by the council of the city.

“Vacation rental dwelling” means a dwelling which is rented, or is available for rent, on a daily or weekly basis or is advertised or is listed with an agent as a vacation rental. (Ord. 2014-09 § 1; Ord. 2008-12 § 1; Ord. 2000-01 § 1; Ord. 97-4 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 96-4 §§ 1 – 4; Ord. 93-4 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 89-8 § 1)


3.04.020 Tax imposed by Charter.

As required in the Lincoln City Charter, for the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient shall pay a tax in the amount of nine and one-half percent of the rent charged by the operator. The amendment of this code section shall not affect the validity or enforcement of the transient room tax in effect prior to this amendment. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment by the operator to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the same time the rent is paid. The operator shall enter the tax on the operator’s records when rent is collected, if the operator keeps records on the cash accounting basis, and when earned, if the operator keeps records on the accrual accounting basis. If rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid by the transient to the operator with each installment. In all cases, the rent paid or charged for occupancy shall exclude the sale of any goods, services and commodities, other than the furnishing of rooms, accommodations, pet accommodations, and space occupancy in campgrounds or trailer or recreational vehicle parks. (Ord. 2008-12 § 1; Ord. 2002-08 § 1; Ord. 97-4 § 3; Ord. 96-4 § 5; Ord. 92-1 § 1; Ord. 89-8 § 2)


3.04.030 Collection of tax by operator – Rules for collection.

A. Every operator renting rooms or space for lodging or sleeping purposes in this city, the occupancy of which is not exempted under the terms of this chapter, shall collect a tax from the occupant. The tax collected or accrued by the operator constitutes a debt owing by the operator to the city.

B. In all cases of credit or deferred payment of rent, the payment of tax to the operator may be deferred until the rent is paid, and the operator shall not be liable for the tax until credits are paid or deferred payments are made. Adjustments may be made for uncollectables.

C. The tax administrator shall enforce provisions of this chapter and shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter as may be necessary to aid in the enforcement.

D. For rent collected on portions of $1.00, fractions of a penny of tax shall not be remitted. (Ord. 89-8 § 3)


3.04.040 Operator’s duties.

Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated upon the operator’s records, and any receipt that the tax or any part of the tax will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, when added, any part will be refunded, except in the manner provided by this chapter. (Ord. 89-8 § 4)


3.04.050 Exemptions.

The tax shall not be imposed on the following, which shall be the only exemptions permitted:

A. Any occupant for more than 30 successive calendar days (a person who pays for lodging on a monthly basis, irrespective of the number of days in such month, shall not be deemed a transient);

B. Any occupant whose rent is of a value less than $2.00 per day;

C. Any person who rents a private home, vacation cabin, or like facility from any owner who rents such facilities for a total of less than 15 days per year who does not advertise the dwelling for rent or list it with an agent as a vacation rental;

D. Any occupant whose rent is paid for a hospital room or to a medical clinic, convalescent home or home for aged people, or to a public institution owned and operated by a unit of government;

E. Any nonprofit tax-exempt charitable, fraternal or religious organizations owning or operating shelters or temporary lodging for victims of domestic violence, women and families, homeless persons, and similar low-income housing facilities in furtherance of their charitable, fraternal or religious purposes;

F. A donation by an owner or operator of the full cost of transient lodging to a nonprofit tax-exempt charitable, fraternal or religious organization, whether used by the organization or auctioned as a fundraiser;

G. State and federal employees on government business, where payment for the rooms is made by the government directly to the operator;

H. Any occupant whose rent is paid by the city. (Ord. 2014-09 § 2; Ord. 91-16 § 1; Ord. 89-8 § 5)


3.04.060 Registration of operator.

A. Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall register with the tax administrator on a form provided by him. Owners of vacation rental dwellings and other operators engaged in business at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted must register not later than 30 calendar days after passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Owners of vacation rental dwellings and other operators starting business after the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted must register within 15 days after commencing business. The privilege of registration after the date of imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax regardless of registration. Registration shall set forth the name under which the operator transacts or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places of business and such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as the tax administrator may require. The registration shall be signed by the operator. The tax administrator shall, within 10 days after registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each registrant to collect the tax from the occupant, together with a duplicate thereof for each additional place of business of each registrant. Certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the tax administrator upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon its sale or transfer. Each certificate and duplicate shall state the place of business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and come to the notice readily of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy.

B. Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

1. The name of the operator;

2. The address of the hotel;

3. The date upon which the certificate was issued;

4. “This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Transient Lodgings Tax Ordinance of the City of Lincoln City by registration with the tax administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the lodgings tax imposed by said city and emitting said tax to the tax administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, or to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of the City of Lincoln City. This certificate does not constitute a permit.” (Ord. 89-8 § 6)


3.04.070 Payment of tax.

A. The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the transient to the operator at the time that rent is paid. All amounts of such taxes collected by any operator are due and payable to the tax administrator on a quarterly basis on the fifteenth day of the following month for the preceding three months, and are delinquent on the last day of the month in which they are due, even if city offices and post offices are closed on that day. The tax administrator has authority to classify the operators for determination of applicable tax periods, and shall notify each operator of the due and delinquent dates for the operator’s returns. The quarters are:

First Quarter: January, February, March;

Second Quarter: April, May, June;

Third Quarter: July, August, September;

Fourth Quarter: October, November, December.

The initial return for operators newly commencing business shall be for the portion of the quarter in which they were first in business; thereafter returns shall be made for the applicable quarterly period.

B. On or before the fifteenth day of the month following each quarter of collection, a return for the preceding quarter’s tax collections shall be filed with the tax administrator. The return shall be filed in such form as the tax administrator may prescribe by every operator liable for payment of tax.

C. Returns shall show the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period. The tax administrator may require returns to show the total rentals upon which tax was collected or otherwise due, gross receipts of the operator for such period and an explanation in detail of any discrepancy between such amounts, and the amount of rents exempt, if any.

D. The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the amount of the tax due, to the tax administrator at his office, either by personal delivery or by mail. If the return is mailed, the postmark shall be considered the date of delivery for determining delinquencies.

E. For good cause, the tax administrator may extend, for not to exceed one month, the time for making any return or payment of tax. No further extension shall be granted, except by the transient lodging tax committee. Any operator to whom an extension is granted shall pay interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month on the amount of tax due without proration for a fraction of a month. If a return is not filed, and the tax and interest due is not paid by the end of the extension granted, then the interest shall become a part of the tax for computation of penalties described elsewhere in this chapter.

F. The tax administrator, if he deems it necessary in order to ensure payment or facilitate collection by the city of the amount of taxes, in any individual case may require returns and payment of the amount of taxes for other than quarterly periods. (Ord. 2000-01 § 2; Ord. 89-8 § 7)


3.04.080 Delinquency.

A. Original Delinquency. Any operator who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due and who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter prior to delinquency shall pay 10 percent of the amount of the tax due in addition to the amount of the tax.

B. Continued Delinquency. Any operator who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due, and who failed to pay any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 15 percent of the amount of the tax due plus the amount of the tax and the 10 percent penalty first imposed.

C. Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud or intent to evade the provisions hereof, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections (A) and (B) of this section.

D. Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month or fraction thereof, without proration for portions of a month, on the amount of the tax due, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

E. Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall be merged with and become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.

F. Petition for Waiver. Any operator who fails to remit the tax herein levied within the time herein stated shall pay the penalties herein stated, provided, however, the operator may petition the transient lodgings tax review committee for waiver and refund of the penalty or any portion thereof and the transient lodgings tax review committee may, if a good and sufficient reason is shown, waive and direct a refund of the penalty or any portion thereof. (Ord. 89-8 § 8)


3.04.090 Deficiency determinations.

If the tax administrator determines that the returns are incorrect, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of the facts contained in the return or returns, or upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determination may be made of the amount due for one, or more than one, period, and the amount so determined shall be due and payable immediately upon service of notice as herein provided after which the amount determined is delinquent. Penalties on deficiencies shall be applied as set forth in LCMC 3.04.080.

A. In making a determination the tax administrator may offset overpayments, if any, which may have been previously made for a period or periods, against any underpayment for a subsequent period or periods, or against penalties and interest on the underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in LCMC 3.04.080.

B. The tax administrator shall give to the operator or occupant a written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If by mail the notice shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears on the records of the tax administrator.

In case of service by mail or any notice required by this chapter, and shall be served by mailing such notice by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested.

C. Except in the case of fraud or intent to evade this chapter or authorized rules and regulations, every deficiency determination shall be made and notice thereof mailed within five years after the last day of the month following the close of the quarterly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within five years after the return is filed, whichever period expires last.

D. Any determination shall become due and payable immediately upon receipt of notice and shall become final within 20 days after the tax administrator has given notice thereof, provided, however, the operator may petition redemption and refund if the petition is filed before the determination becomes final as herein provided. (Ord. 91-16 § 2; Ord. 89-8 § 9(a))


3.04.100 Fraud, refusal to collect or evasion.

If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect said tax or to make within the time provided in this chapter any report or remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, or makes a fraudulent return or otherwise wilfully attempts to evade this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain the facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator has determined the tax due that is imposed by this chapter from any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to report and remit said tax, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice in the manner aforesaid of the amounts so assessed. Such determination and notice shall be made and mailed within five years of the discovery by the tax administrator of any fraud, intent to evade or failure or refusal to collect said tax, or failure to file return. Any determination shall become due and payable upon receipt of notice and shall become final within 20 days after the tax administrator has given notice thereof, provided, however, the operator may petition for redemption and refund if the petition is filed before the determination becomes final as herein provided. (Ord. 91-16 § 3; Ord. 89-8 § 9(b))


3.04.110 Operator delay.

If the tax administrator believes that the collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the city will be jeopardized by delay, or if any determination will be jeopardized by delay, he shall thereupon make a determination of the tax or amount of tax required to be collected, noting the fact upon the determination. The amount so determined as herein provided shall be immediately due and payable, and the operator shall immediately pay such determination to the tax administrator after service of notice thereof; provided, however, the operator may petition, after payment has been made, for redemption and refund of such determination, if the petition is filed within 20 days from the date of service of notice by the tax administrator. (Ord. 89-8 § 9(c))


3.04.120 Redeterminations.

A. Any person against whom a determination is made under LCMC 3.04.090 through 3.04.110 or any person directly interested may petition for a redetermination and redemption and refund within the time required in LCMC 3.04.090 through 3.04.110. If a petition for redetermination and refund is not filed within the time required in LCMC 3.04.090 through 3.04.110, the determination becomes final at the expiration of the allowable time.

B. If a petition for redetermination and refund is filed within the allowable period, the tax administrator shall reconsider the determination, and, if the person has so requested in his petition, shall grant the person an oral hearing and shall give him 20 days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing. The tax administrator may continue the hearing from time to time as may be necessary.

C. The tax administrator may decrease or increase the amount of the determination as a result of the hearing and if an increase is determined such increase shall be payable immediately after the hearing.

D. The order or decision of the tax administrator upon a petition for redetermination and redemption and refund becomes final 20 days after service upon the petitioner of notice thereof, unless appeal of such order or decision is filed with the transient lodgings tax review committee within the 20 days after the service of such notice.

E. No petition for redetermination and redemption and refund or appeal therefrom shall be effective for any purpose unless the operator has first complied with the payment provisions hereof. (Ord. 89-8 § 10)


3.04.130 Security for collection of tax.

A. The tax administrator, whenever he deems it necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter, may require the operator subject thereto to deposit with him such security in the form of cash, bond or other security as the tax administrator may determine. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the tax administrator but shall not be greater than twice the operator’s estimated average quarterly liability for the period for which he files returns, determined in such a manner as the tax administrator deems proper, or $5,000, whichever amount is lesser. The amount of security may be increased or decreased by the tax administrator subject to limitations herein provided. The operator has a right to appeal to the transient lodging tax review committee any decision of the tax administrator made pursuant to this section. The operator’s right to appeal is pursuant to LCMC 3.04.220.

B. At any time within five years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable or at any time within five years after any determination becomes final, the tax administrator may bring any action in the courts of this state, or any other state, or of the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest. (Ord. 91-16 § 4; Ord. 89-8 § 11)


3.04.140 Lien.

A. The tax imposed by this chapter together with the interest, administrative costs, attorney fees and penalties herein provided and the filing fees paid to the county clerk of Lincoln County, Oregon, and advertising costs which may be incurred when same becomes delinquent as set forth in this chapter shall be and, until paid, remain a lien from the date of its recording with the department of records, Lincoln County, Oregon, and superior to all subsequent recorded liens on all tangible personal property used in the hotel of an operator within the city and may be foreclosed on and sold as may be necessary to discharge said lien, if the lien has been recorded electronically as provided in ORS 93.643 or with the department of records in Lincoln County, Oregon. Notice of the lien may be issued by the tax administrator or his deputy whenever the operator is in default in the payment of said tax, interest and penalty, shall be recorded with the department of records of Lincoln County, Oregon, and a copy sent to the delinquent operator. The personal property subject to such lien seized by any deputy or employee of the tax administrator may be sold by the department seizing same at public auction after 10 days’ notice, which means one publication in a newspaper published in the city. Any lien for taxes shown on the records of the proper county official shall, upon payment of all taxes, penalties, and interest thereon, be paid to the city and the operator or person making such payment shall have a receipt therefor stating the full amount of taxes, penalties and interest thereon have been paid and that the lien is hereby released and the record of lien is satisfied.

B. Lien on Real Property. The tax imposed by this chapter together with the interest, administrative costs, attorney fees and penalties herein provided and the filing fees paid to the electronic lien service provider or the county clerk of Lincoln County, Oregon, and advertising costs which may be incurred when same becomes delinquent as set forth in this chapter shall become a lien on real property 30 days after notification of payment due. The lien hereby created may be foreclosed in any manner provided by law or city ordinance.

C. Attorney Fees. In the event of litigation, the prevailing party shall be entitled to recover reasonable attorney fees and other costs and disbursements provided by law. (Ord. 2014-09 § 3; Ord. 89-8 § 12)


3.04.150 Refunds.

A. Refunds by the City to the Operator. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty, or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter, it may be refunded, provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific reason upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years from the date of payment. The claim shall be made on forms provided by the tax administrator. If the claim is approved by the tax administrator, the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any amount then due and payable from the operator from whom it was collected or by whom paid and the balance may be refunded to such operator, his administrators, executors or assignees.

B. Refunds by City to Transient. Whenever the tax required by this chapter has been collected by an operator, and deposited by operator with the tax administrator, and it is later determined that the tax was erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator, it may be refunded by the tax administrator to the transient, provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific reason on which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years from the date of payment.

C. Refunds by Operator to Tenant. Whenever the tax required by this chapter has been collected by the operator and it is later determined that the tenant occupies the hotel for a period exceeding 30 days without interruption, the operator shall refund to such tenant the tax previously collected by the operator from that tenant as a transient. The operator shall account for such collection and refund to the tax administrator. If the operator has remitted the tax prior to the refund or credit to the tenant, he shall be entitled to a corresponding refund under this section. (Ord. 89-8 § 13)


3.04.160 Collection fee.

Every operator liable for collection and remittance of the tax imposed by this chapter may withhold five percent of the net tax herein collected, to cover the operator’s expense in collection and remittance of said tax. (Ord. 89-8 § 14)


3.04.170 Administration.

A. Special Fund. The tax administrator shall deposit all money collected pursuant to this chapter to the credit of the transient room tax fund.

B. Records Required from Operators. Every operator shall keep an adequate system of accounting records of room sales sufficient to allow performance of a compliance review to verify accuracy. All records shall be retained by the operator for a period of five years and six months after they come into being. An adequate system of accounting records of room sales should typically include:

1. Registration cards;

2. Daily and/or monthly deposit and room rental summaries;

3. Adjustment to summaries, including, but not limited to, refunds, exempt rent and monthly rent;

4. Worksheets, showing computations for quarterly reports; and

5. General ledger records relating to gross and net rental receipts.

C. Failure to Maintain Records. Any operator who fails to maintain records adequate to allow performance of a compliance review to verify accuracy shall pay a penalty in the amount of up to $1.00 per room per day for each day the records of the hotel are found to be inadequate by the tax administrator. The penalty imposed by the tax administrator may be appealed to the transient lodgings tax review committee by filing notice of appeal within 20 days after the serving or the mailing of the notice of the imposition of penalty.

D. Examination of Records – Investigations. The tax administrator, or any person authorized in writing by him, may examine during normal business hours the books, papers and accounting records relating to room sales of any operator, after notification to the operator liable for the tax, and may investigate the business of the operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or, if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid.

E. Disclosure of Confidential Information Prohibited.

1. Disclosure by Administrative Staff. It is unlawful for the tax administrator or any person having an administrative or clerical duty under the provisions of this chapter to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a transient occupancy registration certificate, or pay a transient occupancy tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of either, or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person; provided, that nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent:

a. The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by, a federal, state or local official, employee or agent, or to, or by, an administrative body or a court of competent jurisdiction, for tax collection purposes, or for any other regulatory purpose or use in any enforcement proceeding, including but not limited to administering or enforcing any provisions of this chapter, or collecting taxes imposed hereunder, or collecting city business license fees;

b. The disclosure, after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer or to receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors of the taxpayer, if directly interested, of information as to any paid tax, any unpaid tax or amount of tax required to be collected, or interest and penalties; further provided, however, that the city attorney approves each such disclosure and that the tax administrator may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this subsection (E)(1)(b) when in his opinion the public interest would suffer thereby;

c. The disclosure of the names and addresses of any persons to whom transient occupancy registration certificates have been issued;

d. The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city;

e. In relation to any hotel on land as to which the city has been informed that a federally recognized Indian tribe is seeking to acquire the land, the disclosure of such information as the city, in its discretion, believes is necessary or appropriate in order to evaluate and provide information about potential losses of transient room tax revenues in the event of the tribe’s acquisition of the land and subsequent transfer of the land in trust to the federal government.

2. Disclosure by Transient Lodgings Tax Review Committee. It is unlawful for the transient lodgings tax review committee to make known in any manner whatever the content of exempt records or matters or information considered during an executive session pursuant to LCMC 3.04.220, or to make known any confidential information involving trade secrets or business records where the transient lodgings tax review committee has issued a protective order to protect the confidentiality of such records.

F. Use of Transient Room Tax Funds Collected. After payment of the cost associated with administering the transient room tax fund, including but not limited to audit fees, legal services, materials and services, and less a five percent fee to reimburse the general fund of the city for the administrative personnel services applicable to collection and enforcement of the collection of transient room tax funds, the net transient room tax funds collected shall be distributed by the tax administrator quarterly as provided in the Lincoln City Charter. (Ord. 2014-24 § 1; Ord. 2004-09 § 1; Ord. 97-4 § 4; Ord. 96-4 § 6; Ord. 92-1 § 2; Ord. 91-16 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 89-8 § 15)


3.04.180 Transient lodgings tax review committee – Procedure.

Recodified as LCMC 2.68.010. (Ord. 2002-13 § 1; Ord. 92-11 § 1; Ord. 91-16 § 7; Ord. 89-8 § 16)


3.04.190 Transient lodgings tax review committee – Powers and duties.

Recodified as LCMC 2.68.020. (Ord. 91-16 § 8; Ord. 89-8 § 16(a))


3.04.200 Transient lodgings tax review committee – Vacancies.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-05. (Ord. 89-8 § 16(b))


3.04.210 Transient lodgings tax review committee – Frequency of meetings.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-05. (Ord. 89-8 § 16(c))


3.04.220 Appeals.

A. Notice of Appeal. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator may appeal to the transient lodgings tax review committee by filing notice of appeal with the tax administrator within 20 days of the serving or mailing of the notice of a decision given by the tax administrator. The notice of appeal shall state facts relied upon for relief, a statement or proposition of law or ordinance relied upon, the relief requested and shall bear the signature of the appellant or authorized representative of the appellant.

B. Appeals to Be De Novo. All proceedings before the transient lodgings tax review committee shall be original and independent proceedings and shall be heard without a jury and de novo. The tax administrator shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal as prescribed by the transient lodgings tax review committee and shall give the appellant 20 days’ written notice of the time and place of hearing.

C. Burden of Proof. In appeals to the transient lodgings review committee, a preponderance of the evidence shall be required to sustain the burden of proof. The burden of proof shall fall upon the appellant seeking relief from a determination of the tax administrator.

D. Hearings Open to the Public. An appeal hearing before the transient lodgings tax review committee shall be open to the public and minutes shall be kept regarding such proceeding. In any case regarding confidential information involving trade secrets or other confidential business records, upon motion of the appellant, the transient lodgings tax review committee may make such protective orders as may be necessary to protect the confidentiality of such records. In determining whether such protective order should be issued, the transient lodgings tax review committee shall weigh the harm that might be suffered by the appellant against any benefit received by the public as the result of disclosure.

E. Executive Session. After closing the appeal hearing, the transient lodgings tax review committee may continue its meeting in executive session to consider records that are exempt by law from public inspection or to consult with counsel regarding current litigation or litigation likely to be filed in the matter on appeal.

F. Decision of the Transient Lodgings Tax Review Committee. The transient lodgings tax review committee shall render its decision at an open meeting in writing, including therein a concise statement of the facts found by the transient lodgings tax review committee and the conclusions and findings reached by the committee. The committee may affirm, reverse, modify or remand any order or determination of the tax administrator and shall grant such other relief as shall be appropriate. The written decision shall be incorporated in the minutes of the committee. (Ord. 96-4 § 7; Ord. 91-16 § 9; Ord. 89-8 § 17)


3.04.230 Appeals to city council.

Any person aggrieved by any decision of the transient lodgings tax review committee may appeal to the city council by filing notice of appeal with the tax administrator within 20 days of the serving or the mailing of the notice of the decision given by the transient lodgings tax review committee. The tax administrator shall transmit said notice of appeal together with the file of said appealed matter to the council, who shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal from the decision of the transient lodging tax review committee. The council shall give the appellant not less than 20 days’ written notice of the time and place of hearing of said appealed matter. The appeal proceedings before the council shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures utilized in an appeal to the transient lodgings tax review committee as specified in LCMC 3.04.220. (Ord. 96-4 § 8; Ord. 89-8 § 18)


3.04.240 Violation.

Violation of any provisions of this chapter constitutes a Class B violation and shall be dealt with according to the procedures established in Chapter 1.16 LCMC and shall be subject to the penalties stated therein. (Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 89-8 § 21)


3.04.250 Violations – Penalty.

It is unlawful for any operator or other person so required to fail or refuse to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator or to render a false or fraudulent return. No person required to make, render, sign or verify any report shall make any false or fraudulent report with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter. (Ord. 89-8 § 20)


Chapter 3.08 CAPITAL CONSTRUCTION FUND

Sections:

3.08.010    Definition.

3.08.020    Created – Term.

3.08.030    Payments to fund – Time limit.

3.08.040    Payments to fund – Source.

3.08.050    Administration.

3.08.060    Purposes.


3.08.010 Definition.

“Capital construction fund” means that type of fund as authorized and defined by ORS 280.100. (Ord. 87-8 § 1)


3.08.020 Created – Term.

A capital construction fund is established and created by the city beginning with the fiscal year 1987-88, and shall continue for a period of time not exceeding 12 fiscal years. (Ord. 87-8 § 2)


3.08.030 Payments to fund – Time limit.

Annual increments to the fund shall be limited to a period of not to exceed 10 years. (Ord. 87-8 § 3)


3.08.040 Payments to fund – Source.

All annual increments to the fund shall be made from, but not limited to, revenue transfers from the general fund. (Ord. 87-8 § 4)


3.08.050 Administration.

All moneys paid into the fund shall be kept by the city treasurer separate and distinct from other funds of the subdivision and further shall be retained and expended only for the purpose for which the fund was created, as set forth in LCMC 3.08.060. (Ord. 87-8 § 5)


3.08.060 Purposes.

The fund shall be retained and/or expended for any of the following purposes:

A. The purchase of real property on which capital improvements may or will be constructed;

B. The construction of a new city hall and/or any other facilities or buildings deemed necessary;

C. The construction of improvements to or modification of existing municipal facilities and buildings. (Ord. 87-8 § 6)


Chapter 3.12 WATER SYSTEM REPLACEMENT CAPITAL RESERVE FUND

Sections:

3.12.010    Establishment of fund.

3.12.020    Payments to fund – Time limit.

3.12.030    Payments to fund – Source.

3.12.040    Administration.

3.12.050    Discontinuance of fund.


3.12.010 Establishment of fund.

A water system replacement capital reserve fund is established by the city beginning July 1, 1990, for the purpose of providing funds for financing the cost of services, projects, property and equipment, and to construct or acquire and make repairs and improvements thereto, and of maintenance and replacement of the water system of the city. (Ord. 90-6 § 1)


3.12.020 Payments to fund – Time limit.

The annual increments to said fund shall be limited to a period not to exceed 10 years. Any balance in the fund that is not expended or obligated by definite commitment by July 1, 2002, shall revert to and become a part of the general fund of the city and shall be transferred thereto by the finance director of the city. (Ord. 90-6 § 1)


3.12.030 Payments to fund – Source.

Annual increments to the fund shall be made from, but not limited to, revenue transfers from the water fund. (Ord. 90-6 § 1)


3.12.040 Administration.

All moneys paid into the fund shall be kept by the finance director separate and distinct from other funds of the city, and shall be retained and expended only for the purpose for which the fund is created as set forth in LCMC 3.12.010. (Ord. 90-6 § 1)


3.12.050 Discontinuance of fund.

If at any time conditions arise which dispense with the necessity of further accumulations or expenditures from this fund, the city council of the city, by vote of two-thirds of the members of the city council, may by resolution dissolve said fund; provided, that any balance in the fund shall revert to the general fund. (Ord. 90-6 § 1)


Chapter 3.16 SEWER SYSTEM REPLACEMENT CAPITAL RESERVE FUND

Sections:

3.16.010    Establishment of fund.

3.16.020    Payments to fund – Time limit.

3.16.030    Payments to fund – Source.

3.16.040    Administration.

3.16.050    Discontinuance of fund.


3.16.010 Establishment of fund.

A sewer system replacement capital reserve fund is established by the city beginning July 1, 1991, for the purpose of providing funds for financing the cost of services, projects, property and equipment, and to construct or acquire and make repairs and improvements thereto, and of maintenance and replacement of the sewer system of the city. (Ord. 91-9 § 1)


3.16.020 Payments to fund – Time limit.

The annual increments to said fund shall be limited to a period not to exceed 10 years. Any balance in the fund that is not expended or obligated by definite commitment by July 1, 2003, shall revert to and become a part of the general fund of the city and shall be transferred thereto by the finance director of the city. (Ord. 91-9 § 1)


3.16.030 Payments to fund – Source.

Annual increments to the fund shall be made from, but not limited to, revenue transfers from the sewer fund. (Ord. 91-9 § 1)


3.16.040 Administration.

All moneys paid into the fund shall be kept by the finance director separate and distinct from other funds of the city, and shall be retained and expended only for the purpose for which the fund is created as set forth in LCMC 3.16.010. (Ord. 91-9 § 1)


3.16.050 Discontinuance of fund.

If at any time conditions arise which dispense with the necessity of further accumulations or expenditures from this fund, the city council of the city, by vote of two-thirds of the members of the city council, may by resolution dissolve said fund; provided, that any balance in the fund shall revert to the general fund. (Ord. 91-9 § 1)


Chapter 3.24 PERCENT FOR ART PROGRAM

Sections:

3.24.010    Purpose.

3.24.020    Definitions.

3.24.030    Percent for art requirement.

3.24.040    Phased projects.

3.24.050    Waiver.


3.24.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the percent for art program is to expand the experience of the city’s residents and visitors through public art of the highest quality in concept and execution. This will improve the quality of life in the city by allowing residents and visitors to view and interact with public art regularly in public spaces. It will instill a concern for beauty and good design in both the public and private sectors by setting high aesthetic standards. It will reflect and communicate the history, character, and values of the community and thereby create a sense of place. (Ord. 2004-14 § 1)


3.24.020 Definitions.

Except where the context requires otherwise, the words used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

“Acquisition” means acquiring, siting, and maintenance or any one or more thereof.

“City facility” means any city building, developed park area, or structure including but not limited to office buildings, sports facilities, utility and transportation infrastructure, and service facilities.

“Construction cost” means the cost of construction, excluding costs of engineering, administration, and fees and permits, and excluding indirect costs including but not limited to interest during construction, advertising costs, and legal fees.

“Major construction project” means any city facility capital improvement project the cost of which exceeds $50,000 that is paid for in whole or in part by the city, including but not limited to purchase, construction, rehabilitation, renovation, remodeling, or improvement of city facilities. It does not include projects designated by the city council as emergency projects and does not include ordinary maintenance and repair projects, including but not limited to street overlay projects.

“Responsible department” means the city department the budget of which includes a major construction project.

“Works of art” means all forms of original creations of visual art appropriate for viewing by persons of all ages including, but not limited to:

1. Painting in any medium, including both portable and permanently fixed works such as murals;

2. Sculpture, in the round, bas-relief, mobile, fountain, kinetic, electronic, and other forms, and in any material or combination of materials;

3. Other visual media including but not limited to prints, drawings, stained glass, calligraphy, glass works, mosaics, photography, film, clay, fiber textiles, wood, metals, plastics, or other materials or combinations of materials, or crafts or artifacts;

4. Works of a wide range of materials, disciplines, and media that are of specific duration, including performance events, that are documented for public accessibility after the period of specific duration has ended. Works of art may have functional as well as aesthetic qualities. (Ord. 2004-14 § 1)


3.24.030 Percent for art requirement.

One-half percent of the construction of each major construction project shall be used for the acquisition of a work or works of art to be owned by the city and to be displayed in an area or areas frequently visited by the public within the city limits, whether or not such area or areas are at the site of the major construction project. (Ord. 2004-14 § 1)


3.24.040 Phased projects.

Unless otherwise decided by the city council, if a major construction project will be constructed in phases, then at the time of construction of each phase one-half percent of the construction cost of that phase shall be used for the acquisition of works of art pursuant to LCMC 3.24.030. The city council, however, in its discretion may decide to set aside all or part of the half-percent for a project phase or phases so that the half-percent for the entire project may be used in a coordinated, rather than in a piecemeal, fashion. (Ord. 2004-14 § 1)


3.24.050 Waiver.

The city council, in its discretion, may waive in whole or in part the percent for art requirement of LCMC 3.24.030. (Ord. 2004-14 § 1)


Chapter 3.26 RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA TAXATION

Sections:

3.26.010    Purpose and limitations.

3.26.020    Definitions.

3.26.030    Levy of tax.

3.26.040    Deductions.

3.26.050    Seller (marijuana retailer) responsible for payment of tax.

3.26.055    Administration by DOR – Penalties and interest.

3.26.060    Nonexclusive penalties and interest.

3.26.070    Failure to report and remit tax – Determination of tax by director.

3.26.080    Appeal.

3.26.090    Refunds.

3.26.100    Actions to collect.

3.26.110    Criminal and civil penalties for code violations.

3.26.120    Confidentiality.

3.26.130    Inspection of records – Administrative warrant or subpoena.

3.26.140    Forms and regulations.


3.26.010 Purpose and limitations.

A. For the purposes of this chapter, every person who sells marijuana items in the city of Lincoln City is exercising a taxable privilege. The purpose of this chapter is to impose a tax upon the retail sale of marijuana items and not on the business of producing marijuana.

B. Sellers (marijuana retailers) shall be solely responsible for obtaining all required approvals, permits, licenses, and authorizations from the responsible federal, state and local authorities, or other entities, necessary to engage in the business of selling or otherwise providing marijuana items for consideration in the manner contemplated. The city of Lincoln City has no duty, responsibility or liability for requesting, obtaining, ensuring, or verifying seller’s compliance with the applicable federal or state permit or approval requirements. The imposition of this tax on transactions which are subject to a licensing program under Oregon state law is not an approval or endorsement of the transaction and shall not in any way be interpreted as a waiver, modification, or grant of any federal, state or local agency permit, approval or authorization. Businesses operating within the city of Lincoln City shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws. (Ord. 2016-10 § 1)


3.26.020 Definitions.

When not clearly otherwise indicated by the context, the following words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

A. “Cannabinoid” means any of the chemical compounds that are the active constituents of marijuana.

B. “Cannabinoid concentrate” means a substance obtained by separating cannabinoids from marijuana by:

1. A mechanical extraction process;

2. A chemical extraction process using a non-hydrocarbon-based or other solvent, such as water, vegetable glycerin, vegetable oils, animal fats, isopropyl alcohol or ethanol;

3. A chemical extraction process using the hydrocarbon-based solvent carbon dioxide; provided, that the process does not involve the use of high heat or pressure; or

4. Any other process identified by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission, in consultation with the Oregon Health Authority, by rule.

C. “Cannabinoid edible” means food or potable liquid into which a cannabinoid concentrate, cannabinoid extract or dried marijuana leaves or flowers have been incorporated.

D. “Cannabinoid extract” means a substance obtained by separating cannabinoids from marijuana by:

1. A chemical extraction process using a hydrocarbon-based solvent, such as butane, hexane or propane;

2. A chemical extraction process using the hydrocarbon-based solvent carbon dioxide, if the process uses high heat or pressure; or

3. Any other process identified by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission, in consultation with the Oregon Health Authority, by rule.

E. 1. “Cannabinoid product” means a cannabinoid edible and any other product intended for human consumption or use, including a product intended to be applied to the skin or hair, that contains cannabinoids or dried marijuana leaves or flowers.

2. “Cannabinoid product” does not include:

a. Usable marijuana by itself;

b. A cannabinoid concentrate by itself;

c. A cannabinoid extract by itself; or

d. Industrial hemp, as defined in ORS 571.300.

F. “Consumer” means a person who purchases, acquires, owns, holds, or uses marijuana items. Sales from suppliers to marijuana retailers for the purpose of resale do not make the marijuana retailer a consumer.

G. “Director” means the finance director for the city of Lincoln City or his/her designee.

H. “Gross taxable sales” means the total amount received in money, credits, property or other consideration from retail sales of marijuana items subject to the tax imposed by this chapter. The gross taxable sale is the retail sale price paid for marijuana items, excluding tax, to a marijuana retailer by or on behalf of a consumer of the marijuana items.

I. “Marijuana” means the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae, any part of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae and the seeds of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae. “Marijuana” does not include industrial hemp, as defined in ORS 571.300.

J. “Marijuana items” has the meaning given that term in Oregon Laws 2015, Chapter 614, Section 1; specifically “marijuana items” includes one or more of the following items: marijuana, a cannabinoid product, a cannabinoid concentrate or a cannabinoid extract.

K. “Marijuana retailer” (also referred to as “seller”) means a person who sells marijuana items to a consumer.

L. “Oregon Medical Marijuana Program” means the office within the Oregon Health Authority that administers the provisions of ORS 475.300 through 475.346, the Oregon Medical Marijuana Act, and all policies and procedures pertaining thereto.

M. “Person” means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or any group or combination acting as a unit, including the United States of America, the state of Oregon and any political subdivision thereof, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

N. “Purchase or sale” means the retail acquisition or furnishing for consideration by any person of marijuana items within the city and does not include the (wholesale) acquisition or furnishing of marijuana by a grower or processor to a licensed seller.

O. “Registry identification cardholder” means a person who has been diagnosed by an attending physician with a debilitating medical condition and for whom the use of medical marijuana may mitigate the symptoms or effects of the person’s debilitating medical condition, and who has been issued a registry identification card by the Oregon Health Authority.

P. “Retail sale” means the transfer of goods or services in exchange for any valuable consideration and does not include the transfer or exchange of goods or services between a grower or processor and a seller.

Q. “Seller” (also referred to as “marijuana retailer”) means any person who is required to be licensed or has been licensed by the state of Oregon to sell or otherwise provide marijuana items to purchasers for money, credit, property or other consideration within the city.

R. “Tax” means either the tax payable by the seller or the aggregate amount of taxes due from a seller during the period for which the seller is required to report collections under this chapter.

S. “Taxpayer” means any person (seller or marijuana retailer) obligated to account to the director for taxes collected or to be collected, or from whom a tax is due, under the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-10 § 1)


3.26.030 Levy of tax.

A. Every seller/marijuana retailer exercising the taxable privilege of selling marijuana items, as defined herein, is subject to and must pay a tax for exercising that privilege.

B. The amount of tax levied is as follows:

1. Three percent of the gross taxable sale amount paid to the seller of marijuana items by persons who are purchasing marijuana items but are not doing so under the provisions of the Oregon Medical Marijuana Program. (Ord. 2016-10 § 1)


3.26.040 Deductions.

The following deductions shall be allowed against sales received by the seller providing marijuana:

A. Documented refunds of sales where funds are actually returned to any purchaser;

B. Documented adjustments in sales which amount to a refund to a purchaser, providing such adjustment pertains to the actual sale of marijuana items and does not include any adjustments for other services furnished by a seller. (Ord. 2016-10 § 1)


3.26.050 Seller (marijuana retailer) responsible for payment of tax.

A. Every seller shall, on or before the fifteenth day of the month following the end of each calendar quarter (in the months of April, July, October and January), make a return to the director, on forms provided by the city, specifying the total sales subject to this chapter and the amount of tax collected under this chapter. The seller may request or the director may establish shorter reporting periods for any seller if the seller or director deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax. The director may require further information in the return relevant to payment of the tax. A return shall not be considered filed until it is actually received by the director.

B. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the director. Payments received by the director for application against existing liabilities will be credited toward the period designated by the taxpayer under conditions not prejudicial to the interest of the city. A condition considered prejudicial is the imminent expiration of the statute of limitations for a period or periods.

C. Nondesignated payments shall be applied in the order of the oldest liability first, with the payment credited first toward any accrued penalty, then to interest, then to the underlying tax until the payment is exhausted. Crediting of a payment toward a specific reporting period will be first applied against any accrued penalty, then to interest, then to the underlying tax.

D. If the director, in his or her sole discretion, determines an alternative order of payment application would be in the best interest of the city in a particular tax or factual situation, the director may order such a change. The director may establish shorter reporting periods for any seller if the director deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax. The director also may require additional information in the return relevant to payment of the liability. When a shorter return period is required, penalties and interest shall be computed according to the shorter return period. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by sellers pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment is made to the director. A separate trust bank account is not required in order to comply with this provision.

E. Every seller required to remit the tax imposed in this chapter shall be entitled to retain five percent of all taxes collected and due to the city to defray the costs of bookkeeping and remittance.

F. Every seller must keep and preserve, in an accounting format established by the director, records of all sales made by the seller and such other books or accounts as may be required by the director. Every seller must keep and preserve for a period of three years all such books, invoices and other records. The director shall have the right to inspect all such records at all reasonable times. (Ord. 2016-10 § 1)


3.26.055 Administration by DOR – Penalties and interest.

A. The Oregon Department of Revenue (DOR) may administer and collect the tax imposed by this chapter as approved by the voters pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement. In administering the tax statewide, it is impractical for the DOR to administer individual city administrative provisions, including individual city penalties and interest provisions; accordingly, in the event the three percent tax approved by the voters is administered by DOR, DOR shall be responsible for all aspects of city tax administration, including but not limited to adopting administrative rules, auditing returns, assessing deficiencies and collecting the city tax and penalties and interest under applicable state statutes, including, but not limited to ORS 305.220, 305.265 and 314.400. Without limitation, in the event of such intergovernmental agreement, DOR is authorized to make refunds, hold conferences with local taxpayers, handle appeals to the Oregon Tax Court, issue warrants for the collection of unpaid taxes, determine the minimum amount of city tax economically collectible, and take any other actions reasonably necessary to administer and collect the city of Lincoln City voter-approved three percent tax. The IGA will indicate that the city accepts and acknowledges the use of DOR rules addressing the requirements for paying taxes with currency and other matters related to taxation of marijuana under ORS Chapter 475B.

B. Notwithstanding any other local administrative provisions, the following additional administrative provisions shall apply in the event the tax is administered by the Department of Revenue:

1. Interest shall be added to the overall tax amount due at the same rate established under ORS 305.220 for each month, or fraction of a month, from the time the return to the Oregon Department of Revenue was originally required to be filed by the marijuana retailer to the time of payment.

2. If a marijuana retailer fails to file a return with the Oregon Department of Revenue or pay the tax as required, a penalty shall be imposed upon the marijuana retailer in the same manner and amount provided under ORS 314.400.

3. Every penalty imposed, and any interest that accrues, becomes a part of the financial obligation required to be paid by the marijuana retailer and remitted to the Oregon Department of Revenue.

4. Taxes, interest and penalties transferred to the city of Lincoln City by the Oregon Department of Revenue will be distributed to the city’s general fund.

5. If at any time a marijuana retailer fails to remit any amount owed in taxes, interest or penalties, the Oregon Department of Revenue is authorized to enforce collection on behalf of the city of the owed amount in accordance with ORS 475B.700 to 475B.755, any agreement between the Oregon Department of Revenue and the city of Lincoln City under ORS 305.620 and any applicable administrative rules adopted by the Oregon Department of Revenue. (Ord. 2017-02 § 1)


3.26.060 Nonexclusive penalties and interest.

A. Any seller who fails to remit any portion of any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the tax, in addition to the amount of the tax.

B. Any seller who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 15 percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the penalty first imposed. 

C. If the director determines the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections (A) and (B) of this section.

D. In addition to the penalties imposed, any seller who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

E. Every penalty imposed, and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section, shall become a part of the tax required to be paid.

F. Taxes collected pursuant to this chapter shall be segregated into a distinct account. All sums collected pursuant to the penalty provisions in subsections (A) through (C) of this section may be distributed to a separate city of Lincoln City fund to offset the costs of auditing and enforcement of this tax.

G. Waiver of Penalties. Penalties for certain late tax payments may not be waived except pursuant to administrative waiver provisions adopted as part of this title.

H. The administrative remedies in this section are nonexclusive and do not prohibit or otherwise limit other authorized enforcement methods available under the code. (Ord. 2016-10 § 1)


3.26.070 Failure to report and remit tax – Determination of tax by director.

If any seller should fail to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report of the tax required by this chapter, the director shall proceed in such manner as deemed best to obtain facts and information on which to base the estimate of tax due. As soon as the director shall procure such facts and information as is able to be obtained, upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any seller, the director shall proceed to determine and assess against such seller the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the director shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by having it served personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the seller at the last known place of address. Such seller may make an appeal of such determination as provided in LCMC 3.26.080. If no appeal is filed, the director’s determination is final and the amount thereby is immediately due and payable. (Ord. 2016-10 § 1)


3.26.080 Appeal.

Any seller aggrieved by any decision of the director with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may only appeal pursuant to the uniform administrative appeals ordinance in Chapter 1.26 LCMC, except that the appeal shall be filed within 20 days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. All appeal requirements are jurisdictional and shall be strictly observed. The hearing officer shall hear and consider any records and evidence presented bearing upon the director’s determination of amount due, and make findings affirming, reversing or modifying the determination. The findings of the hearing officer shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. 2016-10 § 1)


3.26.090 Refunds.

A. Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once, or has been erroneously collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsection (B) of this section, provided a claim in writing, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the director within one year of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the director.

B. The director shall have 20 working days from the date of receipt of a claim to review the claim and make a determination in writing as to the validity of the claim. The director shall notify the claimant in writing of the director’s determination. Such notice shall be mailed to the address provided by claimant on the claim form. In the event a claim is determined by the director to be a valid claim, in a manner prescribed by the director a seller may claim a refund, or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted, the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously collected or received. The seller shall notify director of claimant’s choice no later than 15 working days following the date director mailed the determination. In the event claimant has not notified the director of claimant’s choice within the 15-day period above, and the seller is still in business, a credit will be granted against the tax liability for the next reporting period. If the seller is no longer in business, a refund check will be mailed to claimant at the address provided in the claim form.

C. No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant established the right by written records showing entitlement to such refund and the director acknowledged the validity of the claim. (Ord. 2016-10 § 1)


3.26.100 Actions to collect.

Any tax required to be paid by any seller under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the seller to the city. Any such tax collected by a seller which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the seller to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city of Lincoln City for the recovery of the amount owing. In lieu of filing an action for the recovery, the city of Lincoln City, when taxes due are more than 30 days delinquent, may submit any outstanding tax to a collection agency. So long as the city of Lincoln City has complied with the provisions set forth in ORS 697.105, in the event the city turns over a delinquent tax account to a collection agency, the city may add to the amount owing an amount equal to the collection agency fees, not to exceed the greater of $50.00 or 50 percent of the outstanding tax, penalties and interest owing. (Ord. 2016-10 § 1)


3.26.110 Criminal and civil penalties for code violations.

A. A violation of any provision of this chapter is punishable as set forth in Chapter 1.16 LCMC. Without limitation, it is a violation of this chapter for any seller or other person to:

1. Fail or refuse to comply as required herein;

2. Fail or refuse to furnish any return required to be made;

3. Fail or refuse to permit inspection of records;

4. Fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the director;

5. Render a false or fraudulent return or claim; or

6. Fail, refuse or neglect to remit the tax to the city by the due date.

B. Violation of subsections (A)(1), (2), (3), (4) and (6) shall be considered a Class A violation. Filing a false or fraudulent return shall be considered a Class B misdemeanor crime. The remedies provided by this section are not exclusive and shall not prevent the city from exercising any other remedy available under the law, nor shall the provisions of this chapter prohibit or restrict the city or other appropriate prosecutor from pursuing criminal charges under state law or city ordinance.

C. The penalties in this chapter are cumulative; imposition of administrative penalties and interest shall not prohibit any other alternative remedies set forth in this code or the laws of the state of Oregon, including but not limited to the criminal prosecution, civil citation or abatement of nuisances. (Ord. 2016-10 § 1)


3.26.120 Confidentiality.

Except as otherwise required by law, it shall be unlawful for the city, any officer, employee or agent to divulge, release or make known in any manner any financial information submitted or disclosed to the city under the terms of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall prohibit:

A. The disclosure of the names and addresses of any person who is operating a licensed establishment from which marijuana items are sold or provided; or

B. The disclosure of general statistics in a form which would not reveal an individual seller’s financial information; or

C. The disclosure of information to city, state, and federal personnel for purposes of civil and criminal law enforcement as well as the presentation of evidence to the federal, state or municipal court or any other administrative agency or hearing officer having jurisdiction in the prosecution of any claim by the city, the state, or federal authorities or from an appeal from the director for amount due the city under this chapter; or

D. The disclosure of information when such disclosure of conditionally exempt information is ordered under public records law procedures; or

E. The disclosure of records related to a business’ failure to report and remit the tax when the report or tax is in arrears for over three months or the tax exceeds $5,000. The city council expressly finds and determines that the public interest in disclosure of such records clearly outweighs the interest in confidentiality under ORS 192.501(5). (Ord. 2016-10 § 1)


3.26.130 Inspection of records – Administrative warrant or subpoena.

The city may examine, or may cause to be examined by an agent or representative designated by the city for that purpose, any books, papers, records, or memoranda, including copies of seller’s state and federal income tax returns, bearing upon the matter of the seller’s tax return for the purpose of tax collection, including verification and calculation of estimate, as well as for all related law enforcement purposes. All books, invoices, accounts and other records shall be made available within the city limits and be open at any time during regular business hours for examination by the director or an authorized agent of the director. If any taxpayer refuses to voluntarily furnish any of the foregoing information when requested, the director may seek an administrative warrant or subpoena from the Lincoln City municipal court or Lincoln County circuit court to compel inspection of records or require the taxpayer or a representative of the taxpayer to attend a hearing or produce any such books, accounts and records for examination. After warrants or subpoenas for records are executed, the failure to submit to examination of records (provided a minimum of 10 days’ written notice of examination was provided) is an offense against the city and is punishable as provided in Chapter 1.16 LCMC. (Ord. 2016-10 § 1)


3.26.140 Forms and regulations.

A. The director is authorized to prescribe forms and promulgate rules and regulations to aid in the making of returns, the ascertainment, assessment and collection of said marijuana tax, in particular, and without limiting the general language of this chapter, to provide for:

1. A form of report on sales and purchases to be supplied to all vendors;

2. The records which sellers providing marijuana items are to keep concerning the tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 2016-10 § 1)


Chapter 3.28 MARIJUANA TAX

(Repealed by Ord. 2016-15)


Title 4 REAL PROPERTY

Chapters:

4.04    Acceptance of Real Property Interests, Leases, and IGA Renewals

4.05    Temporary Easements and Licenses

4.06    Conveyance of Public Utility Easements


Chapter 4.04 ACCEPTANCE OF REAL PROPERTY INTERESTS, LEASES, AND IGA RENEWALS

Sections:

4.04.010    City manager – Delegation.


4.04.010 City manager – Delegation.

A. Acceptance of Real Property, or Interest Therein. Except when a public hearing before the governing body is required by state or local law, the city council hereby authorizes and expressly delegates to the city manager the authority to indicate, for purposes of recording in official deed records, the city of Lincoln City’s acceptance of real property fee title or an interest in real property pursuant to ORS 93.808.

1. The city manager may execute an instrument conveying fee title to the city or conveying any interest in real property to the city, after approval of the form by the city attorney and approval of the description of the property by the city engineer, or designee.

2. City acceptance shall be in substantially the following form:

	CITY ACCEPTANCE (ORS 93.808):

	CITY OF LINCOLN CITY, Grantee

	By:____________________________________

	City Manager

	City of Lincoln City, Oregon

	STATE OF OREGON)

	 	) ss. ___________, 20 __

	Lincoln County	)

	The foregoing instrument was acknowledged before me this _________ day of ______, 20___, by__________________________ as City Manager for the City of Lincoln City.

	____________________________

	Notary Public for Oregon

	My commission expires: ___________

B. Intergovernmental Agreements. Except when a public hearing before the governing body is required by federal, state or local law, the city council hereby authorizes and expressly delegates to the city manager the authority to enter into intergovernmental agreements, provided the amount of any such agreement does not exceed $25,000 and the intergovernmental agreement is approved as to form by the city attorney. Further, the city council hereby authorizes and expressly delegates to the city manager the authority to renew intergovernmental agreements, provided the agreement provides for renewal, terms of the intergovernmental agreement remain the same, or will be modified only as contemplated in the original agreement, and the renewal is approved as to form by the city attorney.

C. Execute Real Property Leases, Licenses, Permits and Grants, Not to Exceed Five Years or $50,000. The city council hereby authorizes and expressly delegates to the city manager the authority to enter into, and renew, leases of real property, licenses, permits and grants, not to exceed five years (including all renewals) or $50,000, provided the written order entering into the lease or lease renewal, or the form of the license, permit or grant, is approved as to form by the city attorney. The city council retains its authority to approve and enter into all real property leases over five years in duration or any license, permit or grant over $50,000. Pursuant to ORS 221.725 lease/option agreements require a public hearing before the city council.

D. Nothing herein prohibits the city manager from referring acceptance of real property instruments, new intergovernmental agreements, intergovernmental agreement renewals, residential real property leases, licenses, permits or grants, to the city council for decision regardless of term or dollar amount.

E. The city manager shall biannually report to the city council on the matters executed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2018-02 § 1; Ord. 2015-08 § 1; Ord. 2014-14 § 1; Ord. 2013-01 § 1)


Chapter 4.05 TEMPORARY EASEMENTS AND LICENSES

Sections:

4.05.010    Title, purpose, and definitions.

4.05.020    Request for temporary easement or license.

4.05.030    Evaluation of request.

4.05.040    Determination by the city manager.

4.05.050    Appeal.

4.05.060    Report.


4.05.010 Title, purpose, and definitions.

A. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Temporary Easement or License Ordinance.”

B. Pursuant to the provisions of ORS 221.725, prior to the sale of any interest in real property the city is required to hold a public hearing and consider various aspects of the sale. ORS 221.727 alternatively permits the establishment of a procedure for the sale or transfer of any interests in real property of an identified class instead of holding a public hearing on each individual transaction. This chapter is intended to delegate and vest in the city manager power and authority to convey a temporary construction easement (not to exceed 12 months in length and subject to conditions set forth herein) or grant a temporary license over city owned property without the need to conduct an individual hearing.

C. For purposes of this chapter the following definitions apply:

“City manager” or “manager” is the city manager for the city of Lincoln City or any person designated by the city manager for purposes of carrying out the duties required of such person.

“Temporary construction easement” is an easement interest in real property which will permit an applicant to engage in construction activities on property other than city property but stage such activities or encroach on city property incidental to such construction. (Ord. 2017-01 § 1)


4.05.020 Request for temporary easement or license.

A. Any person or entity may request a temporary construction easement or license to enter and perform authorized work on or adjacent to city owned property. Authorized work is work that has been permitted by federal, state and/or local authorities, including all necessary city land use or public works approvals. The city manager, with the concurrence of the city attorney, may also initiate such a request. The city manager shall not process such an application without competent evidence of approved plans and permits for the authorized work.

B. The city manager may establish an application fee of not less than $250.00 to be charged for the processing of the application. The council may by resolution increase the fee. City-initiated applications shall not require a fee.

C. The applicant shall submit information requested by the city manager that the manager finds necessary or helpful in making a determination on the application. (Ord. 2017-01 § 1)


4.05.030 Evaluation of request.

A. The city manager shall consider whether the temporary easement (e.g., construction easement) or temporary license sought is “in furtherance of the public interest.” Relevant factors to be considered include, but are not limited to:

1. The easement or license will facilitate construction of a public improvement or recreational facility or amenity which will serve the Lincoln City community; and

2. The easement or license is needed in order to construct, install, or stage construction of the improvement, facility, or amenity and such improvement, facility, or amenity has all required permits, plans and authorizations to proceed to construction; and

3. The easement or license will not conflict with public utilities or public services or otherwise interfere with city, state or federal programs, activities or missions; and

4. If existing utility facilities or structures are within or near the easement or license area, the manager may require locates of existing utilities to be requested by the applicant and the utilities must be notified of the extent and duration of the easement or license;

5. The manager may require copies, at the applicant’s expense, of all approved plans, permits and support documents to be submitted to the city.

6. The manager shall require review and recommendation by the Lincoln City planning department, the Lincoln City public works department and approval as to form by the city attorney before any easement or license can be issued;

7. Appropriate financial consideration may be required depending upon the nature and extent of the requested easement or license. No easement or license shall have duration of more than 12 months. Easements and licenses may be extended only in writing and only after review in accordance with the criteria in this chapter. Notwithstanding the above limitations, a temporary license may automatically renew without a new application (such as a revocable license authorizing an encroachment) provided all annual payments are made as required;

B. This chapter creates no entitlement to a temporary license or easement. Any such grant is in the sole discretion of the city manager. (Ord. 2017-01 § 1)


4.05.040 Determination by the city manager.

A. If the city manager is satisfied after consideration of the evaluation criteria and factors and the best interests of the public that the requested temporary easement or license furthers the public interest, the city manager may grant such easement or license, or portion thereof, in a form approved by the city attorney. The city manager may impose reasonable conditions as part of such grant of easement or license in furtherance of the public interest. Violation of license or easement terms and conditions shall subject the instrument to revocation and shall also be an offense against the city, punishable as a Class B violation in accordance with Chapter 1.16 LCMC.

B. If the city manager’s decision is to grant the request, a written decision is required. If the city manager’s decision is to deny, modify or condition the request, then the applicant shall be provided with the written decision, including the reasons for the denial, modification or conditioning of the request. (Ord. 2017-01 § 1)


4.05.050 Appeal.

Only the applicant may appeal a decision of the city manager to the city council. A decision of the city manager shall be final, unless an appeal is timely filed within 10 days in accordance with Chapter 1.26 LCMC, Uniform Administrative Appeals. (Ord. 2017-01 § 1)


4.05.060 Report.

The city manager shall provide a quarterly report to the city council on the easements and licenses granted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2017-01 § 1)


Chapter 4.06 CONVEYANCE OF PUBLIC UTILITY EASEMENTS

Sections:

4.06.010    Title, purpose, and definitions.

4.06.020    Request for transfer or modification.

4.06.030    Evaluation of request.

4.06.040    Determination by the city manager.

4.06.050    Appeal.

4.06.060    Report.


4.06.010 Title, purpose, and definitions.

A. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “conveyance of public utility easements ordinance” and may also be referred to herein as “this chapter.”

B. Pursuant to the provisions of ORS 221.725, prior to the sale of any interest in real property the city is required to hold a public hearing and consider various aspects of the sale. ORS 221.727 alternatively permits the establishment of a procedure for the sale or transfer of any interests in real property of an identified class instead of holding a public hearing on each individual transaction. This chapter is intended to delegate and vest in the city manager power and authority to transfer the city’s interests in certain classes of city owned property or property interests without the need to conduct a hearing.

C. For purposes of this chapter the following definitions apply:

“City manager” or “manager” is the city manager for the city of Lincoln City or any person designated by the city manager for purposes of carrying out the duties required of such person.

“Public utility easement” is an interest in real property which is held by or granted to the city or the public for the limited purpose of allowing installation, construction and/or maintenance of public utility facilities. (Ord. 2013-06 § 1)


4.06.020 Request for transfer or modification.

A. Any person or persons holding fee title to real property which is subject to a public utility easement may request the transfer of, or modification of, or extinguishment of, the easement by the city. The city manager, with the concurrence of the city attorney, may also initiate such a request but may not proceed without the concurrence of the fee title owner. The city manager shall not process such an application without competent evidence of ownership of fee title provided by the applicant (or multiple applicants, if divided ownership). Evidence such as a title report and deed records may be used. Records of the county assessor’s office may be used but alone shall not be sufficient to determine the holder of fee title. A contract purchaser or someone with equitable interest alone in the property may not request transfer, modification or extinguishment.

B. The city manager may establish an application fee of not less than $250.00 to be charged for the processing of the application. City-initiated applications shall not require a fee.

C. The applicant shall submit information requested by the city manager that the manager finds necessary or helpful in making a determination on the application. (Ord. 2013-06 § 1)


4.06.030 Evaluation of request.

A. The city manager shall consider whether the easement sought to be transferred, modified or extinguished is “not needed for public use” or whether the requested transfer, modification, or extinguishment “furthers the public interest.” Relevant factors to be considered include, but are not limited to:

1. The need of the city or a utility provider for the public utility easement or any portion thereof. The manager may require the applicant to provide submission of letters of no objection from appropriate utility providers. If a utility provider objects a hearing shall be required as provided in ORS 221.725.

2. Existing utility facilities within or near the easement. The manager may require locations of existing utilities to be requested by the applicant.

3. Future plans for development or for extension of utility services within or near the easement. The manager may require copies of facilities plans to be submitted by the applicant.

4. Topography and lateral support of the easement and of surrounding area. The manager may require topographic surveys be provided by the applicant.

5. Development proposals for the applicant’s property or any nearby property. The manager may require copies of all approved plans and permits for the property.

6. Appropriate consideration to be provided in exchange for the transfer, including specifically grants of alternate easement or fee title to property. Exchanges of easements are encouraged so that easements more accurately reflect the facility maintenance and access needs of the city. (Ord. 2013-06 § 1)


4.06.040 Determination by the city manager.

A. If the city manager is satisfied after consideration of the evaluation criteria and factors and the best interests of the public that there is no need to retain all or a portion of the public utility easement, the city manager may transfer, modify or extinguish the easement, or a portion thereof, by quit claim deed, or by other written instrument, in a form approved by the city attorney. The city manager may transfer the property interest conditioned upon the satisfaction of conditions under which the public interest may be better served.

B. If the city manager’s decision is to grant the request, a written decision is required. If the city manager’s decision is to deny, modify or condition the request, then the applicant shall be provided with the written decision, including the reasons for the denial, modification or conditions. (Ord. 2013-06 § 1)


4.06.050 Appeal.

Only the applicant may appeal a decision of the city manager to the city council. A decision of the city manager shall be final, unless an appeal is timely filed in accordance with Chapter 1.26 LCMC, the uniform administrative appeals ordinance. (Ord. 2013-06 § 1)


4.06.060 Report.

The city manager shall biannually report to the city council on the conveyances performed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2013-06 § 1)


Title 5 BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS

Chapters:

5.04    Occupation Taxes

5.08    Bankruptcy, Closing-Out, Fire and Garage Sales

5.12    Bed and Breakfast Accommodations

5.14    Vacation Rental Dwelling License

5.16    Special Events

5.20    Liquor License Review

5.24    Solicitation

5.28    Street Vendors


Chapter 5.04 OCCUPATION TAXES

Sections:

5.04.010    Purpose.

5.04.020    Business entity defined.

5.04.030    Place of business – Requirements.

5.04.040    Permit – Required.

5.04.050    Permit – Term/quarterly renewal.

5.04.060    Permit – Application.

5.04.070    Occupation tax – Required – Amount.

5.04.080    Occupation tax – When due.

5.04.090    Occupation tax – Late payment.

5.04.100    Occupation tax – Determination of number of employees.

5.04.110    Permit – Issuance.

5.04.120    Permit – Transferability.

5.04.130    Permit – Revocation.

5.04.140    Liquor licenses.

5.04.150    Permit for temporary display of merchandise outside.

5.04.160    Violations – Penalties – Alternative remedies.


5.04.010 Purpose.

The taxes imposed under this chapter shall be in addition to all ad valorem taxes, licenses and excises now or hereafter levied pursuant to law, and shall be in addition to any and all other fees or taxes imposed by the United States Government, or by the state. It is specifically declared that the taxes imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter are for the purpose of raising revenues, and that any and all taxes imposed hereby shall be considered reasonable for the purpose of raising revenues. (Ord. 77-10 § 1)


5.04.020 Business entity defined.

A. As used in this chapter, “business entity” means any individual, firm, company, corporation, association or partnership conducting any trade, profession, occupation or pursuit for gain, including property rental, except it does not include the following:

1. Tax-Exempt Organizations. Any organization that has an exemption from income taxes from the Internal Revenue Service and the State of Oregon Department of Revenue;

2. Wholesale Distributors. Any organization that sells a product directly to a business entity for retail and is engaged exclusively in a wholesale business;

3. A business entity regulated by the state, where the state has specifically preempted and precluded the imposition of a business occupation tax by a local government;

4. A business entity located outside of the city of Lincoln City and doing business in Lincoln City only with the city of Lincoln City.

B. Unless exempted under Oregon law, a “business entity” or business entity using an assumed business name must be registered with the Oregon Secretary of State Corporation Division. (Ord. 2019-22 § 1; Ord. 2010-11 § 2; Ord. 91-17 § 1; Ord. 84-4 § 1; Ord. 77-10 § 2(1)(a) – (d))


5.04.030 Place of business – Requirements.

A. Every business entity doing business from a specific location within the corporate limits of the city must operate from a place of business which is within an enclosed building which meets the requirements of all city building, fire and life safety code and LCMC Title 17 standards and all other city ordinances; except that a business with a valid permit for the temporary display and sale of merchandise outside, which permit has been issued pursuant to LCMC 5.04.150, or with a temporary use permit which has been obtained in accordance with LCMC Title 17 requirements, may temporarily display and sell merchandise outside of the building; provided, that all conditions of the temporary permit are followed.

B. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, a business entity doing business in the city whose specific business location is outside of the city, which must, by the nature of its work or service, provide its work or service at a location designated by its customer, shall not be required to operate from an enclosed building.

C. Farmers’ Markets.

1. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, a business entity or tax-exempt organization doing business in the city as a farmers’ market shall not be required to operate from an enclosed building.

2. For the purposes of this section, the term “farmers’ market” means a public market place, operated not more than two days per week during the growing season, where vendors who have grown, gathered, raised, processed, or caught fresh or processed foods and nursery stock from any county in the state of Oregon sell them directly to the public.

3. A farmers’ market may include vendors of art and handicrafts made in Oregon, and from no further than 100 miles from the corporate limits of Lincoln City, but at least half of the vendors in the market must be vendors principally selling fresh or processed foods and nursery stock. The required 50:50 mix of food/nursery stock vendors and crafters shall be calculated over the term of the market season. Market membership records shall be available for inspection by the city upon request.

4. No reselling of any kind is permitted in a farmers’ market, nor may any used or secondhand items be sold in a farmers’ market.

5. The growing season is considered to run from May 1st to November 30th.

6. A farmers’ market is considered to be a business entity of the type that rents out booths or tables for the purposes of the determination of the number of employees.

7. Farmers’ market vendors are responsible for obtaining all licenses and/or permits required by the Lincoln County public health department and the state of Oregon. Copies of all licenses/permits must be available for inspection at all times when the farmers’ market is operating.

D. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, a business entity doing business in the city as a licensed street vendor in an approved location under Chapter 5.28 LCMC shall not be required to operate from an enclosed building.

E. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, a business entity doing business in the city as a licensed food truck located on private property in an approved zoning district pursuant to LCMC Title 17 shall not be required to operate from an enclosed building.

F. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, a business entity doing business in the city as an approved parks concession vendor pursuant to permit issued under Chapter 12.16 LCMC shall not be required to operate from an enclosed building.

G. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, a business entity doing business in the city as an approved special event vendor pursuant to permit issued under Chapter 5.16 LCMC shall not be required to operate from an enclosed building. (Ord. 2019-19 § 1; Ord. 2014-18 § 1; Ord. 2006-05 § 2; Ord. 2005-11 § 2; Ord. 91-17 § 2; Ord. 87-17 § 1; Ord. 82-4 § 13; Ord. 77-10 §§ 2(2), 5(5) – (6))


5.04.040 Permit – Required.

A. Business Occupation Tax Permits Required. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any business entity to conduct, engage in, carry on or practice any trade, profession, occupation or pursuit for gain within the city without first securing an occupation tax permit from the city manager or designate and paying the occupation tax therefor as prescribed in this chapter, except those exempted therefrom in LCMC 5.04.020(B) and (C). A tax-exempt organization shall secure an occupation tax permit, but shall be exempt from payment of the occupation tax.

B. Temporary or Seasonal Permits for the Display of Merchandise Out of Doors Required. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any business entity or tax-exempt organization to display and sell merchandise outside of a building without a valid temporary or seasonal permit for the temporary display of merchandise outside, except street vendors licensed pursuant to Chapter 5.28 LCMC. (Ord. 2001-11 § 2; Ord. 94-04 § 1; Ord. 77-10 § 4(1))


5.04.050 Permit – Term/quarterly renewal.

A. Any permit issued under this chapter shall be for the year commencing upon issuance and continuing for one year from the assigned quarterly renewal date.

B. The finance director will assign each new and existing permit to one of four quarterly renewal dates. The one-year period commencing on the quarterly renewal date is the permit year for corresponding occupation or business. No permit shall be issued for less than one year. For the first year, each permit tax shall be prorated to the assigned renewal date.

C. The city hereby establishes four quarterly renewal dates, as follows:

1. First quarter: January 1st;

2. Second quarter: April 1st;

3. Third quarter: July 1st;

4. Fourth quarter: October 1st. (Ord. 2017-14 § 1; Ord. 77-10 § 4(2))


5.04.060 Permit – Application.

A. Each and every business entity who seeks to do business in the city shall complete an application for an occupation tax permit on a form prepared by the city.

B. There shall be application fee(s) established by council resolution for all new applications and renewals from business entities applying for new or renewed occupation tax permits. Should the application for an occupation tax permit be denied by the city, the fee will not be refunded and will be used to offset the cost of processing the application.

C. A completed permit renewal application and renewal fee shall be due no earlier than 60 days before the assigned quarterly renewal date. The business entity is solely responsible for obtaining and maintaining a valid occupation tax permit. The finance director or designate shall send applications for renewal approximately one month prior to the permit expiration date; and if permit holder is still in business, it shall timely complete the renewal and return with the proper tax and fees due.



D. Any business entity that owes the city any permit tax or application fee, and is delinquent with regards to such moneys, shall not be issued a current occupation tax permit. (Ord. 2017-14 § 2; Ord. 2001-11 § 2; Ord. 91-17 §§ 3, 4; Ord. 77-10 § 5(1) – (4))


5.04.070 Occupation tax – Required – Amount.

All business entities doing business in the city, except those excluded pursuant to LCMC 5.04.020, shall pay the following annual occupation tax:

A. A flat tax rate of $100.00, or such greater amount as established by council resolution for business entities having three workers or less (workers include employees, owners, partners and corporation officers); and

B. An additional tax of $10.00 or such greater amount as established by council resolution for each additional person or employee over three. (Ord. 2017-14 § 3; Ord. 2001-11 § 2; Ord. 91-17 § 5; Ord. 84-4 § 3; Ord. 77-10 § 4(3))


5.04.080 Occupation tax – When due.

The annual occupation tax shall be paid during the 30-day period prior to expiration. The business entity shall procure a permit and pay the tax before commencing business. (Ord. 2017-14 § 4; Ord. 77-10 § 4(4))


5.04.090 Occupation tax – Late payment.

A. In case of late payment of the tax, as provided for in this section, there will be an additional charge for such delinquencies as follows:

1. Month one: five percent of occupation tax;

2. Month two: 10 percent of occupation tax in addition to the five percent penalty imposed in subsection (A)(l) of this section;

3. Month three: The late payment charge will be 15 percent in addition to the five percent and 10 percent penalty imposed in subsections (A)(l) and (2) of this section.

B. In addition to the late payment charge, which is merely a penalty for late payment, any business entity, sole proprietor, partner, executive director or officer of any business entity that is doing business in the city without obtaining an occupation tax permit, or refuses to pay such tax and late charges after 90 days from the renewal date, after it is due, shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to the penalty provisions of LCMC 5.04.160. Each day’s operation of such business shall be considered a separate violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-14 § 5; Ord. 91-17 § 6; Ord. 84-4 § 4; Ord. 77-10 § 4(4)(b) – (c))


5.04.100 Occupation tax – Determination of number of employees.

A. The occupation tax imposed by this chapter is a tax on the number of persons employed by any one business entity, no matter how many businesses, business locations or types of businesses are carried on by the one business entity. Only one occupation tax permit is required for each business entity defined in this chapter. However, each business entity must pay a tax based upon the total number of persons employed by it, no matter where those persons are employed, within the city. If the business has multiple business entities or DBAs the business shall pay a processing and printing fee for each additional permit required. The processing and printing fee cost shall be set by resolution of the city council.

B. In arriving at the number of persons carrying on a business, profession, trade, occupation or pursuit for gain, there shall be considered the proprietors or partners thereof and all persons employed in such by said proprietors or partners. The number of persons employed and to be considered for the purposes of the annual occupation tax shall be the monthly average number of persons employed during the prior calendar year. If such is carried on by a corporation, all officers and employees of such corporation who devote the principal part of their time to such business, profession, occupation, trade or pursuit shall be considered. Any business entity doing business in the city, but whose principal place of business is outside the city, shall pay a tax only on those persons employed by it within the city.

C. Where a business entity is of a type that utilizes sales persons or service providers that are associated with the business but not necessarily employees, which business requires the possession and display of a license, an occupation tax of $10.00 (or such greater amount as set by resolution of the city council) per license displayed for each license belonging to an individual who is not an employee shall be imposed in addition to the taxes calculated pursuant to LCMC 5.04.070.

D. Where a business entity is of the type that rents out booths or tables, each such booth or table rented shall be deemed to be the equivalent of two additional employees and each such entity shall pay an annual fee at two times the employee rate per booth or table, in addition to the taxes calculated pursuant to LCMC 5.04.070.

E. In determining the monthly average number of persons employed by a business entity, for purposes of tax calculation, every applicant for a new permit, or for a renewal, must submit, upon request of the finance director, a copy of its State of Oregon Accident Insurance Fund (S.A.I.F.) reports or private insurance carrier reports, for purposes of workers’ compensation, for the prior calendar year. A new business shall declare the number of persons to be actively engaged or employed by the business.

F. The applicant shall allow the city manager or designate to, at any reasonable time and place, inspect the building, premises, books, papers and accounting records of the business entity to determine the number of persons employed and actively engaged in the business conducted by the business entity. (Ord. 2017-14 § 6; Ord. 2001-11 § 2; Ord. 91-17 § 7; Ord. 77-10 § 4(6))


5.04.110 Permit – Issuance.

The city manager or his designate shall issue an occupation tax permit when a proper application has been made and payment of the required tax has been received. Every business entity shall keep and retain such permit and shall post the same in some conspicuous place at the principal place of business in the city, and shall exhibit the same to the city manager or his designate upon demand. (Ord. 2001-11 § 2; Ord. 77-10 § 4(7))


5.04.120 Permit – Transferability.

No transfer or assignment of any permit issued under this chapter shall be valid or permitted, except that whenever any business is sold or transferred in whole for which a permit has been paid, the purchaser thereof shall not be required to obtain another permit for the balance of the calendar year, but will be required to pay an additional tax if the business entity will employ more persons than the prior business entity did in the same business. Nothing contained in this section shall be taken or construed as vesting any right in any permit as a contract obligation on the part of the city, and any tax may be increased or decreased by the city in any and all instances at any time by the city. (Ord. 77-10 § 4(5))


5.04.130 Permit – Revocation.

Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the city after a hearing thereon before the city council and good cause having been shown. Good cause shall have been shown when it appears that the permit holder has violated any provision of this chapter and failed to comply with an order of the municipal court. Good cause shall not, however, be restricted as defined in this section. (Ord. 77-10 § 7)


5.04.140 Liquor licenses.

Any business entity required to have the city’s approval as a condition of its liquor license by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission shall pay a fee with its application in an amount to be set by resolution of the city council. This application fee is a charge to cover the processing of the application and is in addition to the occupation tax required in this chapter. Any business entity required to have a liquor license shall also be subject to the city occupation tax and be required to obtain such a permit. (Ord. 2001-11 § 2; Ord. 88-10 § 1; Ord. 77-10 § 6)


5.04.150 Permit for temporary display of merchandise outside.

A. Temporary Permits.

1. A permit may be issued to a business entity with an existing valid business occupation tax permit or to a tax-exempt organization for the temporary display and sale of merchandise outside to allow the limited display of merchandise which is temporary and does not conflict with the zoning district regulations where such activity is located.

2. Any such temporary permit shall clearly set forth the conditions under which the letter of permit is granted and shall clearly indicate the time period for which the permit is issued. No such temporary permit may be issued for a period in excess of 72 hours and such temporary permit is not transferable to any other business entity.

3. The application fee for such a temporary permit shall be $25.00. Tax-exempt organizations shall be exempt from payment of this fee.

B. Seasonal Permits.

1. A permit may be issued to a business entity or tax-exempt organization for the temporary display and sale of merchandise outside to allow the limited display of merchandise which is seasonal in nature and does not conflict with the zoning district regulations where such activity is located.

2. Seasonal permits shall clearly set forth the conditions under which the letter of permit is granted and shall clearly indicate the time period for which the permit is issued. Such permits can be issued during two seasonal periods of the year. A summer seasonal permit can be issued for a period of time not to exceed 14 days prior to July 5th of each year. If the summer seasonal permit is requested in order to sell fireworks, the applicant shall provide proof to the city that they have received a permit from the State Fire Marshal for sale of fireworks prior to issuance of a summer seasonal permit by the city. If the applicant fails to meet the conditions of the permit issued by the State Fire Marshal, the seasonal permit issued by the city will be summarily revoked. A winter seasonal permit may be issued for a period of time not to exceed six weeks prior to December 26th of any year. Such seasonal permit is not transferable to any other business entity or tax-exempt organization.



3. The application fee for such a seasonal permit shall be $25.00. Tax-exempt organizations shall be exempt from payment of this fee.

C. Temporary structures, activities or uses may be permitted as necessary to provide for storage and use of supplies and equipment, display of merchandise or to provide for temporary sales offices for uses permitted in the zoning district.

D. Reasonable conditions may be imposed by the city manager, or designate, in connection with approval of the permit for temporary display and sale of merchandise to minimize potential impact of the proposed use to other uses in the vicinity. No temporary or seasonal permits will be issued for display and sale of merchandise on publicly owned property, except for property used by a business entity lessee of publicly owned property in accord with the lease terms, or public right-of-way.

E. No more than two temporary or seasonal permits may be issued to a single business entity within any 12-consecutive-month period of time.

F. Application for a temporary or seasonal permit to display merchandise outside must be made at least five days before the effective date of the permit. (Ord. 2001-11 § 2; Ord. 94-04 § 2; Ord. 91-17 § 8; Ord. 84-4 § 2; Ord. 77-10 § 2(1)(d))


5.04.160 Violations – Penalties – Alternative remedies.

A. Violations.

1. Each day that any person conducts any business in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense.

2. Any violation of this chapter is the responsibility not only of the business entity, but also of the partners, executive director, officers and manager.

3. If a business entity is doing business in the city and this chapter is being violated and the business principals are not located in the city, the person doing business shall be responsible for any chapter violations as well as the business entity itself.

B. Penalties. In addition to the monetary late payment charges imposed pursuant to LCMC 5.04.090, any person or business entity that violates any of the provisions of this chapter may be punished under the provisions of the city’s violation ordinance (Chapter 1.16 LCMC). Any violation of this chapter shall be classified as a Class B violation. (Ord. 2015-10 § 5; Ord. 91-17 § 9; Ord. 88-10 § 2; Ord. 77-10 § 8)


Chapter 5.08 BANKRUPTCY, CLOSING-OUT, FIRE AND GARAGE SALES

Sections:

5.08.010    Definitions.

5.08.020    Sale permit – Required.

5.08.030    Sale permit – Application.

5.08.040    Applicant’s pledge as to conduct of sale.

5.08.050    Place of sale – Business address – Bond.

5.08.060    Time and duration of sale – Extensions.

5.08.070    Prerequisite to sale permit issuance.

5.08.080    Type of merchandise.

5.08.090    Business occupation tax permit.

5.08.100    Sale permit – Issuance.

5.08.110    Sale permit – Revocation.

5.08.120    Violations – Penalties – Alternative remedies.


5.08.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall mean:

“Bankruptcy sale” means a sale conducted where actual bankruptcy proceedings have been filed with the federal court, either voluntary or involuntary, and the stock and fixtures of the business are sold through the bankruptcy proceedings.

“Closing-out sale” means a sale conducted in the process of terminating a business activity, for the purpose of or aiding in the disposition of the entire stock or merchandise of such business.

“Fire sale” means a sale conducted for the purpose of disposing of damaged merchandise, whether such damage was the result of fire, water or any of the elements or caused in the course of shipping, handling or manufacturing.

“Garage sale” means a sale conducted by one or more persons, of primarily personal belongings, and which takes place on the residential premises of one of the owners. (Ord. 79-8 § 1(1) – (4))


5.08.020 Sale permit – Required.

Except as to sales under judicial process, it is unlawful for any person to sell, dispose of or offer for sale in the city, by means of or under the title of bankruptcy sales, liquidating, closing-out, removal, quitting business, fire or garage sales or similarly designated title, whether the same is his property or whether he sells or offers the same for sale as agent, actor or employee of another, unless and until the person desiring to hold such sale obtains a permit therefor. (Ord. 79-8 § 1)


5.08.030 Sale permit – Application.

Any person desiring to hold a bankruptcy sale, closing-out sale, fire sale or garage sale, as defined in LCMC 5.08.010, shall file with the city manager or designate, prior to the opening day of such sale, a written application showing the following information:

A. The name or names of the legal owners of the merchandise to be disposed of at such sale;

B. The name or names of those in legal possession of such merchandise;

C. The name or names of those who will actually dispose of such merchandise at such sale. (Ord. 79-8 § 2)


5.08.040 Applicant’s pledge as to conduct of sale.

A. In submitting the application provided for in LCMC 5.08.030, the applicant shall make a statement declaring that the deceptive-advance, reduction method of attracting purchasers will not be resorted to in connection with such sale or the advertising thereof as follows:

1. The applicant, as an inducement to the securing of such permit, does pledge and obligate himself, or the corporation, firm, association or individuals represented by the applicant, to refrain from marking up or quoting or advertising articles of merchandise at a price above the average or ordinary retail market price of such articles, or at the same time, or at any time, marking down or quoting or advertising the price on such articles in comparison with such marked-up, quoted or advertised prices, or with any prices except the customary or usual prices at which such articles are usually sold or offered for sale.

2. An affirmative statement shall be made that such bankruptcy sale, closing-out sale, quitting business, removal or similarly designated sale is to be conducted in good faith as a result of a bankrupt condition of the applicant, or that the applicant is quitting business at the end of such period of sale, or that such applicant is removing his entire stock of merchandise from his present location to a new and different location in the city, or has actually suffered fire loss to such merchandise within 30 days prior to such date.

3. No new stock shall be added except stock purchased or contracted by the original owner, or in transit, and an itemized statement of such stock shall be filed with the city recorder.

B. This section shall not apply to garage sales. (Ord. 79-8 § 3)


5.08.050 Place of sale – Business address – Bond.

A. A statement of the street and number where the sale is to be conducted and of the present, immediately past, and future business addresses of such applicant must be filed with the city manager. The applicant must tender with the application a bond in the sum of $1,000, conditioned upon the observance of this chapter and for the indemnification of any purchaser at such sale applying for loss suffered by reason of misrepresentation.

B. This section shall not apply to garage sales. (Ord. 79-8 § 4)


5.08.060 Time and duration of sale – Extensions.

A. All sales, except garage sales as defined in LCMC 5.08.010, shall be held on successive days, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, and shall not continue for more than 30 days in all from the commencement of such sale. Extension shall be granted if need is shown.

B. Garage sales shall only be allowed twice each calendar year for a maximum of 14 days including Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. (Ord. 79-8 § 5)


5.08.070 Prerequisite to sale permit issuance.

No permit shall be issued for a sale as defined in LCMC 5.08.010 unless it appears that the applicant is in good faith disposing of his stock for the purpose of retiring from business, or unless he is in a voluntary or involuntary bankrupt condition, or unless he is removing his inventoried stock to a new location, or unless he has suffered a fire loss of a substantial amount within 30 days prior to the date of such application, or unless the character of other or similarly designated sales is based upon the foundation of facts or events which his announcement to the public regarding such sales is to put forth as an inducement for patronage, or in case of a garage sale, is a good-faith effort to dispose of personal property which is surplus to the owners thereof. (Ord. 79-8 § 6)


5.08.080 Type of merchandise.

The kind or type of merchandise referred to in this chapter shall be defined as “all articles usually or customarily sold by the retail merchant to the public in the ordinary course of trade.” (Ord. 79-8 § 7)


5.08.090 Business occupation tax permit.

A. Any business entity, as that term is defined in Chapter 5.04 LCMC, that has a current business occupation tax permit, and that applies for a permit under the provisions of this chapter, shall not be required to pay any tax for the issuance of the permit required herein.

B. Any business entity required to have a permit to conduct a sale described in this chapter shall be required to apply for and pay the applicable business occupation tax permit required pursuant to Chapter 5.04 LCMC, if it does not already have said occupation tax permit.

C. All sales described in this chapter, except garage sales, shall be required to conduct the sale within an enclosed building as required under Chapter 5.04 LCMC.

D. There shall be no tax or permit fee charged for garage sales. (Ord. 79-8 § 9)


5.08.100 Sale permit – Issuance.

A. The permit described in this chapter shall be issued to anyone who complies with all applicable laws and regulations as determined by the city manager or designate.

B. However, any applicant owing the city any moneys, and who is delinquent with regard to such moneys, shall not be issued the permit until arrangements have been made with the city to pay such moneys. (Ord. 79-8 § 10)


5.08.110 Sale permit – Revocation.

The city manager shall revoke the permit of any person violating this chapter. (Ord. 79-8 § 8)


5.08.120 Violations – Penalties – Alternative remedies.

A. Violations. Each day that any person conducts any sale in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense.

B. Penalties. Any person or business entity conducting a sale, other than a garage sale, in violation of this chapter, shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than $250.00. Any person conducting a garage sale in violation of this chapter shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than $50.00.

C. Alternative Remedies. The city may, as an alternative to other remedies that are legally available for enforcing this chapter, institute injunctive, abatement or other appropriate proceedings to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove a sale that is operating in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 82-22 § 4; Ord. 79-8 § 11)


Chapter 5.12 BED AND BREAKFAST ACCOMMODATIONS

Sections:

5.12.010    Applicable provisions.


5.12.010 Applicable provisions.

Bed and breakfast accommodations shall be subject to and their owners shall comply with the provisions of the city’s transient room tax ordinance (Chapter 3.04 LCMC); business occupation tax ordinance (Chapter 5.04 LCMC); and water and sewer user ordinance (Chapter 13.12 LCMC). Under Chapter 13.12 LCMC, bed and breakfast accommodation shall be considered in the same category as motels, with each room rented as a separate bed and breakfast accommodation being considered a separate unit for utility user charges. (Ord. 85-10 § 4)


Chapter 5.14 VACATION RENTAL DWELLING LICENSE

Sections:

5.14.010    Purpose.

5.14.020    Definitions.

5.14.030    Revocable annual vacation rental dwelling license required.

5.14.040    Application and fee.

5.14.050    Standards for issuance of license.

5.14.055    License standards.

5.14.060    Criteria for approval of a license and license renewal.

5.14.070    Additional operational requirements.

5.14.080    License renewal.

5.14.090    Appeals of VRD license determinations.

5.14.100    Complaints.

5.14.110    Revocation procedure.

5.14.120    Discontinuance of vacation rental dwelling occupancy.

5.14.130    Violations – Penalties.

*    Editor’s note: Ordinance 2009-11 §§ 2, 3 provide:

    The provisions of Ordinance Nos. 2007-11 and 2008-07 as readopted in Section 1 will continue to apply to all vacation rental dwelling permits issued under those ordinances as of June 21, 2009, until such time as the permits expire under their terms or on the latest possible renewal date, or expire by operation of law under Ordinance Nos. 2007-11 and 2008-07, whichever comes first. 

    A vacation rental permit due to expire December 31, 2009, will be subject to renewal only as a license under the provisions of Ordinance Nos. 2009-02 and 2009-03. 


5.14.010 Purpose.

A vacation rental dwelling license is a limited permission to use property for vacation rental. A license may be suspended, terminated or revoked if the standards of this chapter are not met or the dwelling is sold or otherwise transferred as defined in this chapter. This chapter provides an administrative framework for licensing the annual operation of a vacation rental. (Ord. 2009-03 § 1)


5.14.020 Definitions.

A. “Sale or transfer” means any change of ownership during the lifetime of the license holder, whether or not there is consideration, or after the death of the license holder, except a change in ownership where title is held not as tenants in common but with the right of in survivorship (e.g., survivorship estates recognized in ORS 93.180, such as with a spouse or domestic partner, or transfers on the owner’s death to a trust which benefits only a spouse or domestic partner for the lifetime of the spouse or domestic partner). Exceptions:

1. A license holder may transfer ownership of the real property to a trustee, a limited liability company, a corporation, a partnership, a limited partnership, a limited liability partnership, or other similar entity and not be subject to license revocation so long as the transferor lives and remains the only owner of the entity. Upon the transferor’s death or the sale or transfer of his or her interest in the entity to another person, the license held by the transferor shall terminate.

2. A license holder may transfer ownership of the real property to the license holder and a spouse or domestic partner with the right of survivorship and not be subject to license revocation; provided, that if the property subject to the license is in a residential zone the spouse or domestic partner does not own an interest in another vacation rental dwelling in a residential zone.

B. “Person” means the natural person or legal entity that owns and holds legal and/or equitable title to the property. If the owner is a natural person, or where the natural person has transferred his or her property to a trust of which the natural person is the trustor, that person can have an ownership right, title, or interest in no more than one dwelling unit in a residential zone that has a vacation rental dwelling license. If the owner is a business entity such as a partnership, corporation, limited liability company, limited partnership, limited liability partnership or similar entity, any person who owns an interest in that business entity shall be considered an owner and such a person can have an ownership right, title, or interest in no more than one dwelling unit in a residential zone that is used for vacation rental or has a vacation rental dwelling license.

C. “Vacation rental” has the definition stated in LCMC 17.08.010. (Ord. 2017-13 § 1; Ord. 2016-14 § 2; Ord. 2009-03 § 1)


5.14.030 Revocable annual vacation rental dwelling license required.

The owner of a vacation rental dwelling shall obtain an annual revocable vacation rental dwelling license under this chapter to lawfully advertise, offer, operate, rent, or otherwise make available for occupancy or use a vacation rental dwelling. (Ord. 2009-03 § 1)


5.14.040 Application and fee.

A. Application Required. Prior to engaging in the use of a vacation rental dwelling for any period of time, a person shall apply for a revocable license for a vacation rental dwelling on forms provided by the city, demonstrating the application meets the standards required of this chapter. A person shall submit a completed application along with payment of the applicable fee. A copy of the approval of the planning and community development director of an application for vacation rental dwelling use as provided in LCMC 17.80.050 shall be required to be attached to the license application under this subsection. If a license application does not include all required information, including a copy of the planning and community development director’s approval and the required fee, the application will be considered incomplete and the city will notify the applicant in writing explaining the information required. If the applicant provides the missing required information within 60 days of the date of the notice, the application will be reviewed. If the applicant cannot provide the required information, the applicant may withdraw the application and the city will refund the application fee.

B. License Fee. The fee for application for a vacation rental dwelling license or license renewal shall be in an amount to recover the city’s actual costs of reviewing and issuing the license application or license renewal application, including any required inspections, and shall be established by resolution of the city council. In addition, a vacation rental dwelling licensee shall obtain a business occupation tax permit under LCMC 5.04.040 but is not required to pay an application fee under LCMC 5.04.060 for a business occupation tax permit in addition to the application fee for an annual vacation rental dwelling license. (Ord. 2010-12 § 1; Ord. 2010-11 § 1; Ord. 2009-03 § 1)


5.14.050 Standards for issuance of license.

A revocable vacation rental dwelling license shall be issued for a period of one calendar year or portion thereof and may be renewed annually provided all applicable standards of this chapter are met.

A. The license shall be issued in the name of the property owner and is not transferable. The license shall terminate and be deemed void when the license holder sells or transfers the property approved as a vacation rental dwelling. Except for exempted transfers related to right of survivorship, (LCMC 5.14.020(A)), the death of a license holder terminates the VRD license. If upon the death of the license holder the ownership of the property transfers by operation of law to an executor or heir, then the license, subject to the license renewal process, shall provisionally continue in effect for a period of one year or until the heir or executor transfers the property to another person, whichever occurs first.

B. The city shall approve an application for a vacation rental dwelling license or license renewal if all the following are met:

1. The property proposed to be licensed for vacation rental is located in a commercial zone, or the property is located in a residential zone and the owner does not have an ownership interest in any another property in a residential zone used or approved for use as a vacation rental dwelling.

2. The planning and community development director has determined the property complies with LCMC 17.80.050.

3. The owner has provided information sufficient to verify a qualified person will be available to be contacted about use of the vacation rental during and after business hours.

4. The owner has agreed to comply with all license and operational standards including any conditions such as specific occupancy requirements. (Ord. 2016-14 § 1; Ord. 2009-03 § 1)


5.14.055 License standards.

The city will provide a form for application designed to assist the applicant in providing information adequate to determine whether the standards of this chapter are met. The application shall provide the following information:

A. Owner Information. Owner’s name, permanent residence address, permanent residence telephone number, and vacation home address and telephone number.

B. Local Representative Information. If the owner permanently resides within the Lincoln City urban growth boundary, the owner may be the local representative provided the owner meets all applicable requirements of this chapter. If the owner does not permanently reside within the Lincoln City urban growth boundary, the owner shall provide the name, address, and telephone number of a local representative who can be contacted concerning use of the vacation rental dwelling in the event the owner is not available. The telephone number of the local representative shall be operative during regular business hours, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., and after business hours and on weekends. The local representative shall be a permanent resident within the Lincoln City urban growth boundary, or an individual staff of a business that manages rental of real property with a physical office open to the public within the Lincoln City urban growth boundary and staffed with at least one person.

C. The applicant shall attach a copy of the determination of the planning and community development director that the proposed vacation rental dwelling complies with LCMC 17.80.050.

D. The applicant shall certify that no person identified as an owner on the application also owns other property in a residential zone in the city that is used as a vacation rental dwelling or is approved by the city for vacation rental dwelling use.

E. The applicant shall certify the dwelling complies with all operational standards of this chapter, including smoke alarm and smoke detector requirements, and that all information provided in the application is true. Providing false information in the application is a violation of this chapter and may be enforced as a Class B violation. A reasonable belief the application information is false is also a basis to revoke a license.

F. The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with the applicable approval criteria of LCMC 5.14.060, including health and safety standards, prior to the initial issuance of a vacation rental license or renewal of a license. (Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 2014-07 § 1; Ord. 2009-03 § 1. Formerly 5.14.060)


5.14.060 Criteria for approval of a license and license renewal.

A. The applicant has the burden to submit competent substantial evidence to the city to demonstrate compliance with each and every applicable criterion for approval or renewal of the license. The approval criteria also operate as continuing code compliance obligations of the owner, also referred to as operational standards. City staff is responsible for review of the evidence for compliance with the criteria. Staff may verify evidence by independent investigation and the applicant shall cooperate fully in any such investigation.

B. To receive approval, an applicant for a vacation rental dwelling license or license renewal shall demonstrate with competent substantial evidence that all approval criteria listed below have been satisfied:

1. Transient Room Tax Compliance.

a. The owner shall demonstrate compliance with Chapter 3.04 LCMC, Transient Room Tax.

b. In the case of a renewal, if the owner is currently subject to a notice of violation, or citation for failure to comply with any applicable requirements of Chapter 3.04 LCMC (Transient Room Tax), including but not limited to failure to report, remit payment or failure to submit to an audit, all VRD operations (including operations during the grace period in the new calendar year) shall be suspended, even if the owner has timely submitted an application for renewal. If the owner has been convicted of any violation of Chapter 3.04 LCMC within the last year, the city shall deny the VRD renewal application.

2. Land Use Compliance. [Reserved]

3. Ownership Limitation for Residential VRDs, Exception for Roads End.

a. [Reserved]

b. Lawfully established VRDs in Roads End (as defined in Ordinance 2012-10) existing and lawfully operating as of July 1, 2013, shall not be counted as more than one VRD ownership when applying the VRD ownership limitation of this chapter.

4. Health and Safety.

a. Maximum Overnight Occupancy. The maximum overnight occupancy of a vacation rental dwelling shall be as follows:

i. In no event shall the occupancy of a vacation rental dwelling (VRD) exceed the limits of the 1997 Uniform Housing Code; and

ii. In no event shall a VRD exceed “lodging house” limitations of the Oregon Residential Specialty Code. These limitations include:

(A) In no event shall use and occupancy of more than five guest rooms be permitted in a VRD. For purposes of this code, a guest room is a bedroom or any other space within the dwelling designed and intended to be used for sleeping; and

(B) In no event shall overnight occupancy of a VRD structure exceed 16 persons; and

iii. Occupancy shall not exceed the limitations identified herein except in a vacation rental dwelling constructed pursuant to (or retrofitted for compliance with) the current Oregon Structural Specialty Code and only in commercial zoning districts or such other districts as council may authorize by ordinance. For the purposes of this provision, commercial zoning districts are the general commercial (GC) zone, the recreation commercial (RC) zone, the Taft Village Core (TVC) zone, the Nelscott Business District (NBD) zone, the Nelscott Beachside Mixed Use (NBMU) zone, the Oceanlake Plan District (OPD) zone, and the Vacation Rental (VR) zone; and

iv. In no event shall the occupancy exceed three times the number of bedrooms in the VRD, plus one additional occupant, not to exceed a total of 16 occupants, except as allowed in subsection (B)(4)(a)(iii) of this section; and

v. The license shall state clearly the numeric occupancy limit for the dwelling, including specifically the number of bedrooms.

b. Structural Safety.

i. Bedroom Egress Windows and Doors.

(A) Bedrooms shall have an egress window or exterior door that is operable, with a minimum opening size of 5.7 square feet, and such window or door shall be not more than 44 inches above the finished floor;

(B) The recognized Oregon Building Code exception to reduce the 5.7-square-foot opening to a five-square-foot opening (for the ground floor only) is authorized;

(C) The vacation rental occupancy of the dwelling shall be reduced to conform to the available number of bedrooms with qualifying egress windows or doors and such limitations shall be clearly posted in the VRD;

(D) For construction predating July 1, 1978, the city manager or designee may reduce the minimum opening size or vary the height limit in subsection (B)(4)(b)(i)(A) of this section as follows:

(1) The opening size must be no smaller than 20 inches in width, and no smaller than 22 inches in height. The total minimum opening size can be no less than four square feet.

(2) If the window sill height exceeds 44 inches but is 52 inches or less above the finished floor, the noncompliance may be mitigated with the permanent installation of a step below the window. The step shall be no more than eight inches high and no less than nine inches deep and shall extend the full width of the window. As an alternative to the step, a ladder is permitted. Such ladder shall be permanently affixed, be at least 12 inches in width, and have rungs at least three inches from the wall. Rungs are not to be separated by more than 18 inches on center, vertically.

The above reductions and alterations are permitted only upon submittal of the owner’s executed hold harmless agreement with the city concerning the noncompliant construction; and

ii. Staircases with four or more risers and lofts, platforms, decks, or porches that are more than 30 inches above the floor below (if inside the dwelling) or above the finished grade (if outside the dwelling) shall have hand and/or guard railings. Interior and exterior hand railings shall be between 30 to 38 inches in height as measured from the toe of the stair. Guard rails shall be a minimum of 34 inches in height for stairs and at least 36 inches in height for flat surfaces. All hand and guard rails shall be secure, and guard rails shall have openings with a maximum width of nine inches (or the required width at the time the railings were installed if the required width was less than nine inches) between guard rails or on open stairs. The provisions of this subsection do not apply to landscape “stair” features except when such stairs provide direct access to the structure or accessory structure. The applicant has the option to close or improve a noncompliant feature, provided the feature does not provide needed access; and

iii. All electrical plug-ins and light switches shall have face plates; and

iv. Electric breaker boxes shall be unobstructed and shall have all circuits labeled, and all empty breaker spaces plugged; and

v. All exterior, kitchen, utility sink, and bathroom plugs shall have GFCI (ground fault circuit interrupter) protected plug receptacles; and

vi. All rooms used for sleeping and all hallways between a potential fire source and sleeping areas shall have functioning smoke detectors; and

vii. Functioning carbon monoxide alarms shall be installed if the unit (A) contains a heater, fireplace, appliance or cooking source that uses coal, kerosene, petroleum products, wood or other fuels that emit carbon monoxide as a by-product of combustion; or (B) includes an attached garage with an opening that connects directly with a living space. Such alarms shall be in compliance with State Fire Marshal rules and any applicable requirements of the State Building Code. A written notice containing instructions for testing the alarm shall be available at the premises; and

viii. Units shall have no obvious tripping hazards; and

ix. Vacation rental dwellings shall meet the building and specialty codes in effect at the time of their construction, and any alterations and repairs shall meet the building and specialty codes in effect at the time of their construction; and

x. Vacation rental dwellings shall have clearly visible house numbers and such numbers shall be illuminated or reflective to facilitate emergency response; and

xi. Vacation rental dwellings shall have posted the appropriate (north/south) DOGAMI Tsunami Evacuation Map. The map shall be a minimum size of 11 inches by 17 inches; and

xii. As regards any of the standards in subsections (B)(4)(b)(i), (ii) and (ix) of this section, a renewal application may satisfy the requirement to certify compliance with the above standards if the owner has agreed in writing to fully comply within a reasonable period of time (not to exceed 180 days) as set forth in a corrective order of the building official or planning director, as applicable.

c. Mandatory Postings. The vacation rental dwelling license issued by the city shall be affixed to a wall within the interior of the dwelling adjacent to the front door. At a minimum, the license will contain the following information:

i. A number or other identifying mark unique to the vacation rental dwelling license which indicates the license is issued by the city of Lincoln City, with the date of expiration;

ii. The name of the owner or local representative and a telephone number where the owner or local representative may be contacted at all times;

iii. The telephone number and website address of the city of Lincoln City and the Lincoln City police department;

iv. The number of approved parking spaces outside the garage and the maximum number of vehicles permitted on the property;

v. The maximum occupancy permitted for the vacation rental dwelling;

vi. Any prohibited occupancy, such as sleeping rooms not available for use due to parking or egress limitations;

vii. The solid waste collection day and requirement to place all garbage in approved containers;

viii. Required Lincoln City quiet hours pursuant to the noise ordinance (Chapter 9.10 LCMC) between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; and

ix. Any required information and conditions specific to the license.

d. Vector Control.

i. Vector control measures shall be employed to prevent vector infestations in vacation rental dwellings.

ii. Insect and rodent control measures to safeguard public health and to prevent nuisance to the public shall be applied. Developed areas, buildings, and structures shall be maintained free of accumulation of debris.

e. Spas and Swimming Pools. Any spa or swimming pool located at or operated in connection with a vacation rental dwelling must comply with the following requirements:

i. “Spa” means any pool designed primarily to direct water or air-enriched water under pressure onto the bather’s body with the intent of producing a relaxing or therapeutic effect. “Swimming pool” means an artificial structure and its appurtenances, which contains water more than two feet deep which is expressly designated or which is used with the knowledge and consent of the owner or operator for swimming or recreational bathing.

ii. Water quality shall be maintained within the following limits:

	Parameter	Minimum	Ideal	Maximum

	Free chlorine	1.5 ppm	3.0 ppm	5.0 ppm

	Combined chlorine	0	0	0.5 ppm

	Bromine	3.0 ppm	3.0 – 5.0 ppm	8.0 ppm

	Total copper	0	0	1.0 ppm

	Total silver	0	0	0.05 ppm

	pH	7.2	7.4 – 7.6	7.6

	Total alkalinity as CaCO3	80 ppm	90 – 110 ppm	180 ppm

	Cyanuric acid	0	0	150

	Calcium hardness	150	200	400+

	Water temperature	 	102	104

iii. Water quality shall be tested and the results logged on an appropriate form, not more than 24 hours before each change of occupants at the vacation rental dwelling. The water quality test results log must be made available for inspection by city staff upon request.

iv. Spa water shall be oxidized or superchlorinated as needed when combined chlorine exceeds spa water quality parameters as defined in this subsection.

5. No Pending Actions or Violations. The owner of a vacation rental dwelling shall not be the subject of a pending criminal action, or have received notice of violation or civil citation regarding compliance of the subject VRD property with any provision of the Lincoln City Municipal Code. A voluntary assurance of compliance, negotiated compliance agreement, or deferred sentence agreement, if approved by the court, will satisfy the requirement that there be no pending actions or violations.

6. Responsible Parties and Mandatory Record Keeping.

a. The owner and representative contact information must be provided to the city and kept updated:

i. Applicant and Owner Information. Owner’s name, and applicant’s name, if different, permanent residence address, permanent residence telephone number, and vacation home address and telephone number. At a minimum, the application must include the names, mailing addresses, and telephone numbers of all persons holding an ownership interest in the property, or holding an ownership interest in the entity that owns the property.

ii. Local Representative Information. The owner shall provide the name, address, and telephone number of a local representative who has authority to address questions, concerns and complaints about use of the vacation rental dwelling in a timely manner and in the event the owner is not available. The telephone number of the local representative shall be operative at all times including nights and weekends. The local representative shall be an individual whose permanent residence is within or no more than 10 miles of the Lincoln City urban growth boundary, or an individual staff of a business that manages rental of real property with a physical office open to the public within the Lincoln City urban growth boundary and staffed with at least one person. If permanently residing within the Lincoln City urban growth boundary, or within 10 miles of the Lincoln City urban growth boundary, the owner may be the local representative provided the owner meets all applicable requirements of this chapter.

iii. Change in Contact Information. Except when to do so is beyond the owner’s control, the owner shall revise the license information for the owner or local representative a minimum of 14 days prior to the date the change takes effect and pays any applicable fee.

iv. Posting of Contact Information. Owners shall post a small placard or sign on the front facing side of the building advising neighbors and tenants of the name and telephone number of the VRD local representative; alarm signs should be located next to this sign.

b. Mandatory Occupancy Records. [Reserved]

7. Required Certifications. To be approved or renewed:

a. An owner (all owners in the event of shared ownership) of a vacation rental dwelling shall submit the following certifications under penalty of perjury and false swearing:

i. That the VRD application submittal information is true and correct; and

ii. That except for noted exceptions to the ownership limitation authorized by law, no person identified as an owner on the application for a VRD in a residential zone also owns other property in a residential zone in the city that is used as a vacation rental dwelling or is approved by the city for vacation rental dwelling use; and

iii. That the dwelling complies with all continuing operational requirements and standards of this chapter, including but not limited to all health and safety standards; and

iv. That the owner has liability insurance which expressly covers the vacation rental operations on the subject property in the amount of at least $500,000, combined single limit; and

v. That the owner has subscribed to solid waste collection service for the subject property; and

vi. That the property currently complies with the parking and landscaping standards contained in or by reference incorporated into this chapter; and

vii. That all improvements on the subject property are in compliance with applicable building codes in effect at the time the improvements were constructed or that such noncompliances are subject to a corrective order approved by the building official; and

viii. That there are no pending city of Lincoln City enforcement actions concerning the subject property or that such violations are subject to a court approved resolution; and

ix. [Reserved]; and

x. [Reserved]; and

xi. That the owner is solely responsible for obtaining all approvals, permits, licenses or authorizations from responsible federal, state, county, city or other local authorities necessary to use the property and facilities thereon in the manner contemplated and that the owner has obtained all such required approvals or authorizations; further, the owner shall acknowledge that any license or permit granted by the city shall not in any way be interpreted as a waiver or modification of any other federal, state, or local requirements or authorize any violation of federal, state or local law; and

xii. That the owner or property complies with any additional certifications identified on the application form approved by the city council by resolution.

b. Applicants are advised that providing false information under oath or affirmation may constitute the crime of false swearing (ORS 162.075) or perjury (ORS 162.065); providing unsworn false information in the application to the city may constitute the crime of unsworn falsification (ORS 162.085). (Ord. 2019-08 § 1; Ord. 2016-26 § 1; Ord. 2016-14 §§ 3 – 5; Ord. 2015-04 § 1; Ord. 2014-30 § 1; Ord. 2014-07 § 2)


5.14.070 Additional operational requirements.

A. Maintenance of Guest Register. The owner shall be responsible for maintaining a guest register for each tenancy of the vacation rental with a record of all vacation rental dwelling occupancy days. The register shall include the name, address, and telephone number of the tenants and the dates of the rental period. The register shall be available for city inspection upon request. If copies of a register are required, the register information shall be treated as confidential to the extent allowed or required by law.

B. Response to Complaints.

1. In addition to the owner, the local representative shall be authorized to respond to tenant and neighborhood questions, concerns, or complaints, and shall respond to any complaints in a timely manner. The owner or local representative is the contact person for questions or complaints regarding the occupancy of the vacation rental dwelling. The owner or local representative shall be available to respond to complaints in a timely manner as may be considered reasonable depending on the circumstances, to ensure use of the vacation rental dwelling complies with the standards for vacation rental dwelling occupancy, city ordinances, and state law.

2. Log of Complaints. The owner or local representative shall maintain a contemporaneous written record of the date, time, and nature of any complaint received and the action taken in response to the complaint. This record shall be made available for city inspection upon request and shall be provided with an application to renew a license.

C. Change in Contact Information. The owner shall revise the license information for the owner or local representative at any time provided the owner submits the revised information no later than 14 days prior to the date the change takes effect and pays any applicable fee. The purpose of such requirement is to maintain current information and to provide the revised information to surrounding property owners, as required in subsection (D) of this section.

D. Notice of Contact Information. The city will send notice to owners of property within 250 feet of the property and including the name, address, and telephone number of the local representative as provided in a license, license renewal, or change in contact information, so that property owners may contact the local representative to report problems associated with the occupancy or use of the vacation rental dwelling. The owner shall be responsible for paying any fee for the costs of mailing such notice, as established by resolution of the city council.

E. Inspection Requirements.

1. At the time of application for a new or renewed vacation rental dwelling license, the dwelling unit shall be subject to inspection by the planning and community development department or building inspector for the purpose of verifying the vacation rental dwelling complies with this subsection including an approved and properly functioning smoke alarm or smoke detector is installed on each floor, in each guest room in accordance with ORS 479.255, and in each common hallway, and at least one smoke detector or smoke alarm for hearing-impaired persons and one door knock device is installed as applicable or required by ORS 479.257.

2. If the vacation rental dwelling unit does not meet the requirements of subsection (E)(1) of this section at the time of inspection, the owner shall request reinspection within 30 days. The city shall not take any action on the application for license until the inspection requirement is satisfied.

3. The city may adopt by resolution a fee to provide for a request for reinspection under this subsection. As necessary and required to accommodate city resources including available budget and personnel, the city may provide by resolution a schedule of reinspection for license renewals so that a vacation rental dwelling conducted under the same and continuing ownership is periodically reinspected for conformance with license standards including smoke alarm and smoke detector requirements.

4. The requirement to use a vacation rental dwelling in conformance with smoke detector or smoke alarm requirements of this subsection is a condition of approval of the vacation rental dwelling license and an additional operational standard. Failure to meet this standard is a violation enforceable as a Class B violation.

5. In lieu of requiring inspection and a program of reinspection for smoke detectors or smoke alarms under subsection (E)(1) of this section, the city may require an applicant to certify the dwelling meets the required standards for smoke alarms or smoke detectors as established in that subsection.

F. License Display. The vacation rental dwelling license issued by the city shall be affixed to a wall within the interior of the dwelling adjacent to the front door. At a minimum, the license will contain the following information:

1. A number or other identifying mark unique to the vacation rental dwelling license and which indicates the license is issued by the city of Lincoln City, with the date of expiration;

2. The name of the owner or local representative and a telephone number where the owner or local representative may be contacted at all times;

3. The telephone number and web site address of the city of Lincoln City and the Lincoln City police department;

4. The maximum number of vehicles allowed parked on the property;

5. The solid waste collection day;

6. Required Lincoln City quiet hours; and

7. Any other information required to be included in the displayed license including any conditions specific to the license.

G. The owner shall comply with all standards of license issuance.

H. Violations. Failing to meet any of the ongoing operational requirements of this chapter including LCMC 5.14.055(A), (B), (E) and (F) and subsections (A), (B), (C), (F), and (G) of this section, including failing to display the license as required, is a violation of this chapter that may be enforced as a Class B violation, and is declared a nuisance that may be enjoined as allowed by law. The planning and community development director or his designee is authorized to issue a notice of violation of this chapter with or without an order to immediately cease and desist all use as a vacation rental. Conviction of a violation of this chapter may be grounds to revoke a license or not renew a license as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 2009-03 § 1)


5.14.080 License renewal.

A. If a revocable vacation rental dwelling license is not renewed as required in this section, the use shall be presumptively deemed discontinued and the license shall expire as provided in this subsection.

B. Renewal Application Process. A person engaging in rental of a vacation rental dwelling pursuant to an approved license shall apply to renew the vacation rental dwelling license on forms provided by the city, as follows:

1. The city hereby establishes four quarterly renewal dates, as follows:

a. First quarter: January 1st;

b. Second quarter: April 1st;

c. Third quarter: July 1st;

d. Fourth quarter: October 1st.

2. The planning and community development director will assign each new license and existing license to one of the four quarterly renewal dates. The one-year period commencing on the quarterly renewal date is the license year for corresponding vacation rental dwelling. For the first year of each new or renewed license under this section, the license fee shall also be prorated to the assigned quarterly renewal date.

3. Renewal Period. A completed license renewal application and renewal fee, as established by city resolution, are due no earlier than 30 days before the assigned quarterly renewal date and no later than 30 days after the assigned quarterly renewal date. The city may impose a late fee for renewal applications submitted beyond the 60-day renewal period, as established by resolution.

4. Late Applications – Expiration. If the city has not received a completed license renewal application and renewal fee accompanied by the applicable fee by 30 days after the assigned quarterly renewal date, the vacation rental dwelling license is subject to expiration as of the assigned quarterly renewal date. The expiration will take effect 10 days after the date the city mails notice to the owner, unless the owner submits a renewal application with required fees including any late fees within the 10-day notice period. After a license expires and is not renewed, the property may not be lawfully used as a vacation rental dwelling unless a new vacation rental license is obtained by the owner.

C. Notice. The city shall send notice of expiration under subsection (B)(4) of this section to the owner of any property for which a timely renewal application has not been received. An application will nevertheless be considered timely submitted if the city receives a completed renewal application from the owner, accompanied by the required fees, within the 10-day late period.

D. License Expiration. If the owner does not submit a renewal application as required under subsection (B) of this section, the license in effect for the prior year shall expire effective as of the assigned quarterly renewal date without further action or notice by the city.

E. Renewal Standards. The city will review an application for license renewal and issue a renewal of the vacation rental dwelling license provided the following standards are met:

1. The licensee has provided all required application information within the time required, and all requirements of this chapter are met;

2. The vacation rental dwelling use of the property has been previously approved under LCMC 17.80.050 and the approval remains valid;

3. The owner has fully complied with Chapter 3.04 LCMC (Transient Room Tax) including submitting the required report for the last quarter of the license year;

4. Staff has reviewed the licensee’s complaint log required by LCMC 5.14.070(B)(2) to determine the nature of complaints, if any, and whether complaints were timely addressed by the owner or local representative. Where city records show more than one complaint about the vacation rental dwelling occupancy was received during the license year, including any complaints that remain unresolved, the applicant shall bear the burden of proof of demonstrating complaints have been satisfactorily resolved or the complaints are not reasonably applicable to the occupancy of the vacation rental dwelling;

5. The license subject to renewal is current, valid, and has not been suspended or revoked;

6. The property has been inspected for compliance with LCMC 5.14.070 within the last three years, either by approval of occupancy by the city building inspector in the final completion of a building permit or by compliance notice of the responsible city staff, or otherwise complies with LCMC 5.14.070(E);

7. The property has generated at least $500.00 from rental occupancy during the previous year as demonstrated by transient room tax reports filed pursuant to LCMC 3.04.070. The person responsible for receiving the transient room tax reports and verifying the amount of tax due will determine whether this standard is met by providing a summary determination to the department responsible for processing the renewal application. Where a cap is imposed, a new or renewal VRD license shall not be issued if the VRD has not obtained or maintained a VRD license in the preceding six-month period and the VRD has been rented at least 30 days in that license year. An accessory license may be issued to a VRD that does not meet the 30 days or more standard. Information provided by the owner under Chapter 3.04 LCMC shall be kept confidential to the extent allowed or required by law; and

8. The property continues to meet the standards for parking, solid waste, landscaping, irrigation and signs, as provided in LCMC 17.80.050(B).

F. If the application does not meet all requirements of subsection (E) of this section, the city will not renew the license and the property shall not be used as a vacation dwelling.

G. Notice. Notice of decision on a renewal application shall be mailed as provided in LCMC 5.14.070(D).

H. A decision on a license renewal may be appealed as provided in LCMC 5.14.090. (Ord. 2017-19 § 1; Ord. 2017-13 § 2; Ord. 2009-03 § 1)


5.14.090 Appeals of VRD license determinations.

A. Authority to Decide Appeal. As authorized in Chapter 2.18 LCMC, a VRD license appeals board shall be responsible for determining an appeal of a decision approving or denying an application or renewal application for a vacation rental dwelling license, or revoking or suspending a VRD license, in any zone.

B. Standard of Review. The board shall determine whether the city’s decision is reasonable and based on a preponderance of the evidence.

C. Filing Requirements – Notice. The licensee or license applicant and any person entitled to notice of license issuance may appeal a VRD license decision.

1. An appellant is required to file a written notice of appeal including the basis for the appeal within 12 days of the license determination being appealed. This requirement is jurisdictional and late filings shall not be allowed.

2. The city council may establish by resolution a fee for filing an appeal, which shall be jurisdictional. The fee shall be sufficient to recover the average or actual costs of mailing notice of hearing and conducting the hearing.

3. At least 10 days before the hearing, notice of hearing on appeal will be mailed to owners of property within 250 feet of the property subject to the application.

D. The city manager or the city manager’s delegate may establish administrative procedures to implement the appeal procedures provided in this subsection, including any required forms.

E. Hearing. Within 14 days of receiving the notice of appeal, the city manager shall schedule a hearing on the appeal before the VRD license appeals board, to be heard at the next available meeting date.

1. At the hearing, parties to the appeal shall have the opportunity to present evidence and arguments, including witness testimony. The city shall maintain a summary record of proceedings, including the date and time of hearing, the names of the parties and witnesses, if any, a list of documents or evidence submitted, and the nature of the oral decision, if any, made at the conclusion of the hearing. In the event an interpretation of the city council is required, the hearing may be stayed to allow the city council sufficient time to issue the interpretation.

2. A decision of the board shall be reduced to writing and signed by the chair.

3. Decisions on license appeals shall be issued within 60 days of the date of the close of the public hearing on the matter.

4. The board’s decision shall be final on the date of mailing the decision to the appellant. The board’s decision is the final decision of the city and is appealable only by writ of review to circuit court.

F. Procedures. The VRD license appeals board may adopt and publish procedures for hearings not in conflict with this subsection, including but not limited to time limits on oral testimony and limitations on written argument. (Ord. 2009-03 § 1)


5.14.100 Complaints.

A. The city manager or the manager’s designee is authorized to implement an administrative procedure to document and respond to complaints about occupancy and use of a vacation rental dwelling.

B. In response to a complaint concerning the occupancy or use of a vacation rental dwelling, city staff including but not limited to the Lincoln City police department shall make at least three attempts to contact the owner and local representative using the information provided in the application for the vacation rental dwelling license. If neither the owner nor the local representative is available, the person receiving the complaint shall document the nature of the complaint and the efforts to reach the owner and local representative including the results of those efforts, and forward a copy of the report to the city manager or the city manager’s designee. On request and in compliance with the public records law, the city shall provide the owner and local representative with the information in the complaint.

C. Timely Resolution of Complaints. The owner and the local representative jointly shall be responsible for ensuring that complaints are resolved in a timely manner. For the purposes of this section, “timely” means within one hour of receiving the complaint, whether from the city or from any other complainant. Except for noise complaints, complaints received after 9:00 p.m. and before 7:00 a.m. are considered timely if they are resolved by 8:00 a.m. The owner’s and local representative’s joint responsibility for resolving complaints does not mean both must respond to and resolve each complaint.

Within 20 days of receiving an oral or written complaint relayed by city staff, the owner must provide the city an explanation in writing of the action taken (including no action) in response to the complaint. The explanation shall be mailed to the city, who may notify the complainant of the response.

D. Failure of the owner or local representative to timely and reasonably respond to a complaint relayed by city staff on at least two separate occasions within the license year shall constitute a violation of this chapter and a Class C civil infraction enforced against the owner and local representative under Chapter 1.16 LCMC. In addition to authority to impose fines and penalties as provided by law, the municipal court shall notify the city manager or his designee of any judgment of conviction for violation under this subsection within 10 working days of entry of judgment. Upon receiving such notice of conviction from the municipal court, the city manager or the city manager’s designee shall initiate proceedings to revoke the vacation rental dwelling license for the property naming the property owner. The revocation shall be conducted under the notice and hearing procedures provided in LCMC 5.14.090 for appeals of license decisions. (Ord. 2016-14 § 6; Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 2009-03 § 1)


5.14.110 Revocation procedure.

A. For the first violation of any provision of LCMC 5.14.055 through 5.14.080 pertaining to operational requirements within a 12-month period, the sanction for violation may be a warning notice. If the same offense continues to occur or a second offense occurs at any time during a 12-month period, the penalty for conviction shall be not less than $250.00. In addition the license shall be subject to revocation.

B. If the vacation rental dwelling license is suspended or revoked as provided in this section, the city manager shall send written notice of suspension and revocation to the owner stating the basis for the decision. The notice shall include information about the right to appeal the decision and the procedure for filing an appeal.

C. The owner may appeal the city manager’s decision to revoke the license by filing a letter of appeal to the board within 12 days after the date of the mailing of the city manager’s decision. The appellant shall pay a revocation appeal fee as established by resolution of city council. Upon receipt of an appeal, the city manager shall stay the revocation decision until the appeal has been determined by the board. The board’s decision shall be final and not subject to further city appeal.

D. The procedure for conduct of the appeal of an administrative decision to suspend or revoke a vacation rental dwelling license shall be conducted as provided in LCMC 5.14.090 for appeals. Notice of the appeal shall be mailed to the owners of property located within 250 feet of the property subject to the license revocation.

E. If the board upholds the decision to revoke the license, the board shall order the owner to discontinue use as a vacation rental dwelling. Notice of revocation shall be mailed to property owners within 250 feet of the property subject to the license revocation. (Ord. 2009-03 § 1)


5.14.120 Discontinuance of vacation rental dwelling occupancy.

A. After Revocation. After a vacation rental dwelling license has been revoked, the dwelling unit may not be used or occupied as a vacation rental dwelling, and the owner of the property to which the license applied and whose license has been revoked shall not be eligible to reapply for a vacation rental dwelling license for vacation rental occupancy of the same property for a period of 12 months from the date of revocation. If the city revokes an owner’s vacation rental dwelling license for a property on two separate occasions, the owner shall not be eligible to reapply for a vacation rental dwelling license for that property.

B. After Expiration. After a vacation rental dwelling license has expired, the dwelling unit may not be used or occupied as a vacation rental dwelling. The owner of the property to which the license applied and whose license has expired shall be required to apply for and obtain a vacation rental dwelling license before the property may be lawfully used or occupied as a vacation rental dwelling. (Ord. 2009-03 § 1)


5.14.130 Violations – Penalties.

A. Any violation of this chapter may be enforced as a Class B violation as provided in Chapter 1.16 LCMC and subject to the penalties established in that chapter. Each day in which a dwelling is used in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation.

B. The following conduct constitutes a violation of this chapter:

1. Providing false information in the application for license or license renewal;

2. Representing a dwelling as available for occupancy or rent as a vacation rental where the owner does not hold a valid vacation rental dwelling license issued under this chapter, or making a vacation rental dwelling available for use, occupancy or rent without first obtaining a valid vacation rental dwelling license;

3. Advertising, renting, using, or offering for use, occupancy or rent, a vacation rental dwelling in a manner that does not comply with the standards of this chapter, including but not limited to failing to maintain or provide on request of the city the required guest register or complaint log information, or in the event a change occurs in the name, address or telephone contact of the local representative, failing to provide such information no later than the date of the change;

4. Failing to comply with the requirements of Chapter 3.04 LCMC; or

5. Failing to comply with the licensing and operational requirements of this chapter including but not limited to the requirements listed in LCMC 5.14.070(G). Evidence proving any of the following establishes a rebuttal presumption of violation of these standards:

a. Trash or litter is present on the property and not contained in solid waste containers;

b. While believed occupied as a vacation rental dwelling, the number of vehicles parked on the property exceeded the number of vehicles allowed;

c. The owner or local representative failed to respond to an inquiry or complaint as established in LCMC 5.14.100;

d. The tenants of the vacation rental dwelling created noise, disturbance, or a nuisance in violation of the Lincoln City Municipal Code;

e. The tenants of the vacation rental dwelling violated state law pertaining to the consumption of alcohol or the use of illegal drugs.

For purposes of this subsection, “violation” means a violation that has been adjudicated by a court of competent jurisdiction whose final order and judgment is not subject to further appeal or has not been appealed.

C. In addition to or in lieu of enforcing a violation under subsection (B) of this section, the city of Lincoln City may file an action regarding use or occupancy of a vacation rental dwelling with the VRD license appeals board. The action shall be filed and a hearing conducted as for an appeal allowed under the Lincoln City Municipal Code and this chapter, except that no filing fee shall be required. (Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 2009-03 § 1)


Chapter 5.16 SPECIAL EVENTS

Sections:

5.16.010    Definitions.

5.16.015    Applicability.

5.16.020    Permit required.

5.16.025    Exempt activities or events.

5.16.030    Permit application.

5.16.040    Fees.

5.16.050    Criteria for approval – Permit conditions.

5.16.055    Additional procedures for competing applications.

5.16.060    Permit issuance.

5.16.070    Appeal.

5.16.080    Revocation or suspension of permit.

5.16.090    Inspection.

5.16.100    Violation – Penalty.


5.16.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter:

“Administrator” means the city manager or his designee.

“Applicant” means a person acting in his or her individual capacity or a corporation or association acting through an agent or officer of the corporation or association.

“Operator” means the individual listed on the permit as being in charge of the event and responsible for ensuring that the permit requirements are fulfilled.

“Special event” means any nonexempt event or activity whether conducted on public or private property, which places an additional demand on city resources or emergency services, including public health and safety. Unless exempted, the following types of activities or events require special event permits: (1) an event on public or private property which requires the closing of a street or other traffic control; (2) an event which involves the authorized sale or consumption of alcohol on public property in the city; (3) an event which involves sound amplification on public property in the city; (4) commercial activity or use of city property (other than standard concession agreements). An event, regardless of the location, conducted by the city of Lincoln City, its authorized employees, or contractors, is not a special event under this chapter. 

“Special events committee” means a committee appointed by the city manager which may include representatives of outside agencies and city departments, including but not limited to city finance, visitor and convention bureau, public works, legal, and police departments, as well as the North Lincoln fire and rescue special district, and Pacific West ambulance service. (Ord. 2015-07 § 1; Ord. 2008-09 § 2; Ord. 91-15 § 2)


5.16.015 Applicability.

This chapter is primarily concerned with activities which use or directly impact public property as well as activities on private property which impact public facilities and services such as streets and public parking. Even when an activity is exempted from permitting under this chapter, the activity remains fully subject to LCMC Title 17 (Zoning). No permit under this chapter can authorize use of private property for a use not authorized in the applicable zoning district. An activity conducted on city park or open space property may be exempt from the special event permit requirement of this chapter, but may still require a permit under the provisions of LCMC 12.16.085 (Exclusive Use Permits). (Ord. 2015-07 § 1)


5.16.020 Permit required.

No person or organization shall sponsor, organize, or conduct a special event as defined in LCMC 5.16.010 without first obtaining a permit from the administrator and paying any fees required therefor. (Ord. 2015-07 § 1; Ord. 2014-06 § 2; Ord. 2008-09 § 2; Ord. 91-15 § 2)


5.16.025 Exempt activities or events.

No special event permit shall be required for the following:

A. An event held inside or outside on private real property, held in a zoning district and with a site plan approval which permits such indoor or outdoor use, and where the event or activity is entirely contained within the property, including parking. Notwithstanding the above, an off-site shared parking agreement or license may satisfy the on-site parking requirement.

B. An event conducted indoors, whether or not alcohol is sold or consumed, and whether or not there is sound amplification, at any of the following venues, provided occupancy limits for the facility are strictly observed and all other applicable regulations, including but not limited to applicable zoning, alcohol and noise regulations, are strictly observed:

1. Driftwood Library, when a permit is obtained;

2. Culinary Center, when a permit is obtained;

3. City Hall meeting rooms, when a permit is obtained;

4. Community Center, when an exclusive use permit is obtained;

5. Arts and Cultural Center;

6. All properties owned by the Confederated Tribes of the Siletz.

Commercial activity on city property identified in this exemption list is not authorized by this exemption, unless the activity is authorized by permit, is consistent with zoning, and a standard concession agreement is executed and the 10 percent concession (or flat rate) is paid.

C. An event conducted outdoors, with an expected attendance of fewer than 50 persons (participants and spectators), at any one time, at any of the following venues, provided all other applicable regulations, including but not limited to applicable zoning, alcohol and noise regulations, are strictly observed:

1. City parks, including ball fields, when an exclusive use permit is obtained;

2. Arts and Cultural Center;

3. All properties owned by the Confederated Tribes of the Siletz.

Unless otherwise provided by written agreement (e.g., lease), commercial activity on city property identified in this exemption list is not authorized by this exemption, unless the activity is authorized by permit, is consistent with zoning, and a standard concession agreement is executed and the 10 percent concession (or flat rate) is paid.

D. Be advised: even when an event or activity is exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter, it may require other permits or authorizations from the city or applicable state agencies (e.g., alcohol sale or use in city parks requires a permit or concession (Chapter 12.16 LCMC)) (e.g., process for OLCC temporary sales license (Chapter 5.20 LCMC)). (Ord. 2019-10 § 1; Ord. 2015-07 § 1)


5.16.030 Permit application.

A. Applications for a special events permit shall be made to the administrator at least 45 days prior to the start of the event and no more than one year prior to the start of the event. Permit applications shall not be accepted for processing by the administrator unless they are submitted at least 45 days prior to the start of the event. Organizers of annual special events or those events which will have significant additional demand on city services are encouraged to submit applications at least 90 days in advance of the event. The administrator may, in extraordinary circumstances, accept a late application, but in no event less than 10 business days prior to an event. Any person desiring a special events permit shall apply at the finance department on official forms prepared by the city. Official city forms detailing application requirements shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. Incomplete applications shall not be processed. The completeness determination date establishes the order in which the applications are processed, except when there are competing applications for an extremely limited resource, such as a contestable ocean wave, in which case applications are processed following the procedure laid out in LCMC 5.16.055. 

B. Each application shall include the following information:

1. The name and address of the event operator, and the name and address of any person or organization sponsoring the event, including its chairperson or director.

2. The proposed location, date and time for the proposed event.

3. The approximate number of people the event organizers expect to attend the event and the maximum number of people the organizers of the event are prepared to accommodate.

4. Whether sale or use of alcoholic beverages is proposed.

5. A detailed description of the event.

6. A description of city services, equipment and facilities requested or needed.

7. A list of prior events in Lincoln City or other locations that were conducted by the event operator or sponsor.

8. A description of the manner in which a sufficient supply of restroom and/or sanitation facilities will be provided to accommodate the maximum number of persons.

9. The proposed method and procedure for restoration and cleanup of the event location, including the removal of all litter.

10. A scale drawing showing adequate parking facilities for the number and types of vehicles anticipated within or adjacent to the location for which the permit is requested. The drawing must also indicate how adequate ingress and egress will be provided to or from such parking area to facilitate the movement of any vehicle at any time to or from the parking area. A list of streets impacted by the event also shall be provided, and the method by which traffic control will be accomplished.

11. The names of any event operator, organizer, or any current agent or employee thereof involved in the event, and who has signed a consent decree or order in the last five years or who has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving false statement or dishonesty within the past five years, and the nature of the offense, or consent decree or order, the state where the conviction, or consent decree or order occurred, and the year of such conviction, or consent decree or order.

12. A description of the manner in which access and all offered amenities will be made available to persons with disabilities, including available procedures. The applicant and all event organizers shall certify in writing, under penalty of perjury and false swearing that they have complied, and will comply for the entire duration of the event, with all applicable local, state and federal laws concerning the proposed event including, but not limited to those laws and regulations related to the Americans with Disabilities Act. The applicant shall further hold the city harmless, defend and indemnify the city, its officers and employees from any and all claims associated with failure of the applicant to comply with the incorporated laws during the event.

13. An explanation of the reasons, if the person applying for the permit is unable to provide any of the foregoing information.

14. The permit application must be signed by the applicant and swear or affirm before an Oregon notary that the applicant has carefully read the application and that all the information contained therein is true and accurate.

C. The application and information submitted with the application or subsequent thereto by the applicant are public records available for public inspection during regular city business hours.

D. After receipt of a completed application, the administrator will distribute copies of the application to all city departments that may be affected by the proposed event. Each department will review the application and describe any conditions or requirements that should be placed on the permit considering the anticipated demand on city services and potential costs of meeting the demand for city services to accommodate the proposed special event. Any department objections to granting the permit including concerns regarding additional impact from the special event on public streets or public health or safety shall also be stated. The city is not required by any provision of this chapter to grant a concession or permit for alcohol sale or use on city property. (Ord. 2015-07 § 1; Ord. 2014-06 § 2; Ord. 2008-09 § 2; Ord. 95-20 § 1; Ord. 91-15 § 2)


5.16.040 Fees.

A. Application Fee. Every application for a special event shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount to be set by resolution of the council, for the cost of processing and reviewing the permit application. Such fee will not be refunded if a permit is not issued. The council may, by resolution, reduce, waive, or pay from other legally available funds the application fee for specified classes of applicants (e.g., applicants proven to be tax exempt organizations or entities (e.g., 501 (c)(3))).

B. Deposit. After review and analysis of the recommendations of the departments of the city and the potential costs to the city as a result of the special event, the administrator may set fees therefor, which fees shall not exceed the actual costs incurred by the city as a result of the additional costs incurred to provide public services for the event, considering the additional demand on city services and the cost of providing such services. A deposit, based on the estimated costs that will be incurred by the city, shall be paid to the city finance department prior to the issuance of the permit. In the event the amount of the deposit is not sufficient to pay all actual costs incurred by the city, the organizer of the event agrees to pay any additional costs after receipt of notice from the city of the additional amount due. Failure to pay such additional costs shall preclude the issuance of subsequent special events permits to such applicant or organization.

C. City Park and Facility Rental Rates. Staff shall not accept an application for processing an exclusive use permit or special event permit for a city park or city facility that does not have an established rental rate. Consult the latest city fee schedule for available city parks and city facilities. It is the determination of city council that such parks and facilities are not available for exclusive use and/or special events, except when such events are conducted by or through the city of Lincoln City. (Ord. 2019-10 § 2; Ord. 2015-07 § 1; Ord. 2014-06 § 2; Ord. 2008-09 § 2; Ord. 91-15 § 2)


5.16.050 Criteria for approval – Permit conditions.

A. If, after review of the recommendations of the city departments as provided in LCMC 5.16.030(D), the administrator makes a preliminary determination that the proposed special event complies with the provisions of this chapter, that the proposed activity is lawful under federal, state, and local law, that the event is not adverse to the public interest, does not pose a significant risk to participants or spectators, and is not inconsistent with the size and capacity and function of the proposed location (including city park or facility), the applicant shall be required to meet the following conditions prior to, or as a condition of, the issuance of a permit:

1. Unless waived or reduced by the city manager and VCB director (Explore Lincoln City), the following insurances shall be required:

a. An applicant for exclusive use/special event shall be required to provide general commercial liability insurance coverage for the applicant’s operations in an amount not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 aggregate. The administrator shall increase the minimum insurance required for high-risk activities after consultation with the city manager. High-risk activities include but are not limited to events and activities with rides, mechanical devices, inflatables, animals, fireworks, fire, or hazardous materials; in addition, an applicant for exclusive use/special event shall provide property damage insurance coverage in an amount not less than $119,300 per occurrence and $596,400 aggregate, said amounts to be adjusted from July 1, 2019, and every year thereafter, as determined by the State Court Administrator pursuant to ORS 30.273. A copy of a certificate of insurance naming the city, its officers and employees as an additional insured shall be supplied prior to issuance of the exclusive use/special event permit. The insurance policy shall further provide that the policy shall not terminate or be canceled without 30 days’ written notice to the city. When an exclusive use/special event is located on park property, there shall be no reduction in insurance below applicable Oregon tort claim limits.

b. All parks or special event vendors (concessionaires) operating under the exclusive use permit or special event permit in a city park shall be covered by the insurance required herein or have separate vendor insurance meeting the city’s requirements. The city shall be named as an additional insured, with the coverage provided being primary coverage;

2. The applicant and event organizers shall comply with all applicable local, state and federal laws concerning the proposed event, including, but not limited to, those laws and regulations related to the Americans with Disabilities Act;

3. All parks or special event vendors (concessionaires) are permitted to operate in a city park only in approved locations to be determined by the director after consultation and approval of such locations by the city’s ADA coordinator. The special event permit shall reserve such location for the vendor only for a specified period of time as set forth in the permit. All applicable rental charges for such location shall apply;

4. The applicant and/or event organizer must be a person or legal entity registered to do business in the state of Oregon and possess an occupation tax permit (OTP) permit pursuant to Chapter 5.04 LCMC. The event organizer is also responsible to provide a list of all vendors engaging in commercial activity during the permit time frame and is responsible for providing evidence to the city that such vendors are registered to do business in the state of Oregon, possess OTPs and any applicable local, state or federal licenses for the activity performed (e.g., food handlers license). All vendors shall pay a 10 percent concession fee on gross revenue to the city and the applicant is responsible to guarantee that such fees are remitted to the city. All vendors and the applicant/organizer are subject to audit. Failure to submit to audit disqualifies such applicant/organizer and individual vendors from future special events, regular exclusive use parks concessions, or street vending under Chapter 5.28 LCMC;

5. In lieu of the 10 percent concession fee in subsection (A)(4) of this section, the parks director, in the director’s sole discretion, may elect to use a daily flat rate concession fee (in addition to regular rental charges) for use of the park facility. Such flat rate shall be established by council fee resolution;

6. Provide adequate restroom and sanitation facilities, parking and traffic control for the anticipated crowd and adhere to requirements for cleanup and restoration of the special events site;

7. Pay any deposits and fees required pursuant to LCMC 5.16.040. If the property used for the event is a city park facility or structure(s), pay the applicable fees for reservation of such space(s). Please note: Parks and city facilities without established exclusive use rental rates are not available for special events;

8. Agree to comply with all conditions specified in the permit;

9. Financial security shall be required to secure compliance with Lincoln City Municipal Code and with permit conditions (e.g., added cleanup costs or overtime costs) when requested by the parks director or police chief to secure protection of city facilities or provision of needed services. An applicant who has previously been granted or denied a permit, or conducted an event without a permit, may be denied a permit on such basis;

10. Indemnification. All special event permits issued under this chapter shall be subject to any rules and regulations relating to city facility or park use as contained in the city code or adopted by resolution of council and such other city, state or federal regulations as may apply to the activity or person(s) involved therein, including specifically the Americans with Disabilities Act. Any applicant issued a permit under this chapter shall be liable for any loss, damage, or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of the willful misconduct or negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall be issued, as well as for any breach of such rules, regulations, and ordinances, to the person or persons so suffering damages or injury, and shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city and its officers, employees and agents from any and all claims, demands, actions and suits (including all attorney fees and costs, through trial and on appeal) arising from the permittee’s use of the park under the permit. All persons to whom a permit has been granted must agree in writing on the application form or permit to hold the city harmless and indemnify the city from any and all liability for injury to persons or property occurring as a result of the activity sponsored by permittee. Said persons shall also be liable to the city for any and all damages to parks, facilities and buildings owned by the city which result from the activity of permittee or are caused by any who participate in said activity. The indemnification provisions of this section cannot be waived or released by city staff.

B. The city shall list the regulations and conditions that the organizer shall comply with in the permit. Such conditions may include but are not limited to the following:

1. The name of the event operator and who will be held responsible for ensuring that the permit requirements are fulfilled;

2. The number of police personnel and/or other city personnel that will be required to handle the event and the estimated cost for these services;

3. The location to which the event is limited;

4. The streets affected by the need for traffic control or that are authorized for use in conjunction with the event, and approved parking;

5. Personnel needed and responsibilities of the organizer;

6. Provisions for first aid care depending upon the size and magnitude of the event;

7. The procedure to be followed if alcoholic beverage consumption is to be allowed;

8. The number and location of restroom facilities to accommodate the expected crowd;

9. Indemnification of the city by the organizer. (Ord. 2019-10 § 3; Ord. 2015-07 § 1; Ord. 2014-06 § 2; Ord. 2008-09 § 2; Ord. 95-20 § 2; Ord. 91-15 § 2)


5.16.055 Additional procedures for competing applications.

In the event there are two or more competing applications for the same limited resource, and a special events permit has not already been issued, the following procedure shall apply:

A. If the administrator has determined that the applications are complete, and the conditions of the permit application are met, the administrator shall schedule a meeting of the special events committee.

B. The special events committee will establish a rating system to review and evaluate the competing applications. The rating system shall include the following criteria:

1. The number of years the applicant has held the event in Lincoln City.

2. Whether the applicant is local.

3. How well the applicant has managed prior events.

4. How well the applicant has complied with the special events permit requirements and conditions in the past.

5. Which event is more likely to draw overnight tourists to Lincoln City.

6. Which event is more likely to provide marketing and publicity for Lincoln City.

7. Which applicant has better financial backing and stability.

8. Which applicant has better expertise and experience.

9. Does the applicant have the backing and/or sponsorship of a well-respected professional organization.

10. Which applicant is more likely to hold the event again in future years.

C. The special events committee will hear presentations from the applicants. 

D. The special events committee will select which applicant will receive a special events permit, using the rating system. Once a selection has been made, the administrator will issue the permit.

E. The special events committee may award additional special events permits to the competing applicant(s), so long as the applicant who holds the first special events permit has a right of first refusal. (Ord. 2015-07 § 1)


5.16.060 Permit issuance.

A. If the administrator determines that the requirements of this chapter and the conditions of the permit are met, the administrator will notify the applicant that the application has been approved and that the permit will be issued by the finance department after payment of all applicable fees.

B. In the event that the administrator finds any cause why the permit applied for should not be issued, the administrator shall deny the permit and notify the applicant in writing of such action and the reasons for denying the permit. (Ord. 2015-07 § 1; Ord. 2014-06 § 2; Ord. 2008-09 § 2; Ord. 91-15 § 2)


5.16.070 Appeal.

An applicant who is aggrieved by the decision of the administrator in regard to the denial of the application for a permit shall have a right to appeal to the city manager. Such appeal will be taken by filing with the office of the city manager, within seven calendar days after notice of the denial, a written notice describing with certainty the action of the administrator from which the appeal is taken and a declaration that such person takes appeal to the city manager for such action. The city manager shall schedule the appeal for an administrative hearing within seven days and shall mail written notice to appellant of the date and time of the hearing. After holding a hearing, the city manager may reverse, affirm or modify in any respect the determination of the administrator. If the city manager acted as the administrator on the initial application, an appeal shall be filed as provided in Chapter 1.26 LCMC, except that the appeal timeframes of this section shall apply. (Ord. 2015-07 § 1; Ord. 2014-06 § 2; Ord. 2008-09 § 2; Ord. 91-15 § 2)


5.16.080 Revocation or suspension of permit.

A special events permit may be temporarily suspended or revoked by the administrator or by the police chief or designee upon any of the following grounds:

A. If the patrons of a special event have become a disorderly or riotous assembly whereby the public peace or the safety of persons or property are threatened.

B. If the operator of such special event refuses to remove or cause to be removed from the event any person violating any of the provisions of the Lincoln City Municipal Code after such operator has been requested to do so by a police officer.

C. If the event operator or sponsor fails to comply with any of the regulations pertaining to special events or the conditions of the special event permit.

D. If a special event permit is revoked, the administrator shall have the discretion whether to accept a subsequent special event application submitted by the operator, sponsor, or responsible party involved in the event for which the permit was revoked including any person with an ownership interest in the event or in the operator, sponsor, or responsible party. (Ord. 2015-07 § 1; Ord. 2014-06 § 2; Ord. 2008-09 § 2; Ord. 91-15 § 2)


5.16.090 Inspection.

Special event premises should be open for inspection by any police officer of the city or by the State Fire Marshal or local designee at any and all times. (Ord. 2015-07 § 1; Ord. 2008-09 § 2; Ord. 91-15 § 2)


5.16.100 Violation – Penalty.

A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of LCMC 5.16.020 commits a Class B violation.

B. Any person who continues to operate a special event after revocation or during a temporary suspension of a special event permit, or violates any term, condition, restriction or limitation of such permit, commits a Class B violation. (Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 2015-07 § 1; Ord. 2008-09 § 2; Ord. 91-15 § 2)


Chapter 5.20 LIQUOR LICENSE REVIEW

Sections:

5.20.010    Title, purpose and authority.

5.20.020    Definitions.

5.20.030    Submission of license application and fees to city recorder.

5.20.040    Chief of police duties – Council consent or appeal hearing.

5.20.050    Hearing – Uniform administrative appeals ordinance.

5.20.060    Substantive criteria for the decision.

5.20.070    Reconsideration of applications.


5.20.010 Title, purpose and authority.

A. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “liquor license review ordinance” and may also be referred to herein as “this chapter.”

B. The purpose of this chapter is to establish the substantive criteria which shall be considered by the city council, and its designee(s), including the chief of police, in making recommendations to the Oregon Liquor Control Commission (OLCC) concerning the granting, denying, modifying, changing, conditioning or renewing of all liquor licenses for premises within the city limits. Further, the purpose of this chapter includes the establishment of fees and the establishment of a process for investigation, and, if necessary, the conduct of a due process hearing concerning such license applications.

C. The procedure and criteria in this chapter, together with the establishment of processing fees herein, is specifically authorized by ORS 471.166(8). (Ord. 2013-05 § 1)


5.20.020 Definitions.

A. “Applicant” means the person, persons, corporation or entity submitting an application for a liquor license.

B. “Application” means the written forms provided by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission that serve as a written request to the city to grant, modify, or renew a liquor license.

C. “City” means the city of Lincoln City, Oregon.

D. “City council” means the city council for the city of Lincoln City, or council’s designee.

E. “Chief of police” means the person holding the position of chief of police for the city of Lincoln City or any officer or employee of the city of Lincoln City delegated or assigned (in writing) any or all of the tasks of the chief of police described herein.

F. “City recorder” means the person holding the position of city recorder or any officer or employee of the city of Lincoln City delegated or assigned in writing any or all of the tasks of the city recorder described herein.

G. “Commission” or “OLCC” means the Oregon Liquor Control Commission.

H. “Temporary sales license (TSL)” means a license obtained from the commission that gives a successful applicant authority to sell alcoholic beverages on premises that the commission has not otherwise licensed, and for which a recommendation by the city must be obtained. (Ord. 2013-05 § 1)


5.20.030 Submission of license application and fees to city recorder.

A. Any person, corporation or entity requesting a liquor license through the OLCC shall present the completed license application forms prescribed by OLCC and all other supportive materials identified in this chapter to the city recorder.

B. An OLCC personal history form shall be completed by the applicant for each person named on the license application. A signed release for a criminal background investigation to address the criteria in ORS 471.313(4) shall be submitted by all applicants.

C. A mandatory processing fee shall be submitted with the application. The fee shall be periodically established by resolution of the city council, except that the initial fee shall be $100.00 for an original application, $75.00 for a change in ownership, change in location or change in privilege application, and $35.00 for a renewal or temporary application. Such fees shall not exceed the maximum fees established in ORS 471.166(8).

D. The city recorder shall accept liquor license applications only when the following conditions are met:

1. An applicant provides legible completed copies of the required applicable forms, including, but not limited to, liquor license application form, temporary sales application (TSL) form, individual history forms, background check form, and business information form.

2. The applicant submits a valid city of Lincoln City business license, when applicable.

3. The application is complete.

4. The applicant has provided any relevant additional information the city recorder requests to determine the qualifications of the applicant.

5. The application is accompanied by the appropriate fees, as established by subsection (C) of this section or subsequent resolution. There is no provision for waiver of an application fee, including TSL fees, regardless of the applicant.

E. If the city recorder finds the application package complete, the application shall be forwarded to the chief of police. The city recorder shall also request that the planning department determine and forward to the chief of police competent evidence concerning whether the location of the licensee’ s business complies with all applicable city land use requirements. If the application package is found not to be complete the city recorder shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies in writing. The city recorder shall take no action on an incomplete application; if the application is not completed within 30 days of the city recorder’s notice of deficiencies, the application shall be returned to the applicant. The applicant may require, upon written request to the city recorder, that an application with missing information (except fees) be processed to decision. (Ord. 2013-05 § 1)


5.20.040 Chief of police recommendation – Appeal.

A. The city council hereby delegates to the chief of police the ability to process all OLCC liquor license applications or requests, and further delegates to the chief of police the authority to make a city recommendation on such applications; provided, that the recommendation shall be placed on the city council consent agenda for review by council. Notwithstanding the above, if the chief of police’s recommendation on a TSL is favorable, the chief’s recommendation is the final recommendation of the city and the matter need not be placed on the council’s consent agenda. In the case of an unfavorable recommendation, or recommended restrictions or conditions otherwise adverse to the applicant, the appeal hearing procedures of this section and LCMC 5.20.050 shall be applicable, if properly initiated by the applicant.

B. Upon receipt of a complete application packet for any liquor license from the city recorder, the chief of police shall:

1. Coordinate and conduct an investigation, gather reliable evidence and write a report including written findings, concerning each application with due consideration of the valid grounds for unfavorable recommendations, specifically analyzing ORS 471.313(4) and (5) and implementing administrative rules. Based on this evidence and findings, the chief of police shall make a recommendation.

2. The chief of police may, at any time, require the applicant to supply additional information if such information is deemed necessary and relevant to the OLCC grounds for unfavorable recommendations.

3. Except as provided above for TSLs, if the chief of police recommendation is for approval, the recommendation shall be placed on the next available consent agenda of the city council for action. The city council may approve such recommendation or may remove the item from the consent agenda for discussion at the request of a council member, or a member of the public. The council, by majority vote, may require that the matter be scheduled for a hearing, before council or their designee, in accordance with the hearing requirements of the uniform administrative appeals ordinance.

4. If the chief of police recommendation is unfavorable, or the chief of police recommends restrictions or conditions otherwise adverse to the applicant, the applicant shall be notified in person or by mail of such unfavorable recommendation or restriction. The notification to the applicant by the chief of police of such unfavorable recommendation or restriction shall advise the applicant that they have the right to a de novo hearing on the matter before the city council, or the council’s designee, if such request for a hearing is timely filed in the office of the city manager within 10 calendar days of personal service, or 12 calendar days of mailing of the notice, in accordance with the uniform administrative appeals ordinance. If no request for a hearing is filed, the recommendation by the chief of police shall be scheduled for the council’s next available consent agenda.

5. After a recommendation is made by the city council, or their designee, the city recorder shall forward the recommendation and any necessary supporting documentation and evidence to the OLCC; the chief of police shall endorse, on behalf of the city, any forms required to forward the recommendation to the OLCC.

6. After final action on such applications the chief of police shall forward all documentation to the city recorder who shall maintain a record of all OLCC applications. (Ord. 2013-09 § 1; Ord. 2013-05 § 1)


5.20.050 Hearing – Uniform administrative appeals ordinance.

A. In the event the city council requests a hearing on an application which has been recommended for approval by the chief of police, the hearing shall be de novo and shall be scheduled before the city council or the council’s designee, and conducted in accordance with uniform administrative appeals ordinance hearing procedures (Chapter 1.26 LCMC).

B. In the event the applicant requests a hearing on an application which has an unfavorable recommendation or recommended restriction by the chief of police, the hearing shall be de novo and shall be scheduled before the city council or the council’s designee, and conducted in accordance with uniform administrative appeals ordinance hearing procedures (Chapter 1.26 LCMC).

C. Notwithstanding the appeal fee provisions of the uniform administrative appeals ordinance, there is no fee imposed for a hearing requested pursuant to subsection (A) or (B) of this section, other than the application fee specified in LCMC 5.20.030. All other appeal requirements of the uniform administrative appeal ordinance shall be observed. (Ord. 2013-05 § 1)


5.20.060 Substantive criteria for the decision.

The city council or the council’s designee may make an unfavorable recommendation to the commission if it finds sufficient basis for such a recommendation under Oregon liquor laws, including without limitation ORS 471.313(4) or 471.313(5), OAR 845-005-0320, 845-005-0325 or 845-005-0326, or the license restriction bases of OAR 845-005-0355, and such recommendation must be supported by reliable factual information. (Ord. 2013-05 § 1)


5.20.070 Reconsideration of applications.

A. After having made a recommendation other than favorable on any license application, the council shall not consider any new application for the same location by the same or substantially the same applicant for a period of at least three months, except as otherwise provided herein.

B. If the chief of police reasonably believes that the conditions which caused the council to make an unfavorable recommendation or impose restrictions adverse to the applicant have substantially changed, and no court or administrative appeal of such license is pending, then the chief of police may reconsider and/or resubmit such application to the council. (Ord. 2013-05 § 1)


Chapter 5.24 SOLICITATION

Sections:

5.24.010    Solicitation hours.

5.24.020    Occupation tax permit.

5.24.030    Criminal trespass.

5.24.040    Signs.

5.24.050    Criminal trespass exception.

5.24.060    Penalties.

Prior legislation: Ords. 89-15 and 2011-11.


5.24.010 Solicitation hours.

The occupant or person in control of real property shall be considered to have given constructive consent to enter those premises for the purpose of solicitation between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., unless a sign is posted pursuant to LCMC 5.24.030. (Ord. 2013-20 § 1)


5.24.020 Occupation tax permit.

Nothing in this chapter exempts or excuses any person or entity from the requirements of the occupation tax permit ordinance, Chapter 5.04 LCMC. (Ord. 2013-20 § 1)


5.24.030 Criminal trespass.

A person who enters private property with a posted and clearly visible “No Solicitation,” “No Trespassing,” or similar sign is subject to prosecution for criminal trespass, regardless of whether the purpose for entry was to engage in business or otherwise and regardless of the hour at which the solicitation took place. Leaving materials on such posted real property may also be subject to prosecution for offensive littering. (Ord. 2013-20 § 1)


5.24.040 Signs.

Signs posted under this section must contain the words “no solicitation” or “no trespassing” or substantially similar language. Signs shall not exceed 12 inches by 12 inches in dimension, and such signs shall conform with Chapter 17.72 LCMC, as applicable. Signs posted pursuant to this section shall be posted on or near the boundaries of the property at normal points of entry, or if there are no apparent boundaries, the sign shall be placed at the primary entrance. (Ord. 2013-20 § 1)


5.24.050 Criminal trespass exception.

The prohibition of LCMC 5.24.030 does not apply to those who have received prior express permission from the person in control of the premises, or to government officials entering the property in the performance of their lawful duties, including, but not limited to: postal workers, peace officers, emergency service personnel, or city employees on official business. (Ord. 2013-20 § 1)


5.24.060 Penalties.

A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a Class C misdemeanor. Notwithstanding this provision, the offense of criminal trespass and/or offensive littering may also be charged and prosecuted as a violation of state law. (Ord. 2013-20 § 1)


Chapter 5.28 STREET VENDORS

Sections:

5.28.005    Applicability.

5.28.010    Definitions.

5.28.020    License required – Fees – Issuance.

5.28.025    Exemptions.

5.28.030    Insurance.

5.28.040    Inspection and permits.

5.28.050    Pushcart size.

5.28.060    Sanitation.

5.28.070    Areas for street vending.

5.28.080    Method of operation.

5.28.090    Prohibition.

5.28.110    Violation – Penalty – Abatement – Revocation.


5.28.005 Applicability.

A. This chapter regulates street vendors operating on properly zoned private property adjacent to city right-of-way, on designated city properties, or on designated city street right-of-way locations.

B. Vendors operating in city parks, city property zoned “parks” or designated as “interim parks” are not subject to this chapter and must obtain approval of either an exclusive use permit and parks concession agreement pursuant to Chapter 12.16 LCMC (parks regulations) or a special event permit and concession agreement pursuant to Chapter 5.16 LCMC (Special Events). (Ord. 2019-07 § 1)


5.28.010 Definitions.

Right-of-Way. As used in this chapter, “right-of-way” means within the physical limits of any street right-of-way within the city’s ownership or over which the city exercises regulatory jurisdiction.

Street Vendor. As used in this chapter, “street vendor” means any person or entity who lawfully sells, or offers for sale, goods or services, such as but not limited to food, beverages, flowers, books, balloons or similar items from a portable table or nonmotorized mobile type device such as a pushcart or like conveyance and such activities are conducted in approved locations. (Ord. 2019-07 § 2; Ord. 82-4 § 1)


5.28.020 License required – Fees – Issuance.

A. No person shall operate as a street vendor without a street vendor license as provided in this chapter.

B. The annual license fee shall be in an amount set by the city council for the cost of administering this licensing program, and such fee shall not be refunded if a license is not issued.

C. The annual license fees of this chapter are in addition to the city occupation tax, and street vendors shall comply with all provisions of the occupation tax ordinance (Chapter 5.04 LCMC).

D. Licenses shall be issued by the planning department after compliance with this chapter by the applicant. (Ord. 2001-11 § 2; Ord. 93-6 § 1; Ord. 82-4 § 2)


5.28.025 Exemptions.

A. Vendors operating under an approved special event permit issued pursuant to Chapter 5.16 LCMC do not need to obtain a street vendor license under this chapter for the duration of the special event at the approved special event location. Such vendors shall be required to comply with all requirements for vendors in Chapter 5.16 LCMC, including but not limited to concession agreements, when such special event vendors are located on city property or right-of-way.

B. Vendors operating in a city park under an approved exclusive use permit issued pursuant to Chapter 12.16 LCMC do not need to obtain a street vendor license under this chapter for the duration of the exclusive use permit at the approved park concession location. Such vendors shall be required to comply with all requirements for vendors in Chapter 12.16 LCMC, including but not limited to concession agreements. (Ord. 2019-07 § 3)


5.28.030 Insurance.

Unless waived or reduced by signature of the city manager and the public works director, the following insurances shall be required: A street vendor shall be required to provide general commercial liability insurance coverage for the licensee’s operations in an amount not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 aggregate. In addition, a street vendor shall provide property damage insurance coverage in an amount not less than $119,300 per occurrence and $596,400 aggregate, said amounts to be adjusted from July 1, 2019, and every year thereafter, as determined by the State Court Administrator pursuant to ORS 30.273. A copy of a certificate of insurance naming the city, its officers and employees as an additional insured shall be supplied prior to issuance of the street vendor license. The insurance policy shall further provide that the policy shall not terminate or be canceled without 30 days’ written notice to the city. When a street vendor is located on public property or right-of-way there shall be no reduction in insurance below applicable Oregon tort claim limits. (Ord. 2019-07 § 4; Ord. 93-6 § 2; Ord. 82-4 § 3)


5.28.040 Inspection and permits.

A. Prior to issuance of a street vendor license the building official and the State Fire Marshal shall inspect each pushcart. The building official shall certify that the device is structurally and mechanically sound, the design will not create a nuisance or hazard to the public and the size of the cart meets the requirements of LCMC 5.28.050. The State Fire Marshal shall certify that any cooking or heating apparatus is in conformance with the provisions of applicable fire codes.

B. No person shall be issued a street vendor license unless he submits with his application proof that all health and sanitary permits required by the state and county have been obtained. (Ord. 82-4 § 4)


5.28.050 Pushcart size.

The size of a street vendor cart shall not be greater than four feet in width and eight feet in length. (Ord. 93-6 § 3; Ord. 82-4 § 5)


5.28.060 Sanitation.

All utensils and equipment used by a licensed street vendor shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall conform to all standards prescribed by state law and county ordinance and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 82-4 § 6)


5.28.070 Areas for street vending.

A. Street vendors may operate on:

1. Private property zoned general commercial, recreation-commercial, Oceanlake plan district, Taft village core and Nelscott plan district (NBD and NBMU subcategories). All vendor operations on such private property must be shown on approved site plans. (LCMC 17.52.240.)

2. Public rights-of-way in general commercial, recreation-commercial, Oceanlake plan district, Taft village core, and Nelscott plan district (NBD and NBMU subcategories) are eligible to be designated as approved street vendor locations. An application for an annual street vendor license shall include a scale drawing of the proposed vendor cart location, clearly demonstrate the location does not disrupt pedestrian or vehicular access, and clearly demonstrate compliance with ADA accessibility requirements to the satisfaction of the ADA coordinator. The public works department may publish a map setting forth preapproved street vendor locations.

B. Except as provided in Chapters 12.16 and 5.16 LCMC, street vendors approved under this chapter shall not operate within:

1. Any park or open space, or any property zoned “park” or “open space” or any property designated for interim park use by city council resolution;

2. State of Oregon parks or waysides, unless granted a permit by the Parks Division of the Oregon Department of Transportation. (Ord. 2019-07 § 5; Ord. 2008-21 § 4; Ord. 93-8 § 1; Ord. 82-8; Ord. 82-4 § 7)


5.28.080 Method of operation.

A. A street vendor may only operate in an approved location.

B. No street vendor shall occupy any area within 10 feet of a crosswalk, alleyway or building doorway.

C. Pushcarts or vendor tables shall not be located or operated in such a manner as to obstruct or impede vehicle or pedestrian traffic or ADA accessibility requirements. No pushcart or vendor table shall be left unattended.

D. Street vendors shall pick up any paper, cardboard, wood, or plastic containers, wrappers, or any litter in any form which is deposited by any person on the sidewalk or street or other property within 25 feet of a pushcart or table at any time it is in a stationary position and the street vendor is conducting business, and shall be responsible for the proper disposal of same. Wastewater shall be properly disposed of which does not include disposal in a storm drain or on the ground.

E. No street vendor shall make any loud noise in violation of the noise ordinance or place any temporary signage, except a two-foot by eight-foot sign on the front of the pushcart/table below the surface table level of the pushcart or two two-foot by four-foot signs on the sides or front and one side below the surface table level of the pushcart/table.

F. No person who holds a street vendor license shall engage in activities in violation of any conditions or requirements stated in the license.

G. No street vendor who serves food shall occupy an area within 50 feet of a customer entrance of a restaurant unless the pushcart/table is operated from private property owned by the licensee.

H. A pushcart/table may be covered with a canopy or umbrella not to exceed four feet by eight feet which shall be securely anchored.

I. A vendor operating on city property or right-of-way under this chapter is required to sign a standard concession agreement and pay a 10 percent gross revenue concession fee to the city. In lieu of the 10 percent concession fee, the finance director, in the finance director’s sole discretion, may elect to use a daily or monthly flat rate concession fee (in addition to any other rental charges) for use of city property or right-of-way. Such flat rate fees shall be established by council fee resolution after the opportunity for public comment.

J. An annual street vendor license under this chapter shall not be renewed or issued for another year to the same vendor until the license applicant has submitted an annual report and documentation for the preceding year(s) including (1) gross sales; (2) concession fees paid; (3) other fees and charges paid for use of public property or right-of-way.

K. Street vendor operations by nonprofit entities licensed under this chapter may be excused from the concession payment to the city; if excused, such concession fee will be considered a city donation to the nonprofit entity. To qualify for such donation, the nonprofit organization must annually demonstrate to the satisfaction of the finance director that the organization holds current nonprofit status and has complied with all applicable city and state regulations. (Ord. 2019-07 § 6; Ord. 93-8 § 2, 3; Ord. 82-4 § 8)


5.28.090 Prohibition.

No person shall demand any pecuniary benefit from a street vendor in return for allowing a vendor to locate adjacent to a business in a public right-of-way. As used in this section, “pecuniary benefit” includes property and any other commercial interest. (Ord. 82-4 § 9)


5.28.110 Violation – Penalty – Abatement – Revocation.

A. Any street vendor who violates any of the provisions of this chapter commits a violation. Any such violation shall be punished under the provisions of Chapter 1.16 LCMC as a Class B violation.

B. Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.

C. Any violation of this chapter is deemed a nuisance. The abatement of such a nuisance is in addition to any other penalty or remedy. A nuisance may be abated as provided in LCMC 8.12.150 through 8.12.180, or in any other manner authorized by law.

D. In addition to other penalties or remedies, the municipal court judge may revoke a street vendor’s license upon a finding that a street vendor has violated a provision of this chapter. The order of revocation shall be entered at the time of the entry and declaration of forfeiture pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.16 LCMC. (Ord. 2015-10 § 5; Ord. 93-6 § 4; Ord. 82-4 §§ 11, 12)

 


Title 6 ANIMALS

Chapters:

6.04    Animals Generally

6.08    Dogs


Chapter 6.04 ANIMALS GENERALLY

Sections:

6.04.010    Animals at large.

6.04.020    Dangerous animals.

6.04.025    Animal waste – Removal and disposal.

6.04.030    Removal of carcasses.

6.04.040    Nuisances declared – Abatement procedures.

6.04.050    Violation – Penalty.

6.04.060    Continuing violations – Additional remedies.


6.04.010 Animals at large.

A. No owner or person in charge of an animal shall permit the animal to be at large.

B. Animals at large may be taken into custody by the city and disposed of as directed by the chief of police. (Ord. 82-15 § 4)


6.04.020 Dangerous animals.

No owner or person in charge of an animal dangerous to the public health or safety shall permit such animal to be exposed in public. If such animal is exposed in public, it may be taken into custody by the city and disposed of as directed by the chief of police; except that before any animal is disposed of, the owner or person in charge shall be entitled to a hearing before the city council. (Ord. 82-15 § 2)


6.04.025 Animal waste – Removal and disposal.

A. It shall be the duty of each person who owns, possesses or controls an animal to immediately remove and properly dispose of any fecal matter left by such animal on any sidewalk, street, right-of-way, park or other public area. It shall further be the duty of each person who owns, possesses or controls an animal to immediately remove and properly dispose of any fecal matter left by such animal on any private property, which is neither owned nor occupied by the person. No person shall permit animal waste to remain on private property owned or controlled by the person for a period of time longer than is reasonably necessary to remove and properly dispose of the animal waste.

B. No person who owns, possesses or controls an animal shall appear with such animal on any sidewalk, street, right-of-way, park or other public area without the means of removal of any fecal matter left by such animal. Further, no person who owns, possesses or controls an animal shall appear on any private property, which is neither owned nor occupied by the person, without the means of removal of any fecal matter left by such animal.

C. For purposes of this section, “proper disposal” means transporting the animal fecal matter to a place or receptacle suitable for the disposal of animal feces. Leaving the fecal matter in a bag along the side of the road is not proper disposal and is a violation of subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 2018-08 § 1)


6.04.030 Removal of carcasses.

No person shall permit an animal carcass owned or controlled by him to remain upon public property, or to be exposed on private property, for a period of time longer than is reasonably necessary to remove or dispose of the carcass. (Ord. 82-15 § 3)


6.04.040 Nuisances declared – Abatement procedures.

The acts, conditions or objects specifically enumerated and defined in LCMC 6.04.010 through 6.04.030 are declared to be public nuisances; and such acts, conditions or objects may be abated by any of the procedures set forth in Chapter 8.16 LCMC. (Ord. 82-15 § 17(1))


6.04.050 Violation – Penalty.

A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of LCMC 6.04.020 commits a Class B violation.

B. Any person who violates any of the provisions of LCMC 6.04.030 or 6.04.040 commits a Class B violation.

C. Any person who violates any of the provisions of LCMC 6.04.010 or 6.04.025 commits a Class C violation. (Ord. 2018-08 § 2; Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 84-14 § 3; Ord. 82-15 § 24(1), (2), (3))


6.04.060 Continuing violations – Additional remedies.

A. Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.

B. The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for violation of this chapter, but is an additional remedy. The imposition of a penalty does not relieve a person of the duty to abate the nuisance; however, abatement of a nuisance within 10 days of the date of notice to abate, or, if written protest has been filed, then abatement within 10 days of council determination that a nuisance exists, will relieve the person responsible from the imposition of any forfeiture or fine under LCMC 6.04.050. (Ord. 82-15 § 25)


Chapter 6.08 DOGS

Sections:

6.08.000    Construction and interpretation.

6.08.010    Definitions.

6.08.020    Dangerous dogs – Liability.

6.08.030    Violation – Enforcement.

6.08.040    Dog control.

6.08.050    License required.

6.08.060    Nuisance declared.

6.08.070    Violations – Forfeiture – Continuing violations.

6.08.080    Nuisances – Additional remedies.

6.08.090    Investigation, impoundment and destruction.

Prior legislation: Ords. 82-15 and 84-14.


6.08.000 Construction and interpretation.

A. This chapter is intended to require control of dogs within the city, establish penalties for violation, and provide for enforcement.

B. The provisions of this chapter are intended to harmonize with ORS Chapter 609, as amended by SB 844 (C. 840, Oregon Laws 2005) and as may be amended hereafter. If interpretation of any provision of this chapter is required in order to apply or enforce its requirements, the more restrictive provision shall apply. (Ord. 2006-02 § 2)


6.08.010 Definitions.

As used in this section, the following words have the following meaning:

“Dangerous dog” means a dog that:

1. Without provocation and in an aggressive manner inflicts serious physical injury, as defined in this section, on a person or kills a person;

2. Acts as a potentially dangerous dog, as defined in this section, after having previously committed an act as a potentially dangerous dog that resulted in the keeper being found to have violated ORS 609.095 or LCMC 6.08.030(B); or

3. Is used as a weapon in the commission of a crime.

“Keeper” means a person who owns, possesses, controls or otherwise has charge of a dog, other than:

1. A licensed business primarily intended to obtain a profit from the kenneling of dogs;

2. A humane society or other nonprofit animal shelter;

3. A facility impounding dogs on behalf of a city or county; or

4. A veterinary facility.

“Menaces” means lunging, growling, snarling or other behavior by a dog that would cause a reasonable person to fear for the person’s safety.

“Muzzle and restrain” means use of muzzle that is made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but will prevent it from biting any human being or animal and restraint by a lead not exceeding four feet in length.

“Potentially dangerous dog” means a dog that:

1. Without provocation, and while not on premises from which the keeper may lawfully exclude others, menaces a person;

2. Without provocation, inflicts physical injury on a person that is less severe than a serious physical injury; or

3. Without provocation, and while not on premises from which the keeper may lawfully exclude others, inflicts physical injury on or kills a domestic animal, other than livestock, which is owned or possessed by a person.

“Proper enclosure” means secure confinement indoors or secure confinement in a locked pen, fenced yard, or structure measuring at least six feet in width, 12 feet in length, and six feet in height, capped if there is a dog house inside or if a dog can climb fences, with secure sides, which provides proper protection from the elements for the dog, is suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and is designed to prevent the animal from escaping while on the property.

“Running at large” means that a dog is off or outside of the premises from which the keeper of the dog may lawfully exclude others, or is not in the company of and under the control of its keeper, except if the dog is within any part of a vehicle.

“Serious physical injury” means physical injury which creates a substantial risk of death or which causes serious and protracted disfigurement, protracted impairment of health or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. (Ord. 2006-02 § 2)


6.08.020 Dangerous dogs – Liability.

A. Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, if a court has determined that a dog is a potentially dangerous dog, and subsequent to that determination the dog causes physical injury to a person or damage to real or personal property, the keeper of the dog is strictly liable to the injured person or property owner for any economic damages resulting from the injury or property damage.

B. Subsection (A) of this section does not apply if a physical injury is to a person provoking the dog or assaulting the dog’s keeper or to a person who trespasses upon premises from which the keeper may lawfully exclude others. (Ord. 2006-02 § 2)


6.08.030 Violation – Enforcement.

A. A person commits the crime of maintaining a dangerous dog if the person is the keeper of a dog and the person, with criminal negligence, fails to prevent the dog from engaging in the following behavior:

1. Without provocation and in an aggressive manner, the dog inflicts serious physical injury on a person or kills a person;

2. The dog acts as a potentially dangerous dog as defined in LCMC 6.08.010 after having previously committed an act as a potentially dangerous dog that resulted in the keeper being found to have violated subsection (B) of this section.

B. A person commits the crime of maintaining a potentially dangerous dog if the person is the keeper of a dog and the dog:

1. Without provocation, and while not on premises from which the keeper may lawfully exclude others, menaces a person;

2. Without provocation, inflicts physical injury on a person that is less severe than a serious physical injury; or

3. Without provocation, and while not on premises from which the keeper may lawfully exclude others, inflicts physical injury on or kills a domestic animal, other than livestock, which is owned or possessed by a person.

C. A law enforcement officer or dog control officer may cite a keeper, impound a dog, or both if:

1. The dog is found running at large in violation of LCMC 6.08.040.

2. The dog is a public nuisance as described in LCMC 6.08.060.

3. The officer has a reasonable belief that the dog is a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog. (Ord. 2006-02 § 2)


6.08.040 Dog control.

A. The keeper of any dog shall not permit such dog to run at large within the boundaries of the city except on the premises owned or controlled by the keeper of the dog.

B. The keeper of a dog who removes the dog from the premises shall have the dog under complete control at all times, by leash, cage or other means sufficient to prevent escape and injury to persons and damage to property. (Ord. 2006-02 § 2)


6.08.050 License required.

Every person owning or keeping any dog which has a set of permanent canine teeth or is six months old shall procure from the county a dog license as provided by ORS Chapter 609. (Ord. 2006-02 § 2)


6.08.060 Nuisance declared.

A. A dog is a public nuisance if it:

1. Is on probation by order of a court or county animal control board and is not secured in a proper enclosure while outdoors on the premises or muzzled and restrained in public;

2. Chases persons or vehicles on premises other than premises from which the keeper of the dog may lawfully exclude others;

3. Damages or destroys property of persons other than the keeper of the dog;

4. Scatters garbage on premises other than premises from which the keeper of the dog may lawfully exclude others;

5. Trespasses on private property of persons other than the keeper of the dog;

6. Disturbs any person by frequent or prolonged noises;

7. Is a female in heat and running at large;

8. Is a dog on probation and not contained in a proper enclosure as defined in LCMC 6.08.010; and

9. Acts as a potentially dangerous dog.

B. The keeper of a dog in the city shall not allow his or her dog to be a public nuisance under subsection (A) of this section. Failure to comply with reasonable restrictions imposed pursuant to LCMC 6.08.070(G) shall be considered evidence of allowing a dog to be a public nuisance.

C. A dog shall not be considered a public nuisance under this section if it bites a person wrongfully assaulting the dog or the dog’s owner, or if it bites a person trespassing upon premises occupied by the dog’s owner after being provoked by that person.

D. Any person who has cause to believe a keeper is maintaining a dog that is a public nuisance may complain, either orally or in writing, to the city. The receipt of any complaint is sufficient cause for the city to investigate the matter and determine whether the keeper of the dog is in violation of this section. (Ord. 2006-02 § 2)


6.08.070 Violations – Forfeiture – Continuing violations.

A. Any person who violates LCMC 6.08.030(B) (maintaining a potentially dangerous dog) commits a Class B violation, subject to a forfeiture of $600.00 as provided in LCMC 1.16.070(A)(2).

B. Any person who violates LCMC 6.08.060(A) (public nuisance) commits a Class C violation, subject to a forfeiture of $250.00 as provided in LCMC 1.16.070(A)(3).

C. Any person who violates LCMC 6.08.040 (running at large) commits a Class D violation, subject to a forfeiture of $100.00, as provided in LCMC 1.16.070(A)(4).

D. Any person who violates LCMC 6.08.050 (license required) is subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than $50.00.

E. In addition to any forfeiture required under this section, the court may order a person who violates LCMC 6.08.030(B) or 6.08.060 to pay restitution for any physical injury or property damage as a result of the violation.

F. Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.

G. The court shall have the authority to impose reasonable restrictions on the keeping of the dog. The keeper must pay the cost of complying with the reasonable restrictions. (Ord. 2015-10 § 5; Ord. 2006-02 § 2)


6.08.080 Nuisances – Additional remedies.

A. The city may, as an alternative to other remedies, institute injunctive or other appropriate proceedings to prevent, enjoin temporarily or permanently, or remove a nuisance that is in violation of this chapter.

B. The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for violation of this chapter, but is an additional remedy. The imposition of a penalty does not relieve a person of the duty to abate the nuisance; however, abatement of a nuisance within 10 days of the date of notice to abate or, if written protest has been filed, then abatement within 10 days of council determination that a nuisance exists will relieve the person responsible from the imposition of any forfeiture or fine under LCMC 6.08.070. (Ord. 2006-02 § 2)


6.08.090 Investigation, impoundment and destruction.

A. The city may investigate any complaint arising under this chapter and issue a citation for violation of any of its provisions as provided in Chapter 1.16 LCMC.

B. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from relying on the procedures of ORS 609.090 through 609.095 to investigate and prosecute a complaint or citation under state law involving a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog.

C. Nothing in this chapter shall limit or restrict the authority of the city or the county board of commissioners to impound and humanely destroy dogs found to be a public nuisance pursuant to ORS Chapter 609. (Ord. 2006-02 § 2)


Title 7 (Reserved)


Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY

Chapters:

8.04    Alarm Systems

8.08    Open Burning

8.10    Property Maintenance

8.12    Nuisances

8.13    Distressed Residential Property Registration

8.14    Chronic Nuisances

8.16    Solid Waste

8.20    Water Shortages


Chapter 8.04 ALARM SYSTEMS

Sections:

8.04.010    Title.

8.04.020    Purpose.

8.04.030    Scope – Applicability.

8.04.040    Definitions.

8.04.050    User permit – Required – General provisions.

8.04.060    User permit – Application.

8.04.070    User permit – Inspection.

8.04.080    User permit – Term – When void.

8.04.090    Duties of alarm users.

8.04.100    Automatic dialing devices.

8.04.110    False alarm penalties.

8.04.120    Revocation of user permits.

8.04.130    Appeals.

8.04.140    Nonliability of city.

8.04.150    Violations.


8.04.010 Title.

The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as “the public safety alarm ordinance.” (Ord. 84-9 § 1)


8.04.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the installation of emergency alarm systems in structures within the city in order to provide additional alarms, including burglary, robbery and medical, and for such other hazards as may constitute a danger to persons or property. It is anticipated that such installations will provide a method of early detection which will permit emergency personnel to increase the present level of protection to persons and property. (Ord. 84-9 § 2)


8.04.030 Scope – Applicability.

A. This chapter governs burglary, robbery, fire and medical alarm systems and hazard monitoring systems, requires permits, establishes fees, provides for revocation of permits, provides for punishment of violations and establishes a system of administration.

B. The provisions of this chapter apply only to systems served by the Lincoln City police communications center. (Ord. 84-9 § 3)


8.04.040 Definitions.

As used in this chapter:

“Alarm business” means the business by any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility.

“Alarm system” means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or other activity requiring urgent attention and to which emergency personnel are expected to respond.

“Alarm user” means the person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind in control of any building, structure or facility wherein an alarm system is maintained.

“Automatic dialing device” means a device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response.

“Burglary alarm system” means an alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the system.

“Chief” means the Lincoln City police chief or his designated representative.

“Coordinator” means the individual designated by the city to issue permits and enforce the provisions of this chapter.

“Designated trunk line” means a telephone line which has been designated to receive only automatic dialing device signals.

“Emergency personnel” means any police officer, fireman, emergency medical technician or public works employee.

“False alarm” means a signal from an alarm system resulting in a response by emergency personnel when an emergency situation does not exist.

“Fire, medical and hazard monitoring system” means an alarm system signaling a fire, medical emergency or hazard.

“Interconnect” means to connect an alarm system including an automatic dialing device to a telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit a message upon the activation of the alarm system.

“Lincoln City police communications” means the city facility used to receive emergency and general information from the public, to be dispatched to the respective emergency personnel utilizing the facility.

“Primary trunk line” means a telephone line serving the Lincoln City police communications facility, that is designated to receive emergency calls.

“Robbery alarm system” means an alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted robbery. (Ord. 84‑9 § 4)


8.04.050 User permit – Required – General provisions.

A. Every alarm user shall obtain an alarm user’s permit for each system from the coordinator’s office within 60 days of use of any alarm system, except as provided in LCMC 8.04.090(A). Application for a burglary or robbery alarm user’s permit, and a fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council, except as excluded by this chapter, shall be filed with the coordinator’s office every year. The fee shall be for the cost of administering this chapter and will not be refunded if a permit is not issued. Each permit shall bear the signature of the chief and shall end on December 31st of the year for which it is issued. The permit shall be physically upon the premises using the alarm system and shall be available for inspection by the chief. The permits required by this section shall be issued for the 12-month period beginning on January 1st of each year and ending on December 31st of the same calendar year. If any person subject to the provisions of this section applies for a new permit within the city at any time after January 1st of any permit period, the permit fees payable for an alarm user’s permit shall be prorated as of the first of the month during which the application is made, but in no event shall a permit be issued for a lesser fee than $2.00.

B. A $50.00 charge will be required, in addition to the fee provided in subsection (A) of this section, from a user who fails to obtain a permit within 60 days after the date of first use of any alarm system, or who files a renewal application or fee on or after March 1st of the year to which the renewal application applies.

C. An alarm user which is a governmental unit shall be subject to this chapter; but a permit shall be issued without payment of a fee and shall not be subject to revocation. (Ord. 2003-20 § 1; Ord. 2001-11 § 2; Ord. 90-10 § 1; Ord. 84-9 § 5)


8.04.060 User permit – Application.

A. Permit application forms shall be made available to persons required to have them, through the city or its agent. Applications and accompanying fees shall be returned to the city for processing.

B. Every permit application required by this section shall be signed by the alarm user or his or her agent and shall include the following information:

1. Name, address, and telephone number of the alarm user. If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners shall be given; if the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of its principal officers and registered agent shall be given;

2. Location of alarm system and type of system;

3. Name of licensed installer and the installer’s state license number, if applicable;

4. Name and telephone number of the person or company responsible for repair and/or maintenance of the alarm system;

5. Statement by applicant on the application that he/she is aware of the requirements of this chapter and the fees and penalties prescribed herein;

6. Names and telephone numbers of persons at different locations who may be authorized to respond to an emergency and enter or open the premises where the device is installed.

C. Information submitted to the city pursuant to this section shall remain confidential.

D. Within 10 days following any change of circumstances which renders obsolete any of the information submitted pursuant to subsection (B) of this section, the alarm user shall file an amendment to his application, setting forth the current accurate information. No additional fee shall be required for this change of information. (Ord. 84-9 §§ 6(d) – (f), 9(g))


8.04.070 User permit – Inspection.

Each alarm user permit shall be available for inspection at reasonable times by the city or designee. (Ord. 84-9 § 9(f))


8.04.080 User permit – Term – When void.

Permits shall be issued on a calendar year basis and shall remain in effect for the period issued unless the permit is revoked or the person or persons or organizations owning, leasing, renting or in control of the protected premises changes. In the event any of the above conditions occurs, the permit shall be null and void, and the permit holder shall file the correct information with the city within 10 days from the date of change, and continued use of an alarm system shall be deemed in violation of this chapter, subject to the penalties provision of LCMC 8.04.110. (Ord. 90-10 § 2; Ord. 84-9 § 9(e))


8.04.090 Duties of alarm users.

A. Every alarm user shall obtain a permit for each alarm system located in the city within 60 days of use of the alarm system. This requirement does not apply to the self-contained residential smoke alarms which are not connected to a communications center or a private monitoring service.

B. Every alarm user utilizing an alarm system shall be responsible for the maintenance of the device, and shall repair any defective device within 48 hours after the alarm user learns or reasonably should have learned that the device is defective. The alarm system shall be disconnected after the expiration of 48 hours if repairs cannot be made within that time.

C. Any alarm user required by federal, state, county or municipal statute, regulation, rule or ordinance to install, maintain and operate an alarm system shall be subject to this chapter. (Ord. 2003-20 § 2; Ord. 84-9 § 6(a) – (c))


8.04.100 Automatic dialing devices.

A. It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device to select a primary trunk line, and it is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram an automatic dialing device which is programmed to select a primary trunk line within 12 hours of receipt of written notice from the coordinator that it is so programmed.

B. Upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, all existing automatic dialing devices programmed to select a primary trunk line shall be reprogrammed to select a designated trunk line or disconnected. (Ord. 84-9 § 7)


8.04.110 False alarm penalties.

As a condition of any alarm system permit issued under the provisions of this chapter, the permittee shall pay to the city, upon and within 10 days of invoice, fees for false alarms generated by the permittee’s alarm system, according to the following schedule:

A. First four false alarms during each calendar year, no charge;

B. For each false alarm thereafter, to and including the sixth, $20.00 per false alarm;

C. For each false alarm thereafter, to and including the tenth, $40.00 per false alarm;

D. For each false alarm thereafter, to and including the twelfth, $80.00 per false alarm;

E. For each false alarm beyond the twelfth the permittee shall pay $150.00 per false alarm, and becomes subject to review for possible revocation of the permit. (Ord. 84-9 § 8)


8.04.120 Revocation of user permits.

A. The following shall be cause for revoking by the coordinator of any alarm user permit:

1. Any false or incomplete statement made on the permit application;

2. Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter;

3. Failure to pay a false alarm fee, as prescribed in LCMC 8.04.110, within 30 days of demand;

4. Exceeding 12 false alarms in a permit year.

B. An alarm user shall immediately discontinue use of the alarm system upon being notified by certified mail of the revocation of the permit.

C. Any party whose permit has been revoked under subsection (A) of this section may appeal the revocation under the provisions of LCMC 8.04.130.

D. An application for a permit subsequent to a revocation of a prior permit is considered an initial application and is subject to the fee provisions of LCMC 8.04.050. (Ord. 84-9 § 9(a) – (d))


8.04.130 Appeals.

A. Any person who has been assessed a false alarm penalty, had a permit revoked or suffered any other penalty as provided in this chapter may appeal such penalty to the city council. A written notice of appeal shall be filed with the city recorder within 10 days after receiving notification of revocation or assessment.

B. The filing of a notice of appeal shall stay the action appealed until disposition of the appeal by the city council.

C. Upon receipt of the written notice of appeal by the city recorder, he shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled city council meeting. (Ord. 84-9 § 10)


8.04.140 Nonliability of city.

Neither the city nor any official or employee thereof, including the Lincoln City police communications center and its employees, shall be liable for any damage resulting from the malfunction or defective installation of any alarm system or alarm monitoring service or conduct of any alarm supplier or installer as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 84-9 § 11)


8.04.150 Violations.

Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a Class D violation. Any violation forfeiture or other remedy shall be in addition to the monetary late payment penalty, the false alarm penalties, and the permit revocation remedies established by this chapter. (Ord. 2015-10 § 5; Ord. 2003-20 § 3)


Chapter 8.08 OPEN BURNING

Sections:

8.08.010    Definitions.

8.08.020    Outdoor burning prohibited – Exceptions.

8.08.030    Violations – Penalty – Injunction.


8.08.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter:

“Agricultural outdoor burning” means the outdoor burning of any agricultural waste.

“Agricultural waste” means any waste material generated or used by an agricultural operation.

“Commercial outdoor burning” means the outdoor burning of any commercial waste.

“Commercial waste” means any waste material generated or used by a commercial operation. Examples of commercial waste are waste from offices, wholesale or retail yards and outlets, warehouses, restaurants, and recreational vehicle parks.

“Construction outdoor burning” means the outdoor burning of any construction waste.

“Construction waste” means any waste material used for, resulting from, or produced by a building or construction project. Examples of construction waste are wood, lumber, paper, crating and packing materials processed for or used during construction, materials left after completion of construction, and materials collected during cleanup of a construction site.

“Demolition outdoor burning” means the outdoor burning of demolition waste.

“Demolition waste” means any material resulting from or produced by the complete or partial destruction or tearing down of any human-made structure or the clearing of any site for land improvement or cleanup.

“Domestic outdoor burning” means the outdoor burning of any domestic waste.

“Domestic waste” means household waste material. Examples of household waste are paper, cardboard, clothing, yard debris, and other material generated in or around a dwelling or on the property appurtenant to a dwelling.

“Industrial outdoor burning” means the outdoor burning of any industrial waste.

“Industrial waste” means any waste material, including process waste, produced as the direct result of any manufacturing or industrial process.

“Outdoor burning” means burning in outdoor open fires; burning in outdoor burn barrels; burning in outdoor incinerators; and burning of waste materials in any other outdoor structures or equipment.

“Person” means a natural person, firm, partnership, association, public or municipal corporation, political subdivision, or state or federal government or agency thereof.

“Person in charge of property” means an agent, occupant, lessee, contract purchaser or other person having possession or control of property or supervising a construction project on the property.

“Person responsible” means an owner of property, a person in charge of property, and the person who caused or maintained outdoor burning on property.

“Waste” means any useless or discarded materials.

“Yard debris” means wood, needle, or leaf materials from trees, shrubs, plants, or grass from the real property appurtenant to a dwelling. (Ord. 2003-21 § 1)


8.08.020 Outdoor burning prohibited – Exceptions.

No owner or other person responsible shall cause or allow to be initiated or continued on the owner’s property any agricultural, commercial, construction, demolition, domestic, or industrial outdoor burning, except that the following shall not be prohibited by this section:

A. A fire used only for ceremonial or cooking purposes and fueled only by commercially available fireplace or barbecue fuel or by wood, with the fire contained in a fireplace, barbecue grill, chinaria, or other similar structure or equipment (but not a burn barrel) specifically designed for outdoor ceremonial or cooking purposes;

B. A wood-fueled beach fire;

C. A fire set or permitted by North Lincoln Fire and Rescue District No. 1 when in the opinion of the district fire chief the fire is necessary or appropriate for the performance of the district’s official duty for fire fighting or fire protection training;

D. A fire set or permitted by North Lincoln Fire and Rescue District No. 1 and in accord with such conditions and restrictions as the fire chief deems appropriate, when in the opinion of the fire chief the fire is necessary or appropriate for fire fighting, fire prevention, or fire protection purposes;

E. A fire set or permitted by North Lincoln Fire and Rescue District No. 1 and in accord with such conditions and restrictions as the fire chief deems appropriate, when the city manager has issued a written declaration of emergency and authorization of the fire on the ground that a hazard to the public health or safety cannot be removed or disposed of in any other practical manner;

F. A campfire in a firepit structure provided by the State of Oregon in Devils Lake State Park. (Ord. 2003-21 § 1)


8.08.030 Violations – Penalty – Injunction.

A. Any person who violates LCMC 8.08.020 commits a Class C violation.

B. Each fire that violates LCMC 8.08.020 constitutes a separate violation.

C. Each day that a fire continues in violation of LCMC 8.08.020 constitutes a separate violation.

D. The city may, in addition or as an alternative to other remedies, institute injunctive or other appropriate proceedings to prevent or enjoin violations of LCMC 8.08.020. (Ord. 2015-10 § 5; Ord. 2003-21 § 1)


Chapter 8.10 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE1

Sections:

8.10.010    Purpose.

8.10.020    Definitions.

8.10.030    Responsibility.

8.10.040    Vacant premises.

8.10.050    Noxious weeds.

8.10.060    Maintenance of exterior property – General.

8.10.070    Exterior property accumulations of rubbish and garbage.

8.10.080    Exterior property storage.

8.10.090    Pest infestation.

8.10.100    Maintenance of building and structure exteriors – General.

8.10.110    Building and structure exterior surfaces.

8.10.120    Building and structure foundation walls.

8.10.130    Building and structure exterior walls.

8.10.140    Building and structure roofs and drainage.

8.10.150    Building and structure decorative features.

8.10.160    Building and structure windows and doors.

8.10.170    Building and structure glazing.

8.10.180    Accessory structures.

8.10.190    Violations – Penalty and nuisance declaration.

8.10.200    Summary abatement.

8.10.210    Other remedies.


8.10.010 Purpose.

The provisions of this chapter establish the minimum conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of buildings, structures and property. (Ord. 2004-12 § 1)


8.10.020 Definitions.

Whenever the words “building,” “premises,” “property,” or “structure” are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof.” Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall for the purposes of this chapter have the following meanings:

“Building” means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy and having a fixed base on or a fixed connection to the ground.

“Deterioration” means a lowering in quality of the condition or appearance of a building or structure, characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting, or other physical decay.

“Exterior property” means the space on a premises not occupied by buildings or structures.

“Exterminate” and “extermination” mean the act of control, elimination, and removal of pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, or trapping; or by any other method approved by the Lincoln County health department.

“Garbage” means animal, vegetable, or other waste from the handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food.

“Good repair” means substantially free of deterioration.

“Imminent hazard” means a condition that creates a substantial risk of injury, damage, or loss to a person, to a person’s health, or to property, when such injury, damage, or loss is occurring, impending shortly, or on the point of happening.

“Infestation” means the presence of pests on or within premises in numbers that are harmful, bothersome, or create an imminent hazard.

“Neatly kept” means stored, stacked, or otherwise arranged in a manner generally free of disorder or disarray.

“Noxious weeds” means plants that are quarantined under OAR 603-052-1200.

“Occupancy” means the purpose for which a premises is used or intended to be used.

“Occupant” means any person living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a premises.

“Person” means an individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity, or any other group acting as a unit.

“Person responsible” means any person having a legal or equitable interest in a premises; or recorded in the official records of Lincoln County as holding title to the premises; or identified in the official records of the state of Oregon or Lincoln County as being responsible for the payment of property taxes on the premises; or otherwise having possession or control of the premises; including the guardian, executor, or administrator of the estate of any such person if ordered to take possession of the premises by a court.

“Pests” means animals commonly considered detrimental to humans or human concerns, including but not limited to insects and rodents.

“Premises” means a lot, plot, or parcel of land including any buildings and structures thereon.

“Rubbish” means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, and including the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, cardboard, plastic, glass, sweepings, tree branches, yard trimmings, cans, metals, mineral matter, crockery, dust, and similar waste materials.

“Safe” means secure from threats of danger to the life, health, property, or safety of the public, occupants, or visitors and not so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsound, of faulty construction, or unstable that there is a significant risk of partial or complete collapse.

“Sanitary” means free from agents injurious or with a significant potential to be injurious to health, including without limitation accumulations of debris, rubbish, manure, garbage, or other refuse, stagnant water, or polluted water.

“Secure” means protected against unauthorized entry, including without limitation having doors, windows, and other openings all firmly closed and locked or otherwise closed off such as by a grille or grating.

“Skilled manner” means executed in a workmanlike manner including, as appropriate, generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged, without marring adjacent work, and completed in conformance with generally accepted construction and maintenance practices.

“Structure” means that which is built or constructed. (Ord. 2004-12 § 1)


8.10.030 Responsibility.

A person responsible for a premises shall maintain the premises in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. A person responsible shall not occupy or permit another person to occupy premises that are not in a sanitary and safe condition and that do not comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-12 § 1)


8.10.040 Vacant premises.

All vacant premises shall be maintained in a safe, secure, and sanitary condition. (Ord. 2004-12 § 1)


8.10.050 Noxious weeds.

All premises shall be maintained free of noxious weeds. (Ord. 2004-12 § 1)


8.10.060 Maintenance of exterior property – General.

All exterior property shall be maintained in a sanitary and safe condition. No owner or person in charge of property shall permit, allow, maintain or suffer graffiti to remain on private property within view from premises open to the public, such as public rights-of-way or other publicly owned property. (Ord. 2017-23 § 3; Ord. 2004-12 § 1)


8.10.070 Exterior property accumulations of rubbish and garbage.

All exterior property shall be free of any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. Composting of materials such as leaves, grass clippings, and food wastes (other than meat, bones, and fatty wastes) generated on the premises, for personal use on the premises, is not subject to this prohibition. (Ord. 2004-12 § 1)


8.10.080 Exterior property storage.

Materials such as but not limited to firewood, building materials, and equipment, stored in or on exterior property, shall be neatly kept. (Ord. 2004-12 § 1)


8.10.090 Pest infestation.

All premises shall be kept free from pest infestation. Where pests are found, they shall be promptly exterminated. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. (Ord. 2004-12 § 1)


8.10.100 Maintenance of building and structure exteriors – General.

The exterior of a building or structure shall be maintained in good repair, and in a safe and sanitary condition. (Ord. 2004-12 § 1)


8.10.110 Building and structure exterior surfaces.

All building and structure exterior surfaces, including but not limited to window frames, doors, door frames, cornices, porches, siding, and trim, shall be maintained in good repair. (Ord. 2004-12 § 1)


8.10.120 Building and structure foundation walls.

All building and structure foundation walls shall be maintained free from large open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of pests. (Ord. 2004-12 § 1)


8.10.130 Building and structure exterior walls.

All building and structure exterior walls shall be maintained in good repair and weather proof and shall be properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration. The use of tarps or similar material for emergency repair, or in place of a customary building component such as siding or a door, shall not exceed 90 days in total, whether such use is continuous or interrupted, except when a longer period is needed for the processing of an insurance claim that was filed within 14 days of the incident giving rise to the claim or when the city manager or his or her designee grants an extension for up to 30 additional days. (Ord. 2004-12 § 1)


8.10.140 Building and structure roofs and drainage.

All building and structure roofs and flashing shall be sound, tight, and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drains, gutters, and down spouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions, and shall not direct drainage onto the property of another. The use of tarps or similar material for emergency repair shall not exceed 90 days in total, whether such use is continuous or interrupted, except when a longer period is needed for the processing of an insurance claim that was filed within 14 days of the incident giving rise to the claim or when the city manager or his or her designee grants an extension for up to 30 additional days. (Ord. 2004-12 § 1)


8.10.150 Building and structure decorative features.

All building and structure cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings, and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair, with proper anchorage and in a safe condition. (Ord. 2004-12 § 1)


8.10.160 Building and structure windows and doors.

Every building and structure window, door, and frame shall be kept in good repair and weather tight. No window or door may be covered with plywood, tarps, or similar materials for more than 90 days in total, whether such covering is continuous or interrupted, except when a longer period is needed for the processing of an insurance claim that was filed within 14 days of the incident giving rise to the claim or when the city manager or his or her designee grants an extension for up to 30 additional days. (Ord. 2004-12 § 1)


8.10.170 Building and structure glazing.

All building and structure glazing materials shall be maintained in good repair. Glazing with holes or cracks, or that is partially or wholly missing, shall be replaced with new glazing within 30 days after the defect becomes apparent. (Ord. 2004-12 § 1)


8.10.180 Accessory structures.

All accessory sheds, fences, walls, signs, sign structures, and other similar structures shall be erected in a skilled manner and maintained structurally sound and in good repair. (Ord. 2004-12 § 1)


8.10.190 Violations – Penalty and nuisance declaration.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation of any provision of this chapter is a Class C violation. In addition, a violation of any provision of this chapter is a nuisance. (Ord. 2015-10 § 5; Ord. 2004-12 § 1)


8.10.200 Summary abatement.

The city manager or his or her designee may proceed summarily to abate a violation of this chapter that unmistakably exists and poses an imminent hazard. (Ord. 2004-12 § 1)


8.10.210 Other remedies.

The city, as a remedy in addition to violation and nuisance abatement proceedings, may institute injunctive or other appropriate proceedings to prevent, enjoin temporarily or permanently, or remove a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-10 § 5; Ord. 2004-12 § 1)1

Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 2004-12 adds these provisions as Chapter 8.08. This chapter has been renumbered to avoid duplication of numbering. 


Chapter 8.12 NUISANCES

Sections:

8.12.010    Definitions.

8.12.020    Nuisances affecting public health.

8.12.030    Creating hazards.

8.12.040    Attractive nuisances.

8.12.050    Snow and ice.

8.12.060    Noxious vegetation.

8.12.070    Scattering rubbish.

8.12.080    Trees.

8.12.090    Fences.

8.12.095    Graffiti.

8.12.100    Surface waters – Drainage.

8.12.110    Radio and television interference.

8.12.120    Junk.

8.12.130    Nuisance declarations.

8.12.140    Notice.

8.12.150    Abatement by person responsible.

8.12.155    Inspection and abatement warrants.

8.12.160    Abatement by city.

8.12.170    Assessment of costs.

8.12.180    Summary abatement.

8.12.190    Violation – Penalty.

8.12.200    Continuing violations – Additional remedies.


8.12.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:

“Discarded vehicle” means any vehicle which meets any of the following criteria:

1. Inoperative;

2. Wrecked;

3. Dismantled or partially dismantled;

4. Abandoned;

5. Junked.

“Graffiti” means any unauthorized markings of paint, ink, chalk, dye, or other similar substance which is visible from premises open to the public, and that have been placed upon any real or personal property such as buildings, fences, structures, or the unauthorized etching or scratching of such described surfaces where the markings are visible from premises open to the public, such as public rights-of-way or other publicly owned property.

“Noxious vegetation” means:

1. Poison oak;

2. Poison ivy;

3. Tansy ragwort;

4. St. John’s wort (goat weed);

5. Canadian thistle;

6. Scotch broom (uncontrolled);

7. Gorse;

8. Blackberry bushes or vines which cover more than 51 percent of the total square footage of an individual lot or extend over a property line;

9. Vegetation of any kind which obstructs or impairs the free and full use of any sidewalk, street or other public right-of-way of travel;

10. Vegetation of any kind which creates:

a. A health hazard,

b. A fire hazard,

c. A traffic hazard.

“Person” means a natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.

“Person in charge of property” means an agent, occupant, lessee, contract purchaser or other person having possession or control of property or the supervision of any construction project.

“Person responsible” means the person responsible for abating a nuisance and shall include:

1. The owner;

2. The person in charge of property as defined in this section;

3. The person who caused to come into or continue in existence a nuisance as defined in this chapter or another ordinance of the city.

“Public place” means a building, way, place or accommodation, whether publicly or privately owned, open and available to the general public. (Ord. 2017-23 § 1; Ord. 87-13 § 1; Ord. 82-15 § 1)


8.12.020 Nuisances affecting public health.

No person shall cause or permit, on property owned or controlled by him, a nuisance affecting public health. The following are nuisances affecting public health and may be abated as provided in this chapter:

A. Privies or open vaults within the city, except those constructed or maintained in connection with construction projects in accordance with the Health Division regulations;

B. Accumulations of debris, rubbish, manure and other refuse that are not removed within a reasonable time and affect the health of the city;

C. Stagnant water which affords a breeding place for mosquitoes and other insect pests;

D. Pollution of a body of water, well, spring, stream or other drainage ditch by sewage, industrial wastes or other substances;

E. Decayed or unwholesome food which is offered for human consumption;

F. Premises which are in such a state or condition as to cause an offensive odor or which are in an unsanitary condition;

G. Drainage of liquid wastes from private premises;

H. Cesspools or septic tanks which are in an unsanitary condition or which cause an offensive odor. (Ord. 82-15 § 6)


8.12.030 Creating hazards.

No person shall create a hazard by:

A. Maintaining or leaving in a place accessible to children a container with a compartment of more than one and one-half cubic feet capacity and a door or lid which locks or fastens automatically when closed and which cannot be easily opened from the inside;

B. Being the owner or otherwise having possession of property upon which there is a well, cistern, cesspool, excavation or other hole of a depth of four feet or more and a top width of 12 inches or more, fail or refuse to cover or fence it with a suitable protective construction. (Ord. 82-15 § 7)


8.12.040 Attractive nuisances.

A. No owner or person in charge of property shall permit thereon:

1. Unguarded machinery, equipment or other devices which are attractive, dangerous and accessible to children;

2. Lumber, logs or piling placed or stored in a manner so as to be attractive, dangerous and accessible to children;

3. An open pit, quarry, cistern or other such excavation without safeguards or barriers to prevent such places from being used by children;

4. Storage of discarded vehicles.

B. This section does not apply to authorized construction projects or licensed auto wrecking yards with reasonable safeguards to prevent injuries or death to playing children. (Ord. 82-15 § 8)


8.12.050 Snow and ice.

No owner or person in charge of property, improved or unimproved, abutting on a public sidewalk, shall permit:

A. Snow to remain on the sidewalk for a period longer than the first two hours of daylight after the snow has fallen;

B. Ice to remain on the sidewalk for more than two hours of daylight after the ice has formed, unless the ice is covered with sand, ashes or other suitable material to assure safe travel. (Ord. 82-15 § 9)


8.12.060 Noxious vegetation.

A. No owner or person in charge of property shall allow noxious vegetation to grow on his property. It shall be the duty of an owner or person in charge of property to cut down or destroy noxious vegetation.

B. If destruction is done by the application of herbicides, it shall be the duty of the owner or person in charge of property to apply the same in conformance with the manufacturer’s directions and all applicable federal and state laws and regulations. (Ord. 87-13 § 2; Ord. 82-15 § 10)


8.12.070 Scattering rubbish.

A. No person shall deposit upon public or private property any kind of rubbish, trash, debris, refuse or any substance that would mar the appearance, create a stench or fire hazard, detract from the cleanliness or safety of the property or would be likely to injure a person, animal or vehicle traveling upon a public way.

B. No person shall deposit in public or privately owned garbage cans, containers or dumpsters, other than their own or those specifically provided for their use, any kind of rubbish, trash, debris or refuse accumulated at their place of business or abode. (Ord. 82-15 § 11)


8.12.080 Trees.

A. No owner or person in charge of property that abuts upon a street or public sidewalk shall permit trees or bushes on his property to interfere with street or sidewalk traffic. It is the duty of an owner or person in charge of property that abuts upon a street or public sidewalk to keep all trees and bushes on his premises, including the adjoining parking strip, trimmed to a height of not less than eight feet above the sidewalk and not less than 13 feet seven inches above the roadway.

B. No owner or person in charge of property shall allow to stand a dead or decaying tree that is a hazard to the public or to persons or property on or near the property. (Ord. 82-15 § 12)


8.12.090 Fences.

A. No owner or person in charge of property shall construct or maintain a barbed-wire fence thereon, or permit barbed wire to remain as part of a fence along a sidewalk or public way; except such wire may be placed above the top of other fencing not less than six feet, six inches high.

B. No owner or person in charge of property shall construct, maintain or operate an electric fence along a sidewalk or public way or along the adjoining property line of another person. (Ord. 82-15 § 13)


8.12.095 Graffiti.

No owner or person in charge of property shall permit, allow, maintain or suffer graffiti to remain on such private property within view of premises open to the public. Property upon which graffiti has been placed and remains after 10 days from written notice to the owner of record shall constitute a nuisance. If the graffiti is unauthorized etching or scratching of glass or clear acrylic material, property upon which graffiti has been placed and remains after 30 days from written notice to the owner of record shall constitute a nuisance. (Ord. 2017-23 § 2)


8.12.100 Surface waters – Drainage.

A. No owner or person in charge of a building or structure shall suffer or permit rainwater, ice or snow to fall from the building or structure onto a street or public sidewalk or to flow across the sidewalk.

B. The owner or person in charge of property shall install and maintain in proper state of repair adequate drainpipes or a drainage system, so that any overflow water accumulating on the roof or about the building is not carried across or upon the sidewalk. (Ord. 82-15 § 14)


8.12.110 Radio and television interference.

A. No person shall operate or use an electrical, mechanical or other device, apparatus, instrument or machine that causes reasonably preventable interference with radio or television reception by a radio or television receiver of good engineering design.

B. This section does not apply to devices licensed, approved and operated under the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. (Ord. 82-15 § 15)


8.12.120 Junk.

A. No person shall keep any junk outdoors on any street, lot or premises, or in a building that is not wholly or entirely enclosed.

B. The term “junk” as used in this section includes motor vehicles, motor vehicle parts, abandoned automobiles, discarded automobiles, machinery, machinery parts, appliances or parts thereof, iron or metal, glass, paper, lumber, wood or other waste or discarded materials.

C. This section does not apply to junk kept in a duly licensed junk yard or automobile wrecking yard. (Ord. 82-15 § 16)


8.12.130 Nuisance declarations.

A. The acts, conditions or objects specifically enumerated and defined in LCMC 8.12.020 through 8.12.110 are declared public nuisances; and such acts, conditions or objects may be abated by any of the procedures set forth in LCMC 8.12.140 through 8.12.180.

B. In addition to the nuisances specifically enumerated within this chapter, any act described as a nuisance in any ordinance of the city or in any other chapter of this code, and every other thing, substance or act which is determined by the city council to be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the city, is declared a nuisance and may be abated as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 90-9 § 1; Ord. 82-15 § 17(1), (2))


8.12.140 Notice.

A. Upon determination by the city manager or his designate that a nuisance exists, the city shall cause a notice to be posted on the premises or at the site of the nuisance, directing the person responsible to abate the nuisance.

B. At the time of posting, the city manager shall cause a copy of the notice to be forwarded by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, to the person responsible at his last known address.

C. The notice to abate shall contain:

1. A description of the nuisance;

2. A brief description of the real property on which the nuisance exists;

3. A direction to abate the nuisance within 10 days from the date of the notice;

4. A statement that, unless the nuisance is removed, the city may abate the nuisance;

5. A statement that, if the city abates the nuisance, the costs shall become a lien subject to foreclosure by the city as a lien for street improvements;

6. A statement that the person responsible may protest the order to abate by giving notice to the city manager within 10 days from the date of the notice.

D. Upon completion of the posting and mailing, the person posting and mailing shall execute and file certificates stating the date and place of the mailing and posting.

E. An error in the name or address of the person responsible shall not make the notice void, and, in such case, the posted notice shall be sufficient. (Ord. 82-15 § 18)


8.12.150 Abatement by person responsible.

A. Within 10 days after the posting and mailing of such notice as provided in LCMC 8.12.140, the person responsible shall remove the nuisance or show that no nuisance exists.

B. A person responsible, protesting that no nuisance exists, shall file with the city manager a written statement which shall specify the basis for so protesting.

C. The statement shall be forwarded to the city council as a part of its regular agenda at its next succeeding meeting. At the time set for consideration of the abatement, the person protesting may appear and be heard by the council. The council shall determine whether or not a nuisance exists. The determination shall be entered in the official minutes of the council. Council determination shall be required only in those cases where a protest has been filed as provided.

D. If the council determines that a nuisance does exist, the person responsible shall, within 10 days after the council determination, abate the nuisance.

E. If more than one person is a person responsible, they shall be jointly and severally liable for abating the nuisance or for the costs incurred by the city in abating the nuisance. (Ord. 82-15 §§ 19, 20)


8.12.155 Inspection and abatement warrants.

Whenever the manager has reasonable cause to believe that there exists upon any building, structure or premises any violation of the Lincoln City Municipal Code, state laws or regulations or any codes adopted by reference, including but not limited to nuisance conditions under this chapter, the manager or designee may, with consent of the owner or occupant, enter the property to inspect for violations or perform the required abatement. If consent is not given for inspection or abatement, the manager, in conjunction with the city attorney, shall pursue inspection or abatement through any legal means, including but not limited to seeking an administrative inspection warrant or administrative abatement warrant from the circuit court or municipal court. (Ord. 2017-23 § 4)


8.12.160 Abatement by city.

A. If, within the time period allowed, the nuisance has not been abated by the person responsible, the council may cause the nuisance to be abated.

B. The officer charged with abatement of the nuisance shall have the right, at reasonable times, to enter into or upon the property to investigate or cause the removal of a nuisance. Sale of discarded vehicles shall be as provided in Chapter 10.12 LCMC.

C. The city manager shall keep an accurate record of the expenses incurred by the city in physically abating the nuisance and shall include therein a charge of $10.00 or 10 percent of those expenses, whichever is the greater, for administrative overhead. (Ord. 82-15 § 21)


8.12.170 Assessment of costs.

A. The city manager by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, shall forward to the person responsible a notice stating:

1. The total cost of abatement, including the administrative overhead;

2. That the cost as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien against the property unless paid within 30 days from the date of the notice;

3. That if the person responsible objects to the cost of the abatement as indicated, he may file a notice of objection with the city manager not more than 10 days from the date of the notice.

B. Upon the expiration of 10 days after the date of the notice, the council, in the regular course of business, shall hear and determine the objections to the costs assessed, if any.

C. If the costs of the abatement are not paid within 30 days from the date of the notice, an assessment of the costs, as stated or as determined by the council, shall be made and shall thereupon be entered in the docket of city liens, and, upon such entry being made, shall constitute a lien upon the property from which the nuisance was removed or abated.

D. The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street improvements are enforced and shall bear interest at the rate of nine percent per annum. The interest shall commence to run from the date of the entry of the lien in the lien docket.

E. An error in the name of the person responsible shall not void the assessment, nor will a failure to receive the notice of the proposed assessment render the assessment void, but it shall remain a valid lien against the property. (Ord. 82-15 § 22)


8.12.180 Summary abatement.

The procedure provided by this chapter is not exclusive but is in addition to procedure provided by other ordinances. The city manager or his designate may proceed summarily to abate a health or other nuisance which unmistakably exists and which imminently endangers human life or property. (Ord. 82-15 § 23)


8.12.190 Violation – Penalty.

A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of LCMC 8.12.020, 8.12.030, 8.12.040 and 8.12.120 commits a Class B violation.

B. Any person who violates any of the provisions of LCMC 8.12.090, 8.12.110 and 8.12.130 commits a Class B violation.

C. Any person who violates any of the provisions of LCMC 8.12.060, 8.12.070, 8.12.080 and 8.12.100 commits a Class C violation.

D. Any person who violates any of the provisions of LCMC 8.12.050 commits a Class D violation.

E. The city may, as an alternative to other remedies, institute injunctive or other appropriate proceedings to prevent, enjoin temporarily or permanently, or remove a nuisance that is in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 89-16 § 1; Ord. 84-14; Ord. 82-15 § 24(1 – 4), (6))


8.12.200 Continuing violations – Additional remedies.

A. Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.

B. The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for violation of this chapter, but is an additional remedy. The imposition of a penalty does not relieve a person of the duty to abate the nuisance; however, abatement of a nuisance within 10 days of the date of notice to abate or, if written protest has been filed, then abatement within 10 days of council determination that a nuisance exists will relieve the person responsible from the imposition of any forfeiture or fine under LCMC 8.12.190. (Ord. 82-15 § 25)


Chapter 8.13 DISTRESSED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION

Sections:

8.13.010    Definitions.

8.13.020    Registration – Security and maintenance obligation.

8.13.030    Registration – Information required – Change in ownership.

8.13.040    Maintenance obligations.

8.13.050    Security obligations.

8.13.060    Inspection requirement.

8.13.070    City notice of noncompliance – Appeal – City abatement.

8.13.080    Penalties – Citation – Remedies not exclusive.


8.13.010 Definitions.

The following definitions apply unless inconsistent with the context:

“Abandoned residential property” means:

1. Residential property that is both vacant and subject to either a pending judicial execution sale under ORS 18.901 (2017) et seq., or to nonjudicial foreclosure pursuant to ORS 86.764 to 86.782 (2017); or

2. Residential property that is both vacant and was the subject of either a judicial execution sale under ORS 18.901 (2017) et seq., or nonjudicial foreclosure pursuant to ORS 86.764 to 86.782 (2017) where legal title is retained by the beneficiary(ies) of a foreclosed trust deed or was otherwise transferred to beneficiary(ies) pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure.

“Foreclosed residential property” means residential property an owner obtains as a result of:

1. Foreclosing a trust deed on the residential property;

2. Obtaining a judgment foreclosing a lien on the residential property; or

3. Purchasing the residential property at a trustee’s sale or a sheriff’s sale.

“Local” means within 30 road/driving miles distance of residential property.

“Manager” means city manager or the manager’s designee.

“Owner” means any natural person, partnership, association, corporation or other entity identified as having or claiming a lien interest either as a mortgagee under a mortgage or as a trustee or beneficiary under a trust deed in abandoned residential property or vacant foreclosed residential property.

“Residential property” is property as defined in ORS 18.901(2017).

“Vacant” means condition(s) indicative of residential property being uninhabited, vacant or abandoned including (but are not limited to):

1. Visibly overgrown and/or dead vegetation at the property;

2. Accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail;

3. Visible accumulation of trash, junk and/or debris;

4. Absence of typical household furnishing consistent with active residential habitation; and/or

5. Statements by neighbors, delivery agents, government employees that the property is uninhabited or vacant. (Ord. 2019-11 § 1; Ord. 2017-22 § 1)


8.13.020 Registration – Security and maintenance obligation.

All owners of abandoned residential property and vacant foreclosed residential property shall continuously comply with the registration, security, maintenance and inspection requirements imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 2017-22 § 1)


8.13.030 Registration – Information required – Change in ownership.

A. Residential property shall be registered by the owner(s) thereof with the manager in the event:

1. Of an anticipated judicial foreclosure of the property, no earlier than the commencement of any of the actions described by ORS 18.904, 18.906, 18.908 (2017) and not later than the date first set for the execution sale described in ORS 18.930 (2017);

2. Of an anticipated nonjudicial foreclosure of the property done pursuant to ORS 86.764 to 86.782 (2017) not later than the date of service or mailing of the notice of sale described in ORS 86.764 (2017); or

3. An owner receives written notice from the manager that the manager believes the residential property is vacant.

B. Each registration shall be on a form approved by the manager and contain, at a minimum, the following:

1. The name of the trustee or mortgagee;

2. The name of the beneficiary (if different) under the trust deed;

3. The street/office mailing address(es) of the trustee/mortgagee and, if there is one, the beneficiary under the trust deed; and

4. The name, mailing address and contact information of a local individual or entity charged with responsibility by the trustee, mortgagee and/or beneficiary for ensuring compliance with the Lincoln City Municipal Code, including code responsibility for Chapters 8.10 (Property Maintenance) and 8.12 (Nuisance) LCMC and the requirements of this chapter.

C. Each registration shall be accompanied by payment of a registration fee in an amount set by council resolution.

D. The manager shall maintain a current list of registered residential properties.

E. In the event ownership of a registered residential property changes, notice of the change shall be sent to the manager not later than 30 days after the change. (Ord. 2019-11 § 2; Ord. 2017-22 § 1)


8.13.040 Maintenance obligations.

The owners of residential property determined to be or registered as abandoned residential property or vacant foreclosed residential property shall cause the property to be maintained consistent with Chapter 8.10 LCMC (Property Maintenance). In addition, the maintenance obligations of this chapter include not violating any provision of Chapter 8.12 LCMC (Nuisances). Maintenance includes, but is not limited to, maintaining the property in a generally kempt condition consistent with surrounding occupied residential property and free of weeds, dead vegetation, graffiti, trash, accumulated newspapers, circulars, flyers, discarded personal items and other items/conditions that give the appearance the property is vacant or abandoned. (Ord. 2017-22 § 1)


8.13.050 Security obligations.

A. The owners of residential property determined to be or registered as abandoned residential property or vacant foreclosed residential property shall cause the property to be secured (including closure and locking of windows, doors, gates and other opening(s) allowing access to the dwelling) and thereafter to be maintained so as not to be readily accessible to unauthorized persons.

B. Residential property subject to subsection (A) of this section shall be continuously posted with a notice (printed and legible with a font size no less than 12 point) listing the name and contact information of the local individual or entity identified in the city’s registration form along with the following phrases completed with the appropriate identification and contact information:

THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY: ____________.

TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL: _________.

The posting shall be placed either on the interior of the dwelling or secured to the exterior of the dwelling. Exterior posting must be constructed of and printed on weather resistant materials. (Ord. 2017-22 § 1)


8.13.060 Inspection requirement.

The local individual or entity identified in the registration required by LCMC 8.13.030 shall inspect the residential property on not less than a monthly basis to ensure that the requirements imposed by the terms of LCMC 8.13.040 to 8.13.050 are met. (Ord. 2017-22 § 1)


8.13.070 City notice of noncompliance – Appeal – City abatement.

A. In the event the manager believes an owner has failed to meet the registration, maintenance, security or inspection obligations of this chapter, the manager shall send notice of said failure to the owner at the address listed on the tax rolls of the county maintained consistent with ORS 311.560 (2017) or at such other address as may be known to the manager. The notice shall set out the nature of the failure(s) to be corrected and shall give the owner deadline(s) within which the owner must remedy the violation(s). If the violation is failure to register or maintain posting of the premises, the owner shall have no less than 10 days from such written notice to register or post the property before daily fines will accrue. If the violation concerns maintenance, inspection or security of the premises, the owner shall have no less than 30 days to comply, unless the manager finds that the condition of the property constitutes a public health or safety threat, in which case the notice may specify compliance is required in less than 30 days. Notice under this chapter may be combined with or incorporate Chapters 8.10 and 8.12 LCMC notice requirements. Unless a health and safety threat is presented, the longer time frames for compliance shall control. Summary abatement is authorized consistent with Chapter 8.12 LCMC findings and procedures.

B. A decision of the manager that a violation exists is subject to appeal pursuant to the uniform administrative appeals ordinance (Chapter 1.26 LCMC). Such appeal shall be filed in strict compliance with LCMC 1.26.030. Any failure to comply is a jurisdictional defect. The appeal fee is considered a deposit toward the actual costs of the appeal. If the appellant prevails, no fees are charged against the appellant.

C. In the event the owner fails to remedy the matters within the time set out in the notice or such longer period as set forth in a negotiated compliance agreement, and no due process appeal hearing is timely requested, the city may then enter the property and cause the failures to be corrected, charging the costs thereof to the property as a lien. Unless written consent to the abatement is given, the city may also seek a warrant before performing such abatement. (Ord. 2019-11 § 3; Ord. 2017-22 § 1)


8.13.080 Penalties – Citation – Remedies not exclusive.

A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter commits a Class “B” violation and may be cited in accordance with Chapter 1.16 LCMC. Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.

B. The abatement of a condition violating this chapter, including any nuisance, is not a penalty for violation of this chapter, but is an additional remedy. The imposition of a penalty does not relieve a person of the duty to abate the nuisance; however, complete abatement of a violation within the time specified in the notice will relieve the person responsible from the imposition of any fine for the subject noncompliance period.

C. The city may, as an alternative to other remedies, institute injunctive or other appropriate proceedings to prevent, enjoin temporarily or permanently, or remove a nuisance that is in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-22 § 1)


Chapter 8.14 CHRONIC NUISANCES

Sections:

8.14.010    Definitions.

8.14.020    Violation.

8.14.030    Procedure.

8.14.040    Commencement of actions – Remedies – Burden of proof.

8.14.050    Summary closure.

8.14.060    Enforcement.

8.14.070    Attorney fees.


8.14.010 Definitions.

A. Chronic Nuisance Property.

1. Property on which three or more nuisance activities exist or have occurred during any 60-day period; or

2. Property on which or within 500 feet of which any person associated with the property has engaged in three or more nuisance activities during any 60-day period; or

3. Property which, upon request for execution of a search warrant, has been the subject of a determination by a court that probable cause that possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses as defined in ORS 167.203, 475.005 through 475.285 and/or 475.940 through 475.995 has occurred within the previous 60 days, and the chief of police has determined that the search warrant was based on evidence of continuous or repeated nuisance activities at the property; or

4. Property on which continuous or repeated nuisance activities as defined in subsections (C)(7), (8), (13), and/or (14) of this section exist or have occurred.

B. Control. The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern property, or conduct that occurs on a property.

C. Nuisance Activities. Any of the following activities, behaviors or conduct:

1. Harassment as defined in ORS 166.065(1)(a).

2. Intimidation as defined in ORS 166.155 through 166.165.

3. Disorderly conduct as defined in ORS 166.025.

4. Assault or menacing as defined in ORS 163.160 through 163.190.

5. Sexual abuse, contributing to the delinquency of a minor, or sexual misconduct as defined in ORS 163.415 through 163.445.

6. Public indecency as defined in ORS 163.465.

7. Prostitution or related offenses as defined in ORS 167.007 through 167.017.

8. Alcoholic liquor violations as defined in ORS 471.105 through 471.482.

9. Offensive littering as defined in ORS 164.805.

10. Criminal trespass as defined in ORS 164.243 through 164.265.

11. Theft as defined in ORS 164.015 through 164.140.

12. Arson or related offenses as defined in ORS 164.315 through 164.335.

13. Possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses as defined in ORS 167.203, 475.005 through 475.285, and/or 475.940 through 475.995.

14. Illegal gambling as defined in ORS 167.117, and/or 167.122 through 167.127.

15. Criminal mischief as defined in ORS 164.345 through 164.365.

16. Any attempt to commit (as defined in ORS 161.405), and/or conspiracy to commit (as defined in ORS 161.450), any of the above activities, behaviors or conduct.

17. Fire or discharge of a firearm as defined in LCMC 9.08.020.

18. Unlawful operation of a sound-producing source as defined in LCMC 9.10.020 through 9.10.040.

19. Unlawful drinking in public places as defined in LCMC 9.28.170.

20. Curfew violation as defined in LCMC 9.32.010.

21. Violating the privacy of another as defined in LCMC 9.12.010.

22. Loitering as defined in LCMC 9.08.010.

23. Urination or defecation in public places as defined in LCMC 9.08.030.

D. Person. Any natural person, agent, association, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity capable of owning, occupying or using property in the city of Lincoln City.



E. Person Associated With. Any person who, on the occasion of a nuisance activity, has entered, patronized, visited, or attempted to enter, patronize or visit, or waited to enter, patronize or visit a property or person present on a property, including without limitation any officer, director, customer, agent, employee, or any independent contractor of a property, person in charge, or owner of a property.

F. Person in Charge. Any person in actual or constructive possession of a property, including but not limited to an owner or occupant of property under his or her ownership or control.

G. Property. Any property, including land and that which is affixed, incidental or appurtenant to land, including but not limited to any business or residence, parking area, loading area, landscaping, building or structure or any separate part, unit or portion thereof, or any business equipment, whether or not permanent. For property consisting of more than one unit, property may be limited to the unit or the portion of the property on which any nuisance activity has occurred or is occurring, but includes areas of the property used in common by all units of property including without limitation other structures erected on the property and areas used for parking, loading and landscaping. (Ord. 2006-10 § 1)


8.14.020 Violation.

A. Any property determined by the chief of police to be a chronic nuisance property is in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies.

B. Any person in charge of property determined by the chief of police to be a chronic nuisance property is in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies. (Ord. 2006-10 § 1)


8.14.030 Procedure.

A. When the chief of police is made aware of two or more police reports documenting the occurrence of nuisance activities on or within 500 feet of a property, the chief of police shall independently review such reports to determine whether they describe the activities, behaviors or conduct enumerated under LCMC 8.14.010(C). Upon such a finding, the chief of police may notify the person in charge in writing that the property is in danger of becoming chronic nuisance property. If the chief sends a notice to the person in charge under this section, a copy of the notice may also be sent to the owner and/or occupant at the address shown on the tax rolls of the county in which the property is located, if these persons are different than the person in charge. The notice may be delivered personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid, and shall contain the following information:

1. The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the property.

2. A statement that the chief of police has information that the property may be chronic nuisance property, with a concise description of the nuisance activities that exist, or that have occurred. The chief of police shall offer the person in charge an opportunity to propose a course of action that the chief of police agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation.

3. Demand that the person in charge respond to the chief of police within 10 days to discuss the nuisance activities.

B. When the chief of police is made aware of a police report documenting the occurrence of additional nuisance activity on or within 500 feet of a property after notification as provided by subsection (A) of this section, or, in the case of chronic nuisance property as defined in LCMC 8.14.010(A)(3) or (4), for which notice under subsection (A) of this section is not required, the chief of police shall notify the person in charge in writing that the property has been determined to be a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following information:

1. The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the property.

2. A statement that the chief of police has determined the property to be chronic nuisance property with a concise description of the nuisance activities leading to his/her determination.

3. Demand that the person in charge respond within 10 days to the chief of police and propose a course of action that the chief of police agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation.

4. The notice shall be delivered either personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid and with delivery confirmation, addressed to the person in charge at the address of the property determined to be a chronic nuisance property, or such other place which is likely to give the person in charge notice of the determination by the chief of police.

5. A copy of the notice shall be delivered either personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the owner and/or the occupant at the address shown on the tax rolls of the county in which the property is located, and/or the occupant at the address of the property, if these persons are different than the person in charge.

C. If the person in charge fails to respond as required by subsection (B)(3) of this section, the chief of police may refer the matter to the city manager and the city attorney. Prior to referring the matter to the city manager and the city attorney, the notice required by subsection (B) of this section shall also be posted at the property.

D. If the person in charge responds as required by subsection (B)(3) of this section and agrees to abate nuisance activities giving rise to the violation, the chief of police may postpone referring the matter to the city manager and the city attorney. If an agreed course of action does not result in the abatement of the nuisance activities within 60 days or if no agreement concerning abatement is reached within 60 days, the chief of police may refer the matter to the city manager and the city attorney.

E. When a person in charge makes a response to the chief of police as required by subsection (A)(3) or (B)(3) of this section any conduct or statements made in connection with the furnishing of that response shall not constitute an admission that any nuisance activities have occurred or are occurring. This subsection does not require the exclusion of any evidence that is otherwise admissible or offered for any other purpose.

F. The failure of any person to receive notice as provided by subsection (A) or (B) of this section shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the proceedings under this chapter. (Ord. 2006-10 § 1)


8.14.040 Commencement of actions – Remedies – Burden of proof.

A. The city manager may authorize the city attorney to commence legal proceedings in the municipal or circuit court as provided by law for abatement of nuisance activities or conditions to abate chronic nuisance property and to seek closure, the imposition of civil penalties against any or all of the persons in charge thereof, and any other relief deemed appropriate.

B. If the court determines property to be chronic nuisance property, the court shall order that the property be closed and secured against all unauthorized access, use and occupancy for a period of not less than six months, nor more than one year. The order shall be entered as part of the final judgment. The court shall retain jurisdiction during any period of closure.

C. If the court determines a property to be chronic nuisance property, the court may impose a civil penalty of up to $1,000 per day for each day nuisance activities occurred on the property, following notice pursuant to LCMC 8.14.030(B); or the cost to the city to abate the nuisance activities at the property, whichever is greater. The amount of the civil penalty shall be assessed against the person in charge and/or the property and may be included in the city’s money judgment.

D. If satisfied of the good faith of the person in charge, the court shall not award civil penalties if the court finds that the person in charge at all material times could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had become chronic nuisance property.

E. In establishing the amount of any civil penalty, the court may consider any of the following factors and shall cite those found applicable:

1. The actions taken by the person in charge to mitigate or correct the nuisance activities at the property;

2. The financial condition of the person in charge;

3. Repeated or continuous nature of the problem;

4. The magnitude or gravity of the problem;

5. The cooperation of the person in charge with the city;

6. The cost to the city of investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the nuisance activities;

7. Any other factor deemed relevant by the court.

F. The city shall have the initial burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the property is chronic nuisance property.

G. Evidence of a property’s general reputation and/or the reputation of persons residing in or frequenting it shall be admissible. (Ord. 2006-10 § 1)


8.14.050 Summary closure.

Any summary closure proceeding shall be based on evidence showing that nuisance activities exist or have occurred on the property and that emergency action is necessary to avoid an immediate threat to public welfare and safety. Proceedings to obtain an order of summary closure shall be governed by the provisions of ORCP 79 for obtaining temporary restraining orders. In the event of summary closure, the city is not required to comply with the notification procedures set forth in LCMC 8.14.030(A) and (B). (Ord. 2006-10 § 1)


8.14.060 Enforcement.

A. The court may authorize the city to physically secure the property against all unauthorized access, use or occupancy in the event that the person in charge fails to do so within the time specified by the court. In the event that the city is authorized to secure the property, the city shall recover all costs reasonably incurred by the city to physically secure the property as provided by this section. The city personnel physically securing the property shall prepare a statement of costs and the city shall thereafter submit that statement to the court for its review as provided by ORCP 68.

B. The person in charge shall pay reasonable relocation costs of a tenant as defined by the Oregon Residential Landlord and Tenant Act in ORS 90.100(41) if, without actual notice, the tenant moved into the property after either:

1. A person in charge received notice of the determination of the chief of police pursuant to LCMC 8.14.030(B); or

2. A person in charge received notice of an action brought pursuant to LCMC 8.14.040 or 8.14.050.

C. A lien shall be created against the property for the amount of the city’s money judgment. In addition, any person who is assessed penalties under LCMC 8.14.040(C) and/or costs under subsection (A) of this section shall be personally liable for payment thereof to the city. Judgments imposed by this chapter shall bear interest at the statutory rate. (Ord. 2006-10 § 1)


8.14.070 Attorney fees.

The court may, in its discretion, award attorney fees to the prevailing party. (Ord. 2006-10 § 1)


Chapter 8.16 SOLID WASTE

Sections:

8.16.010    Policy – Finding.

8.16.020    Definitions.

8.16.030    Exceptions.

8.16.040    Prohibited acts.

8.16.050    Responsibilities of persons receiving and providing service.

8.16.060    Required subscription – Owner ultimately responsible for payment.

8.16.070    Billing and payment.

8.16.080    Nonsubscription and nonpayment – Termination of service – Water shutoff.

8.16.090    Billing disputes.

8.16.100    Minimum level of service.

8.16.110    Residential reduction or elimination of service.

8.16.120    Exemption from service.

8.16.130    Violation – Penalty.

8.16.140    Severability.

8.16.150    Administration.

Prior legislation: Ords. 87-6, 87-14, 88-2, 89-14, 97-2 and 98-3.


8.16.010 Policy – Finding.

A. It is declared to be the policy of the city to regulate solid waste management to:

1. Ensure safe, economical and comprehensive solid waste service;

2. Ensure that rates are just, fair, reasonable and adequate to provide necessary public service; and to prohibit rate preferences and other discriminatory practices;

3. Provide for technologically and economically feasible recycling and resource recovery by and through a franchisee in a coordinated county-wide program;

4. Protect public health and the environment;

5. Provide public service standards;

6. Protect against improper and dangerous handling of hazardous wastes;

7. Provide a basis and incentive for investment in solid waste equipment, facilities, sites and technology.

B. The achievement of this policy requires that the whole city be treated as a single service area for solid waste management service; that there be a single provider of solid waste management service within the city; and that there be compulsory and universal participation in solid waste collection and disposal within the city. (Ord. 2003-19 § 1)


8.16.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter:

“City” means the city of Lincoln City.

“Franchisee” means the person granted the exclusive right, privilege and franchise to provide solid waste management service within the city by an ordinance adopted by the city council and accepted by such person, or a subcontractor of such person.

“Hazardous waste” means any waste:

1. As defined by ORS 466.005; or

2. Defined as hazardous waste by another governmental unit having jurisdiction; or

3. Found to be hazardous to service workers, to service equipment, or to the public by the franchisee.

“Person” means an individual, partnership, association, corporation, trust, firm, estate, or other private legal entity.

“Recyclable materials” means any material or group of materials that can be collected and sold for recycling at a net cost equal to or less than the cost of collection and disposal of the same material.

“Resource recovery” means the process of obtaining useful material or energy resources from solid wastes, including energy recovery, materials recovery, recycling and reuse of solid wastes.

“Service” means:

1. Collection service – The collection and/or compaction of residential, commercial, drop box and demolition solid waste together with the collection of recyclable materials.

2. Disposal service – Transportation and disposal of solid waste at a disposal site.

3. Resource recovery service – All services incidental to resource recovery.

“Solid waste” means all putrescible and nonputrescible waste, including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, refuse, ashes, and swill; waste paper and cardboard; grass clippings; compost; residential, commercial, industrial, demolition and construction wastes; discarded residential, commercial and industrial appliances, equipment and furniture; discarded, inoperable or abandoned vehicle parts and vehicle tires; manure, vegetable or animal solid or semisolid waste; dead animals; infectious waste as defined by Oregon Revised Statutes; and all other wastes not excepted by this definition. Solid waste does not include:

1. Hazardous waste;

2. Sewer sludge and septic tank and cesspool pumping or chemical toilet waste;

3. Beverage containers as defined in ORS 459.700;

4. Materials used for fertilizer or for other productive purposes or which are salvageable as such materials are used on land in agricultural operations and the growing or harvesting of crops and the raising of fowl or animals.

“Solid waste management” means the prevention or reduction of solid waste; management of the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing and final disposal of solid waste; and facilities necessary or convenient to such activities.

“Waste” means material that is no longer directly usable by the source, generator or producer of the material, which material is to be disposed of or to be resource-recovered by another person. The fact that all or any part of the material may have value and thus be recovered or that the source, generator or producer of material has separated or segregated such material from other waste does not remove the material from this definition. (Ord. 2006-12 § 1; Ord. 2003-19 § 1)


8.16.030 Exceptions.

Nothing in this chapter shall:

A. Prohibit any person from transporting residential wastes the person produces to an authorized disposal site or resource recovery facility, providing the person complies with LCMC 8.16.050(B), (E), and (F) and 8.16.110;

B. Prohibit any person from contracting with a state or federal agency to provide service to such agency; provided, however, such person shall apply for a city franchise for that service only and shall comply with all applicable requirements imposed by franchise on the franchisee defined in LCMC 8.16.020 with the exception of rates or terms of service set by contract with such agency where they are in conflict;

C. Prohibit any person from engaging in a charitable, civic or benevolent activity;

D. Prohibit the generator or producer from transporting and disposing of waste created as an incidental part of regularly carrying on the business or service of auto wrecking, to the extent licensed by the state; demolition, land clearing or construction; janitorial service; gardening, park maintenance or landscaping service; street sweeping; auto body recovery; or septic tank pumping or sludge collection. “Janitorial service” does not include cleanup of accumulated or stored wastes or solid wastes. (Ord. 2003-19 § 1)


8.16.040 Prohibited acts.

Except for a franchisee, no person shall:

A. Provide collection service or offer to provide or advertise for the performance of collection service;

B. Unless as otherwise provided by this chapter, take, process, sort, transfer, compact or remove, whether for recycling, reuse or otherwise, solid waste materials placed out for collection;

C. Unless as otherwise provided by this chapter, other than the person producing the materials contained therein, enter or interfere with any solid waste container, or remove any such container or its contents from the location where the same has been placed by the person producing the contents of such container without first obtaining written consent from the franchisee of the city;

D. Unless as otherwise provided by this chapter, supply his or her own containers other than 20- and 32-gallon containers and mechanical compactor containers;

E. Perform collection service to any tenant, lessee or occupant of any real property owned, operated or managed by such person;

F. Sort, scatter, dump, deposit or cause to be deposited any solid waste generated from construction or demolition of a structure within city limits, except in disposal sites approved and permitted by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality or other governmental agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 2010-09 § 2; Ord. 2006-12 § 1; Ord. 2003-19 § 1)


8.16.050 Responsibilities of persons receiving and providing service.

In addition to compliance with ORS Chapters 459 and 459A and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto:

A. To prevent recurring back and other injuries to collectors and other persons and to comply with safety instructions to collectors from the State Accident Insurance Fund:

1. No garbage can shall exceed 60 pounds gross loaded weight nor 32 gallons in size. Cans shall be tapered with a smaller bottom than top opening.

2. Sunken refuse cans or containers shall not be used.

3. To protect against injuries to users or collectors, to protect against damage and spilling during cold weather and to protect against rodent hazards, only garbage cans meeting standards set forth by the State Accident Prevention Division shall be used.

4. The user shall provide safe access to the pickup point so as not to jeopardize the safety of the driver of a collection vehicle or the motoring public or to create a hazard or risk to the person providing service. Where the city manager or city manager’s designee finds that a private bridge, culvert or other structure or road is incapable of safely carrying the weight of the collection vehicle, the collector shall not enter onto such structure or road. The user shall provide a safe alternative access point or system.

B. Every person who generates or produces solid waste or wastes shall remove or have removed all putrescible wastes at least every 14 days. More frequent removal may be required where a facility or service involves the public health. All wastes shall be removed at sufficient frequency as to prevent health hazards, nuisances, or pollution.

C. To protect the privacy, safety, pets and security of customers and to prevent unnecessary physical and legal risk to the collectors, a residential customer shall place the container to be emptied outside of any locked or latched gate and outside of any garage or other building.

D. No stationary compactor or other container for commercial or industrial use shall exceed the safe loading design limit or operation limit of the collection vehicles provided by the franchisee. Upon petition of a group of customers reasonably requiring special service, the council may require the franchisee to provide or subcontract for the provision of vehicles capable of handling specialized loads including, but not limited to, front-loading collection trucks and drop box trucks and systems.

E. To prevent injuries to users and collectors, stationary compacting devices for handling solid wastes shall comply with applicable federal and state safety regulations.

F. Any vehicles used by any person to transport wastes shall be so loaded and operated as to prevent the wastes from drooping, sifting, leaking, blowing or other escapement from the vehicle onto any public right-of-way or lands adjacent thereto. Garbage cans shall be totally emptied when serviced and lids replaced tightly. (Ord. 2003-19 § 1)


8.16.060 Required subscription – Owner ultimately responsible for payment.

A. The owner and/or occupant of any dwelling or other property within the city shall subscribe to and pay for service rendered to the dwelling or property. The franchisee and the owner may agree in writing that the occupant will initially be responsible for payment for service, but if the franchisee previously has so notified the owner in writing, then the owner shall be responsible for payment for service provided to the occupant if the occupant does not pay for the service.

B. In the event of a new or initial or change of occupancy of property, the owner or occupant of the property shall subscribe for service to such property within seven days of the occupancy.

C. For purposes of service, property shall be considered to be occupied if the property is hooked up to city water and is receiving water service.

D. If the property owner or occupant of property served by city water fails to subscribe to service as required by this section, the city shall mail written notice to the property owner and, if occupied by a person not the owner, the occupant stating the service required and the remedies for noncompliance. If the property owner or occupant fails to subscribe to service within 30 days of the date of the notice from the city of the requirement for service, the city may terminate water service to the property pursuant to LCMC 8.16.080. (Ord. 2003-19 § 1)


8.16.070 Billing and payment.

A. The franchisee shall bill the property owner for all service provided to the property, including service above required minimums. The owner and franchisee may agree in writing to have the occupant billed initially on non-owner-occupied property. The bill shall briefly state the service provided, time period, charges and remedies for nonpayment as provided in LCMC 8.16.080.

B. The property owner, or the occupant under a special billing agreement as provided in subsection (A) of this section, shall pay within 30 days of the billing date. If payment is not made within the required time, enforcement proceedings under LCMC 8.16.080 may be instituted or the franchisee may use any other lawful process to collect the debt. (Ord. 2003-19 § 1)


8.16.080 Nonsubscription and nonpayment – Termination of service – Water shutoff.

A. In the event of nonpayment after notice as provided in LCMC 8.16.070(A), the franchisee may terminate service.

B. In the event a property owner or occupant of property fails to subscribe to service after notice from the city as specified in LCMC 8.16.060(D), or in the event of termination of service by the franchisee for nonpayment and notice from the franchisee to the city as specified in subsection (C) of this section, the city may shut off water service to the property pursuant to the following procedure:

1. Prior to shutting off water service to the property, the city shall give written notice to the property owner and, if occupied by a person other than the owner, the occupant, advising of the city’s intent to shut off water service to the property for nonsubscription to or nonpayment for service any time after 20 days from the date the notice was mailed and posted. The notice shall be given by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by regular mail, and shall be posted conspicuously on the property.

2. The property owner and/or occupant shall have the right to an administrative hearing before the city manager or the city manager’s designee to establish that service has been subscribed to and paid for, or that service has been subscribed to and there are no unpaid billings. In the event the property owner or occupant requests such a hearing in writing prior to the shutting off of water service, then water service shall remain on until the hearing is held, a written decision is made and mailed to the property owner, and no appeal was taken to the city council as provided in subsection (B)(3) of this section or, if an appeal was taken and the city council upholds the city manager’s decision, until the date specified in the city council’s decision.

3. A property owner and/or occupant may appeal the decision of the city manager by filing a written notice of appeal with the city council within 10 days of the date of the decision. The appeal before the city council shall be limited to a review of the record and the receipt of oral arguments regarding the record.

C. The notice given by the franchisee to the city informing the city of nonpayment and termination of service pursuant to subsection (A) of this section must contain the name of the owner and, if occupied by a person not the owner, the name of the occupant of the property, the address of the property, the amount owed and a statement that there is no dispute as to the amount owed between the franchisee and the owner or occupant of the property. (Ord. 2003-19 § 1)


8.16.090 Billing disputes.

In the event of a dispute as to the amount owed between the franchisee and the owner or occupant of the property, the franchisee shall resolve the dispute in any manner prescribed by law, prior to terminating service and giving the city notice as prescribed in LCMC 8.16.080(C). (Ord. 2003-19 § 1)


8.16.100 Minimum level of service.

The minimum level of service to any dwelling or other property, including commercial uses, is one pickup of solid waste container per two-week interval, except as provided in LCMC 8.16.110 and 8.16.120. The minimum level of service, however, is subject to the provisions of Oregon Revised Statutes, and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, and the provisions of LCMC 8.16.050 and 8.16.110 as they relate to the public responsibility to prevent health hazards, nuisances or pollution. (Ord. 2003-19 § 1)


8.16.110 Residential reduction or elimination of service.

A. Residential Reduction in Service. Upon proof by affidavit of a lack of need for full residential service, a person may be allowed to reduce residential service to once a month. Evidence of a lack of need may include showing that recycling, composting or other environmentally accepted methods of disposal are being used.

B. Residential Elimination of Service. Upon proof by affidavit of a lack of need for residential service, a person may be allowed to eliminate the residential service under the following circumstances:

1. By subscribing to commercial grade service at another location within the city; or

2. By transporting residential waste at least on a weekly basis to the franchisee or to an identified appropriate solid waste disposal site; or

3. By using recycling, composting, or other environmentally accepted methods of disposal of solid waste and transporting, at appropriate intervals, any solid waste that cannot be recycled, composted, or disposed of in an environmentally safe manner to the franchisee or to an identified appropriate solid waste disposal site.

C. Decisions and Appeals. The city manager or a designee shall make the determination regarding a reduction or elimination of residential service, and that decision shall be final unless appealed in writing to the city council within 10 days from notice of the determination. (Ord. 2003-19 § 1)


8.16.120 Exemption from service.

Property which is unoccupied and does not receive water service by choice of the owner is exempt from service. (Ord. 2003-19 § 1)


8.16.130 Violation – Penalty.

Violation by any person except the franchisee of the provisions of this chapter, except for violation of LCMC 8.16.040(F), is a Class D violation, punishable in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.16 LCMC. Violation of LCMC 8.16.040(F) is a Class B violation, punishable in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.16 LCMC. (Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 2010-09 § 3; Ord. 2003-19 § 1)


8.16.140 Severability.

Any finding by any court of competent jurisdiction that any portion of this chapter is unconstitutional or invalid shall not invalidate any other provision of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-19 § 1)


8.16.150 Administration.

The city manager may prepare forms, rules and regulations for the administration of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-19 § 1)


Chapter 8.20 WATER SHORTAGES

Sections:

8.20.010    Voluntary conservation measures.

8.20.020    Serious water shortages.

8.20.030    Critical water shortages.

8.20.040    Enforcement.


8.20.010 Voluntary conservation measures.

Upon a determination that water consumption exceeds availability and/or that due to a water shortage the water available within the system is approaching the minimum required to meet fire protection and other essential requirements, the city manager or mayor may request voluntary reduction of water use by customers through actions which may include, but are not limited to, the following specific actions:

A. Raise customer awareness through notification of water conditions and provide general information on water;

B. Limit irrigation of lawns to only after 9:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m.;

C. Limit hosing and/or washing off sidewalks, walkways, driveways, streets, parking lots, open ground, or other hard-surfaced areas to only where necessary for public health or safety;

D. Limit washing cars, boats, trailers, or other vehicles by hose to only when using a shut-off nozzle. Washing such vehicles at commercial or fleet washing facilities which use water recycling equipment is an exception;

E. Limit serving water for drinking at a restaurant, motel, cafe, cafeteria, or other public place where food is sold or served to any person to only when expressly requested;

F. Limit cleaning buildings (walls or roofs) to only when in preparation for painting;

G. Request other voluntary measures on the part of Lincoln City water customers. (Ord. 95-19 § 1)


8.20.020 Serious water shortages.

Upon determination of serious water shortages by the city council, the city council may declare an emergency restricting certain uses. Upon such action the council may impose any of the following restrictions:

A. Prohibit lawn water except after 9:00 p.m. up to 9:00 a.m. and for no more than one hour during that time period;

B. Provide for a reduction in system-wide pressure below standard operating pressure in accordance with the existing conditions, but not to the point so as to jeopardize public health or safety;

C. Restrict or prohibit other outdoor water uses as determined appropriate in accordance with existing conditions. (Ord. 95-19 § 2)


8.20.030 Critical water shortages.

Upon determination of critical water shortages by the city council, the council may declare an emergency prohibiting certain uses. Upon such action by the council it shall be unlawful to:

A. Water, sprinkle or irrigate a lawn, grass or turf unless:

1. It is a new lawn, grass or turf that has been seeded or sodded after March 1st of the calendar year in which the critical water shortage has been declared. In such cases water is permitted only as necessary until the lawn, grass or turf has become established;

2. It is a high-use athletic field that is used for organized play;

3. It is a golf tee and green; or

4. It is a park and recreation area deemed by the city council to be of a particular significance and value to the community sufficient to justify watering, sprinkling or irrigating notwithstanding the critical water shortage;

B. Wash, wet down, or seep with water sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, open ground or other hard-surfaced areas unless:

1. In the opinion of the city council there is a demonstrable need for the activity in order to meet public health or safety requirements including but not limited to alleviation of immediate fire or sanitation hazards, or dust control to meet air quality requirements mandated by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality;

2. The activity is limited to power washing of buildings, roofs and homes prior to painting, repair, remodeling or reconstruction and not solely for aesthetic purposes;

C. Wash cars, trucks, trailers, tractors, or other land vehicles or boats or other waterborne vehicles except if by commercial establishments or fleet washing facilities which recycle or reuse the water in their washing processes or if by bucket and hose with a shut-off mechanism unless the council finds as to specific classes of vehicles that the public health, safety and welfare is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleaning, such as cleaning of solid waste transfer vehicles and vehicles that transport food and other perishables. (Ord. 95-19 § 3)


8.20.040 Enforcement.

Any violation of the mandatory restrictions and prohibitions stated in this chapter shall be enforced by Lincoln City as follows: the Lincoln City water department shall personally deliver a notice of violation to the occupant at the premises where the violation has occurred. If the occupant is not present, the Lincoln City water department may post the notice on the premises advising the user of the violation and warning that the water service may be discontinued if the violation continues. The Lincoln City water department also shall mail the notice of violation by regular mail to the occupant at the address of the subject premises where the violation has occurred. If the violation continues or is repeated, the Lincoln City water department may discontinue the water service during the period of the critical water shortage. (Ord. 95-19 § 4)


Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE

Chapters:

9.04    Crimes and Violations

9.08    Offenses Against Public Order

9.10    Noise Control

9.12    Offenses Against Persons

9.14    Equal Rights

9.16    Offenses by or Against Minors

9.20    Obstructing Governmental Administration

9.24    Social Gambling

9.28    Liquor and Marijuana

9.32    Curfew

9.34    Signage


Chapter 9.04 CRIMES AND VIOLATIONS

Sections:

9.04.010    Adoption of state criminal laws and procedures.

9.04.020    Misdemeanor penalties and procedures.

9.04.030    Authority to inventory the personal effects of a person taken into custody.

9.04.040    Authority to inventory the contents of impounded vehicles.


9.04.010 Adoption of state criminal laws and procedures.

A. All criminal procedures, provisions and requirements applicable to violations and misdemeanors, including but not limited to Oregon Evidence Code (ORS Chapters 40 and 41), ORS Chapter 153 violations, defenses, burden of proof, general principles of criminal liability, parties, and general principles of justification contained in Oregon Revised Statutes Chapters 131 through and including 167, as well as Chapters 471 through 480, are hereby adopted in full and made applicable to the municipal court.

B. All misdemeanor and violation offenses and penalties described in ORS Chapters 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166 and 167, as well as offenses described in the Oregon Vehicle Code and ORS Chapters 33, 133, 137, 153, 471, 475, 476, and 480, are hereby adopted by reference. When cited as a city ordinance violation, violation of an ORS section adopted by reference is an offense against this city and shall be punishable to the same extent as provided in the applicable state statute or city code. Notwithstanding the above, nothing herein prohibits or restricts the city police or city attorney from electing to pursue a charge and prosecute defendants with state law offenses in the name of the state of Oregon pursuant to ORS 221.339.

C. In addition to the adoption in subsection (B) of this section, all misdemeanor offenses described in ORS Chapters 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166 and 167, as well as misdemeanor offenses described in the Oregon Vehicle Code and ORS Chapters 33, 133, 137, 153, 471, 475, 476, and 480, are hereby adopted by reference and the penalty for such offenses is reduced by the city legislative body to be that of a Class B violation under state law. When cited as a city ordinance violation, violation of an ORS section adopted by reference in this section is a noncriminal offense against this city and shall be punishable only as a noncriminal violation offense as provided in the applicable state law. The procedures used for citation under this section shall be violation procedures. This section is intended to create a class of noncriminal violations identical to state law crimes which previously were created by reduction of the crime to a violation by the prosecutor in individual cases. Because these offenses are created by the legislative body as violations, they are not crimes and criminal procedures are not authorized. For purposes of citation, the short title for this subsection shall be the “Lincoln City Violation Code/ORS … .”

D. Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, definitions appearing in the general definitional and other particular sections of chapters adopted by subsections (A), (B), and (C) of this section are applicable throughout this chapter. Where appropriate, references to “state” and “state statute” shall be deemed to also include “city” and “city ordinances.”

E. The city police, city attorney, assistant city attorney and municipal court, including the municipal court judge, judges pro tem, court clerk and deputy clerks, shall have all the powers, duties, and responsibilities provided under Oregon Revised Statutes, as applicable, to investigation, prosecution, administration, and adjudication of criminal offenses and violations within the city of Lincoln City and on city-owned property, including extraterritorial property, as applicable.

F. The statutes, codes and procedures adopted herein are expressly made applicable within the city limits of the city of Lincoln City as well as outside the city limits when concerning offenses occurring on city-owned or controlled property located outside the city limits of the city of Lincoln City, Oregon. (Ord. 2015-10 § 6; Ord. 2014-03 § 1; Ord. 2014-01 § 1; Ord. 93-15 § 1; Ord. 88-7 § 2)


9.04.020 Misdemeanor penalties and procedures.

A. Unless otherwise specifically provided, when the Lincoln City Municipal Code identifies violation of its provisions as a misdemeanor or as subject to this title, any person violating any provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this code is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor offense (maximum $2,500 fine and up to 180 days in jail);

1. In addition to a fine and incarceration, the municipal court may impose any additional punishment, probation, remedial measure (e.g., restitution), or exclusion as provided under Chapter 12.18 LCMC that is appropriate for the offense.

2. Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this code is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. 2014-01 § 1; Ord. 93-15 § 2; Ord. 88-7 § 3)


9.04.030 Authority to inventory the personal effects of a person taken into custody.

A. In order to protect the owner’s property, safeguard the police department against the assertion of false claims, and protect police department members and others when reasonable suspicion exists to believe that any individual’s safety is at risk, every person taken into lawful custody by the police department shall have his or her personal effects inventoried. For purposes of this section, the term “custody” shall mean the imposition of actual or constructive restraint by a police officer pursuant to any lawful authority for the purposes of transporting or involuntarily confining a person pursuant to Oregon Revised Statutes.

B. The chief of police shall institute regulations describing the manner in which this inventory shall be conducted. These regulations shall eliminate any discretion as to what effects are subject to inventory and shall limit the inventory as follows:

1. All items of personal property shall be removed from the clothing worn by a custodial person.

2. All open containers in possession of the custodial person shall have their contents inventoried.

3. All containers designed for carrying valuables, including, but not limited to, wallets, purses, coin purses, fannypacks, and backpacks, shall have their contents inventoried.

4. Any valuables found during the inventory and not left in the immediate possession of the custodial person shall be detailed in writing on a property receipt filed with the police department.

5. All closed opaque containers found during the inventory shall not have their contents inventoried except as described above, or where the container is to be placed in the custodial person’s possession, or where the custodial person requests that the closed opaque container be placed in his or her immediate possession.

C. Nothing in this section shall be construed in any way to limit the police department’s ability to conduct any lawful search. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as authorizing violation of applicable state and federal search and seizure laws. (Ord. 2017-15 § 1; Ord. 2014-01 § 1; Ord. 98-2 § 1. Formerly 9.04.090)


9.04.040 Authority to inventory the contents of impounded vehicles.

A. In order to protect owners’ property, safeguard the police department against the assertion of false claims and protect police department members and others when reasonable suspicion exists to believe that any individual’s safety is at risk, every vehicle lawfully impounded shall have its contents inventoried. The inventory shall be conducted before the vehicle is released to a third party except under the following circumstances:

1. If there is reasonable suspicion to believe that any individual’s safety will be placed at risk the inventory shall be conducted after such safety concerns are no longer present; or

2. If the vehicle is being impounded for evidentiary purposes in connection with the investigation of a criminal offense, the inventory will be done after such investigation is completed.

B. The chief of police shall institute regulations consistent with this section describing the manner in which this inventory shall be conducted. These regulations shall eliminate any discretion as to how an inventory shall be conducted, and shall limit the inventory as follows:

1. All open container contents found throughout the passenger compartments, any unlocked compartments that are part of the vehicle, including but not limited to unlocked vehicle trunks and unlocked property containers attached to the car, and any locked compartments including, but not limited to, locked vehicle trunks, locked property containers attached to the car, if either the keys to these locked compartments are available to be released with the vehicle to a third party or an unlocking mechanism for such compartment is available within the vehicle, shall be inventoried.

2. An inventory of personal property will be conducted throughout the passenger compartments of the vehicle including, but not limited to, accessible areas under or within the dashboard area, in any door or seat pockets, any console between the seats, or under any seat within the passenger compartment.

3. In addition to any of the above-described areas, an inventory of personal property will also be conducted in any unlocked compartment that is a part of the vehicle including, but not limited to, unlocked vehicle trunks and unlocked property containers attached to the vehicle. An inventory of personal property shall be conducted throughout any locked compartments that are part of the vehicle including, but not limited to, locked vehicle trunks, and locked property containers attached to the vehicle, if either the keys are available to be released with the vehicle to a third party or an unlocking mechanism for such compartment is available within the vehicle.

4. Except as otherwise allowed by this subsection, closed opaque containers shall not be opened, but rather shall be inventoried consistent with their outward appearances only. Purses, wallets, fannypacks, backpacks, and other similar items designed to contain valuables shall be opened and their contents shall be inventoried.

5. All items not left in the immediate possession of the arrested person shall be inventoried in writing and kept on file at the police department.

C. Nothing in this section shall be construed in any way to limit the police department’s ability to conduct any lawful search. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as authorizing violation of applicable state and federal search and seizure laws. (Ord. 2017-15 § 1)


Chapter 9.08 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER

Sections:

9.08.010    Repealed.

9.08.020    Discharge of weapons.

9.08.030    Urination or defecation in public places.

9.08.040    Repealed.

9.08.045    Humane campsite removal policy and procedures.

9.08.050    Overnight camping on public property.

9.08.055    Permitted overnight camping/sleeping.

9.08.060    Vehicles injuring animals.


9.08.010 Loitering.

Repealed by Ord. 2012-04. (Ord. 2008-22 § 2; Ord. 88-7 § 5.10)


9.08.020 Discharge of weapons.

A. No person, other than an authorized peace officer, shall fire or discharge a gun or other weapon, including spring-activated or air-activated pellet guns, air guns, BB guns, bows and arrows, or any other weapon which propels a projectile by use of gunpowder or other explosive, jet or rocket propulsion, except at firing ranges approved by the chief of police and the city council.

B. Any weapon or device used in committing a violation of this section shall be confiscated by police and, upon conviction, may be forfeited to the city by order of the municipal court judge.

C. Violation of this section is punishable as a Class A misdemeanor. (Ord. 88-7 § 5.20)


9.08.030 Urination or defecation in public places.

A. No person shall, while in or in view of a public place, perform an act of urination or defecation, except in toilets provided for that purpose.

B. Violation of this section is punishable as a Class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 88-7 § 5.30)


9.08.040 Begging.

Repealed by Ord. 2016-17. (Ord. 88-7 § 5.40)


9.08.045 Humane campsite removal policy and procedures.

A. Prior to removing a campsite as defined in LCMC 9.08.050, the city shall post a notice 24 hours in advance of removal. If the campsite is a vehicle, tow procedures shall also be observed. All posted notices shall be in English and Spanish. A city enforcement officer shall not issue a citation for violation of LCMC 9.08.050 if the citation would be issued within 200 feet of the notice and within two hours before or after the notice was posted.

B. At the time that a 24-hour notice is posted, the city shall inform a local agency that delivers social services to homeless individuals where the notice has been posted.

C. The local agency may arrange for outreach workers to visit the campsite where a notice has been posted to assess the need for social service assistance in arranging shelter and other assistance.

D. All unclaimed personal property shall be given to the police department whether 24-hour notice is required or not. The property shall be stored for a minimum of 30 days during which it will be reasonably available to any individual claiming ownership. Any personal property that remains unclaimed for 30 days may be disposed of consistent with state law and city code for disposition of found, lost, unclaimed or abandoned property, as applicable. For purposes of this subsection, “personal property” means any item that is reasonably recognizable as belonging to a person and that has apparent utility. Items that have no apparent value or utility or are in an unsanitary or putrescent condition may be immediately discarded. Weapons, drug paraphernalia and items that appear to be either stolen or evidence of a crime shall be given to the police department.

E. Following the removal of a camping site on public property, the law enforcement officials, local agency officials and outreach workers may meet to assess the notice and removal policy, to discuss whether the removals are occurring in a humane and just manner and to determine if any changes are needed in the policy.

F. The 24-hour notice required under subsection (A) of this section shall not apply:

1. When there are grounds for law enforcement officials to believe that illegal activities other than camping are occurring.

2. In the event of an exceptional emergency such as possible site contamination by hazardous materials or when there is immediate danger to human life or safety.

3. The site is public property designated for day use recreation.

4. The site is public property designated as a campground and occupied by an individual under an agreement or pursuant to authorization specified in LCMC 9.08.055, Permitted overnight camping/sleeping. (Ord. 2016-18 § 3)


9.08.050 Overnight camping on public property.

A. Except as provided in LCMC 9.08.055, Permitted overnight camping/sleeping, including but not limited to overnight camping or overnight sleeping in a recreational vehicle, trailer or automobile, on any public property including but not limited to streets, sidewalks, parks and parking lots, on any premises open to the public, and on any ocean shore area under the jurisdiction of the Oregon Parks and Recreation Division, is prohibited.

B. The city may erect signs notifying the public of the prohibition of camping under subsection (A) of this section; provided, however, that the erection of signs shall not be a prerequisite to prosecution of violations of subsection (A) of this section.

C. Camping equipment used in a violation of subsection (A) of this section may be seized by the city police as evidence of the violation and, after seizure, shall be held by the city police until further order of the court before which the violation is pending.

D. Except as provided below for “willful violation,” a violation of subsection (A) of this section is punishable as a Class E violation. A willful violation is punishable as a Class C violation. As used in this subsection, “willful violation” means a violation that occurs after the person has received, within 90 days preceding the current violation, a citation for violating subsection (A) of this section or a written warning from a police officer or code enforcement officer that the person was violating this section.

E. As used in this section the following definitions apply:

1. “Campsite” means any place where any bedding, sleeping bag, or other material used for bedding purposes, or any stove or fire is placed, established or maintained, whether or not such place incorporates the use of any tent, lean-to, shack, or any other structure, or any vehicle or part thereof.

2. “Overnight” means occurring any time between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., unless the city code (e.g., parks regulations) sets different hours for closure, in which case “overnight” means any time during posted hours of closure.

3. “Camping” or “to camp” means to set up or to remain in or at a campsite, for the purpose of establishing or maintaining a temporary place to live.

F. Nothing in this section prohibits prosecution for criminal trespass when a person enters or remains on public property or other premises open to the public during posted hours of closure or in violation of a trespass notice or order, including but not limited to those issued under Chapter 12.18 LCMC. (Ord. 2016-18 § 1; Ord. 2005-09 § 2; Ord. 95-12 § 1; Ord. 88-7 § 5.50)


9.08.055 Permitted overnight camping/sleeping.

A. The prohibitions in LCMC 9.08.050 are inapplicable in the following circumstances:

1. The property involved is appropriately zoned and has all necessary approvals for the proposed use of overnight camping, in a vehicle or otherwise (for example, a recreational vehicle park in a recreation commercial zone with a conditional use approval or state-owned public campground in the park zone);

2. The city council or manager, by emergency declaration, has authorized overnight camping, in accordance with the limitations, terms and conditions of such declaration;

3. A special event permit pursuant to Chapter 5.16 LCMC or other parks permit (Chapter 12.16 LCMC) authorizes overnight camping in accordance with the limitations, terms and conditions of such permit;

4. Subject to conditions specified in subsection (B) of this section, and notwithstanding any other provision of this code, any religious institution located in the city of Lincoln City may offer overnight camping or sleeping space on institution property to homeless persons living in vehicles. Homeless persons may sleep overnight in a vehicle in a parking lot of a religious institution that owns or leases property on which a parking lot is located only with written permission of the property owner or the owner’s representative. The property owner may not grant permission for more than three vehicles used for camping or sleeping at any one time. For purposes of this subsection (A), the term “vehicle” includes a car, truck, van, camper, and camp trailer.

B. A religious institution who allows a person or persons to camp/sleep overnight in a vehicle on a property pursuant to subsection (A)(4) of this section shall:

1. Provide or make available sanitary facilities, including but not limited to toilet and hand washing facilities;

2. Provide trash disposal facilities to such persons consistent with LCMC 8.16.060;

3. Require such camping/sleeping space be not less than five feet away from any property line; and

4. Not require payment of any fee, rent or other monetary charge for overnight camping/sleeping, as authorized by this section.

C. An institution who permits overnight camping/sleeping pursuant to subsections (A)(4) and (B) of this section may revoke that permission at any time and for any reason. Any person who receives permission to camp/sleep on that property as provided in this section shall leave the property immediately after permission has been revoked.

D. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the city manager or the manager’s designee may revoke permission for a religious institution to offer overnight camping/sleeping in vehicles or revoke permission of a person to sleep overnight on such properties, if the city finds that the institution, owner, or person has violated any applicable law, ordinance, rule, guideline or agreement, or that the activity constitutes a public nuisance or other threat to the public welfare.

E. The city manager or the manager’s designee may impose administrative civil penalties on responsible parties who fail to comply with the requirements of this section, as provided in Chapter 1.16 LCMC.

F. In addition to any other penalties that may be imposed, any site used for overnight camping/sleeping in a manner not authorized by this section or other provisions of this code shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated as such. As used in this section, “campsite” has the meaning given in LCMC 9.08.050.

G. Nothing in this section creates any duty on the part of the city or its agents to ensure the protection of persons or property with regard to permitted overnight camping/sleeping. (Ord. 2016-18 § 2)


9.08.060 Vehicles injuring animals.

A. Any person operating a vehicle within the city who injures or kills any domestic animal shall:

1. Immediately stop and render aid to the animal;

2. Provide for the disposition of the carcass if the animal is killed;

3. Make diligent inquiry to determine the owner of the animal and notify the owner of the incident;

4. Report the incident to the police department.

B. Violation of this section is punishable as a Class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 88-7 § 5.60)


Chapter 9.10 NOISE CONTROL

Sections:

9.10.010    Policy.

9.10.020    Definitions.

9.10.030    Prohibitions.

9.10.040    Exceptions.

9.10.045    Noise variance.

9.10.050    Administration and enforcement.


9.10.010 Policy.

Certain activities desirable for the economic, social, political, educational and technical advancements of the citizens of the city may require the production of sounds that offend, disrupt, intrude or otherwise create hardship among the citizenry. The time or manner of sound, however, may constitute a hazard to the health, safety, welfare, and quality of life of citizens of the city.

It is the policy of the city to limit and regulate sound deemed to be harmful to the health, safety, welfare and quality of life of the citizens of the city, and this chapter shall be liberally construed to effectuate that purpose. (Ord. 96-8 § 1)


9.10.020 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:

“Audio or video equipment” means audio or video equipment that produces sound, including but not limited to compact disc players, phonographs, radios, stereo systems, tape players, tape recorders, televisions and video cassette recorders.

“Construction activity” means noise generated by any construction activity, including but not limited to noise produced by manual, mechanical, pneumatic, electric, or any other means during surveying, laying out, staging, land clearing, excavation, grading, paving, landscaping, construction, finishing, or any other activity relating to construction of any building, structure or other improvement including streets, roads, and sidewalks.

“Noise-sensitive unit” means real property normally used for sleeping, or normally used as schools, churches, hospitals or public libraries. Property used in industrial or agricultural activity is not noise-sensitive property unless it meets one or the above criteria in more than an incidental manner.

“Plainly audible sound” means unambiguously communicated sound that is:

1. Spoken speech;

2. Music; or

3. Mechanical or electronic noise.

“Premises open to the public” means street, parking lot or other premises open to the general public for the use of motor vehicles, whether the premises are publicly or privately owned and whether or not a fee is charged for the use of the premises.

“Public right-of-way” means the area between boundary lines of a street or other area dedicated to the public.

“Sound-producing source” means anything that is capable of making sounds that can be measured by a sound level meter as provided in LCMC 9.10.030(A)(1). “Sound-producing source” includes, but is not limited to, the following:

1. Air conditioning or heating units, heat pumps, refrigeration units (including those mounted on vehicles), and swimming pool or hot tub pumps;

2. Air horns, bells or sirens;

3. Audio or video equipment;

4. Domestic tools, including chain saws, electric drills, electric saws, hammers, lawn mowers, leaf/snow blowers and similar tools;

5. Loudspeakers or public address systems;

6. Musical instruments;

7. Spoken speech;

8. Vehicle engines or exhaust systems, other than regular traffic upon a highway, road or street;

9. Vehicle tires, when caused to squeal by excessive speed or acceleration;

10. Residential parties that are plainly audible to noise-sensitive units that are not the source of the noise.

“Vehicle” means any device in, upon or by which any person, animal or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including but not limited to vehicles that are propelled or powered by any means. (Ord. 2016-23 § 2; Ord. 96-8 § 1)


9.10.030 Prohibitions.

A. No person may produce or permit to be produced, with a sound-producing source, sound that:

1. When measured at or within the boundary of property on which a noise-sensitive unit which is not the source of the sound is located:

a. Exceeds 50 dBA at any time between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day, or

b. Exceeds 60 dBA at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. the same day;

2. Is plainly audible at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. the same day at a distance of at least 100 feet from the source of the sound;

3. Is plainly audible at any time between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day:

a. Within a noise-sensitive unit that is not the source of the sound, or

b. On a public right-of-way at a distance of at least 50 feet from the source of the sound.

B. A violation of any provision of this chapter is a Class B violation. (Ord. 2016-23 § 1; Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 96-8 § 1)


9.10.040 Exceptions.

The following are exceptions to the prohibitions of LCMC 9.10.030:

A. Sounds caused by organized athletic or other group activities, when such activities are conducted on property generally used for such purposes, such as stadiums, parks, schools, churches and athletic fields. This exception shall not impair the city’s power to declare such event or activity in violation of other laws, ordinances or regulations.

B. Sounds caused by emergency work, or by the ordinary and accepted use of emergency equipment, vehicles and apparatus, regardless of whether such work is performed by a public or private agency, or upon public or private property.

C. Sounds caused by bona fide use of emergency warning devices and alarm systems.

D. Sounds regulated by federal law, including but not limited to sounds caused by aircraft or commercially licensed watercraft operations.

E. Sounds caused by blasting activities when performed, under a permit issued by appropriate governmental authorities, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. of the same day, excluding weekends and legal holidays.

F. Sounds caused by industrial, agricultural or construction activities during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. of the same day.

G. Sounds caused by regular vehicular traffic upon premises open to the public.

H. Sounds caused by domestic tools during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.

I. Sounds caused by Highway 101 night work, subject to the following:

1. This exception authorizes, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., highway, roadway and utility construction and relocation activities within the Highway 101 and adjacent city right-of-way and extending 250 feet onto adjacent public/private lands and approved staging areas. This exception applies to state of Oregon and city projects, whether conducted by employees or contractors, and to approved projects by public utility providers.

2. Notwithstanding the above, to qualify for the exception the public agency or utility provider shall provide public notice, including door hanger notice, to all occupied residential properties and commercial hotel/motel establishments within the project area approximately 48 hours prior to the commencement of the work. For purposes of this section, project area shall extend 500 feet from the project limits. Notwithstanding the above, for projects extending more than seven days, the city engineer shall determine the form of notice and the number of additional notice(s) required, if any.

J. Sounds caused by a special event, permitted pursuant to Chapter 5.16 LCMC, or parade, permitted by Chapter 10.12 LCMC, provided the event or parade is operated or conducted consistent with the terms and conditions of the permit, including but not limited to permit duration and authorized hours of operation. (Ord. 2014-13 § 1; Ord. 2013-19 § 1; Ord. 96-8 § 1)


9.10.045 Noise variance.

Any person who is planning the use of a sound-producing source which may violate any provision of this chapter may apply to the city manager or designee for a variance from such provision.

A. Application. The application shall state the provision from which a variance is being sought, the limited period of time the variance is to apply, the reason for which the variance is sought, the amplification permit fee, as set by resolution, and any other supporting information which the manager may reasonably require.

B. Review Considerations. The manager shall consider:

1. The nature and duration of the sound emitted.

2. Whether the public health, safety or welfare is endangered.

3. Whether compliance with the provision would produce no benefit to the public.

4. Whether previous permits have been issued and the applicant’s record of compliance.

5. Content of the noise is not a consideration; decibel level and any threatened disruption of surrounding property owners and the public is the paramount consideration.

C. Time Duration of Variance. A variance may be granted for a specific time interval only.

D. The manager shall, within 10 days, deny the application, approve it, or approve it subject to conditions. Conditions shall be strictly observed.

E. The manager’s decision may be appealed as provided in the uniform administrative appeals ordinance, Chapter 1.26 LCMC. Notice of appeal shall be received by the city recorder’s office with the appeals fee within seven calendar days of personal service of the decision or 10 calendar days of mailing of the decision.

F. The manager may at any time before or during the operation of a variance granted by the manager revoke the variance for good cause.

G. Violation of the terms and conditions of a variance shall be considered a Class B violation. Any violation of the noise ordinance outside the duration of the variance shall be considered a Class B violation. (Ord. 2015-10 § 6; Ord. 2014-13 § 2)


9.10.050 Administration and enforcement.

A. The city manager, or a person designated by the city manager, may issue citations for violations of the provisions of this chapter.

B. If the city manager, or a person designated by the city manager, believes that an object causing a sound believed to be a violation likely may be used to persist in causing additional violations of the provisions of this chapter, then the city manager, or person designated by the city manager, upon issuance of a citation, may seize the object and impound it. The municipal court, upon disposition of the issued citation, shall determine whether the object shall be returned to the defendant or deemed forfeited contraband.

C. In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter, a violation may be enjoined by a civil action pursuant to ORS 30.315. (Ord. 96-8 § 1)


Chapter 9.12 OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS

Sections:

9.12.010    Violating privacy of another.


9.12.010 Violating privacy of another.

A. No person, other than a peace officer performing a lawful duty, shall enter upon land or into a building used in whole or in part as a dwelling not his own, without permission of the owner or person entitled to possession thereof, and while so trespassing look through or attempt to look through a window, door or transom of the dwelling or that part of the building used as a dwelling with the intent to violate the privacy of any other person.

B. Violation of this section is punishable as a Class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 88-7 § 6.10)


Chapter 9.14 EQUAL RIGHTS

Sections:

9.14.010    Short title.

9.14.020    Policy and intent.

9.14.030    Definitions.

9.14.040    Discrimination in employment prohibited.

9.14.050    Discrimination in selling, renting, or leasing real property prohibited.

9.14.060    Discrimination in places of public accommodation prohibited.

9.14.070    Exceptions.

9.14.080    Enforcement.


9.14.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “equal rights ordinance” and may also be referred to herein as “this chapter.” (Ord. 2005-15 § 1)


9.14.020 Policy and intent.

A. It is the policy of the city to eliminate discrimination based on race, religion, color, sex, marital status, national origin, age (if the individual is 18 or over), disability, sexual orientation and gender identity. Such discrimination threatens not only the rights and privileges of city citizens, but also the institutions and foundation of our community.

B. Furthermore, the city council finds that state law does not clearly prohibit discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity. It is the intent of the city council, in the exercise of its powers for the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare and for the maintenance of peace and good government, that every individual shall have an equal opportunity to participate fully in the life of the city and that discriminatory barriers to equal participation in employment, housing, and public accommodation be removed. (Ord. 2005-15 § 1)


9.14.030 Definitions.

A. For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:

“Employer” means any person who, directly or through an agent, engages or uses the personal service of one or more employees within the city, reserving the right to control the means by which such service is or will be performed.

“Gender identity” means a person’s actual or perceived sex, including a person’s identity, appearance, expression, or behavior with respect to actual or perceived sex, whether or not that identity, appearance, expression or behavior is different from that traditionally associated with the person’s sex at birth.

“Sexual orientation” means actual or perceived heterosexuality, homosexuality, or bisexuality.

B. Any terms used in this chapter but not defined are to be defined as in ORS Chapter 659A. (Ord. 2005-15 § 1)


9.14.040 Discrimination in employment prohibited.

A. It shall be unlawful to discriminate in employment on the basis of an individual’s race, religion, color, sex, national origin, marital status, age (if the individual is 18 years or older), or mental or physical disability by committing any of the acts made unlawful under the provisions of ORS 659A.030 and 659A.112.

B. In addition, it shall be unlawful to discriminate in employment on the basis of an individual’s sexual orientation or gender identity by committing against any such individual any of the acts already made unlawful under ORS 659A.030 when committed against the categories of persons listed therein. (Ord. 2005-15 § 1)


9.14.050 Discrimination in selling, renting, or leasing real property prohibited.

It shall be an unlawful real property transaction practice for any person to discriminate on the basis of race, religion, color, sex, national origin, marital status, age, familial status, domestic partnership, mental or physical disability, sexual orientation or gender identity by committing against any such individual any of the acts made unlawful under ORS 659A.145 or 659A.421. (Ord. 2005-15 § 1)


9.14.060 Discrimination in places of public accommodation prohibited.

It shall be an unlawful public accommodation practice for a person to discriminate on the basis of an individual’s race, religion, color, sex, national origin, marital status, age, familial status, domestic partnership, mental or physical disability, sexual orientation or gender identity by committing against any such individual any of the acts made unlawful under ORS 659A.142 or 659A.400 through 659A.409. (Ord. 2005-15 § 1)


9.14.070 Exceptions.

A. The prohibitions in this chapter do not apply to an organization whose primary purpose and function is religious.

B. The housing prohibitions in this chapter do not apply to renting space in a single housing unit or to renting of space in a building which is owner-occupied and which has fewer than four units.

C. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent an employer from enforcing an otherwise valid dress code. (Ord. 2005-15 § 1)


9.14.080 Enforcement.

A. Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful discriminatory act under the provisions of this chapter may file a complaint with the Commissioner of the Bureau of Labor and Industries under procedures established in ORS 659A.820. The Commissioner shall have the same power to enforce the provisions of this equal rights chapter as the Commissioner has to enforce alleged violations within the Commissioner’s statutory authority.

B. Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful discriminatory act under the provisions of this chapter shall have a cause of action in any court of competent jurisdiction. Election of remedies and other procedural issues relating to the interplay between administrative proceedings and private rights of action shall be handled as provided for in ORS 659A.870 through 659A.880. The court may grant such relief as is provided in ORS 659A.885. (Ord. 2005-15 § 1)


Chapter 9.16 OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS

Sections:

9.16.010    Leaving child unattended in vehicle.

9.16.020    Places of amusement.

9.16.030    Misrepresentation of age by minor.


9.16.010 Leaving child unattended in vehicle.

A. No person having the care and custody of a child six years of age or younger shall knowingly leave, lock or confine the child for more than 15 minutes in a motor vehicle on the streets, alleys, public ways or public places of the city. A child is unattended, within the meaning of this section, if the oldest person with the child is not 10 years of age or older.

B. It is lawful and the duty of a police officer or other peace officer finding a child, as defined in subsection (A) of this section, unattended in a motor vehicle in violation of said subsection (A) to enter the vehicle and remove the child, using such force as is reasonably necessary, and if deemed necessary by the officer to effect an entrance to the vehicle where the child is confined in order to remove the child.

C. Leaving a child unattended in a vehicle is a Class A misdemeanor. (Ord. 88-7 § 7.10)


9.16.020 Places of amusement.

A. No person under 18 years of age shall enter, visit or loiter in or about a public cardroom, poolroom, billiard parlor or dance hall, unless the establishment is a recreational facility as defined in this section.

B. No person operating or assisting in the operation of a public cardroom, poolroom, billiard parlor or public place of amusement shall permit a person under 18 years of age to engage therein in any game of cards, pool, billiards, dice, darts, pinball, games of like character, or games of chance either for amusement or otherwise.

C. No person shall employ a person under 18 years of age in or about a cardroom, poolroom, billiard parlor or dance hall, unless the establishment is a recreational facility as defined in this section.

D. These prohibitions do not apply to the playing of billiards or pool in a recreational facility. As used in this chapter, a “recreational facility” means an area, enclosure or room in which facilities are offered to the public to play billiards or pool for amusement only and:

1. Which is clean, adequately supervised, and adequately lighted and ventilated;

2. In which no alcoholic liquor is sold or consumed; and

3. Access to which does not require passing through a room where alcoholic liquor is sold or consumed.

E. Violation of this section is punishable as a Class A misdemeanor. (Ord. 88-7 § 7.20)


9.16.030 Misrepresentation of age by minor.

A. No person shall:

1. Being less than a certain specified age, knowingly represent himself to be of any age other than his true age with the intent of securing a right, benefit or privilege which by law is denied to persons under that certain specified age;

2. Being unmarried, knowingly represent that he is married with the intent of securing a right, benefit or privilege which by law is denied to unmarried persons.

B. Violation of this section is punishable as a Class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 88-7 § 7.30)


Chapter 9.20 OBSTRUCTING GOVERNMENTAL ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

9.20.010    Obstructing a police officer.

9.20.020    Providing false information to a police officer.

9.20.030    Impersonation of public servant.

9.20.040    False reports.

9.20.050    Disturbing police or fire communication.

9.20.060    Deliveries to prisoners.

9.20.070    Obstruction of fire hydrant.

9.20.080    Disorderly conduct at fire.


9.20.010 Obstructing a police officer.

A. A person commits the crime of obstructing a police officer if that person intentionally or knowingly interferes with or obstructs another person, knowing the other person to be a police officer, and while such other person is acting in the course of official duty.

B. Violation of this section is punishable as a Class A misdemeanor. (Ord. 88-7 § 8.10)


9.20.020 Providing false information to a police officer.

A. A person commits the crime of providing false information to a police officer if that person intentionally or knowingly uses a false or fictitious name, intentionally or knowingly gives a false or fictitious address or intentionally or knowingly gives a false date of birth to another person, knowing the other person to be a police officer, while the police officer is investigating any crime or any violation of any city ordinance or state statute.

B. Violation of this section is punishable as a Class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 88-7 § 8.20)


9.20.030 Impersonation of public servant.

A. No person shall, with intent to obtain a benefit or to injure or defraud another, falsely impersonate a public servant and do an act in such assumed character.

B. Impersonating a public servant is a Class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 88-7 § 8.30)


9.20.040 False reports.

A. No person shall knowingly initiate a false alarm or report which is transmitted to a fire department or law enforcement agency or other organization that deals with emergencies involving danger to life or property.

B. No person shall knowingly make or file with the police department or with the city attorney or a police officer engaged in his official duties a false, misleading or unfounded statement or report concerning the offense or alleged offense of violating a city ordinance or the commission or alleged commission of a crime.

C. Violation of a provision of this section is punishable as a Class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 88-7 § 8.40)


9.20.050 Disturbing police or fire communication.

A. No person shall operate any generator of electromagnetic waves or cause a disturbance of such magnitude as to interfere with the proper functioning of any police or fire department radio communication system.

B. Violation of a provision of this section is a Class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 88-7 § 8.50)


9.20.060 Deliveries to prisoners.

A. No person shall deliver, by any means whatsoever, intoxicating liquor, dangerous drugs or narcotic drugs, as defined by state law, to a person confined in the city holding facility.

B. Violation of this section is punishable as a Class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 88-7 § 8.60)


9.20.070 Obstruction of fire hydrant.

A. It is unlawful for the owner of property adjacent to a street upon which is located a fire hydrant to place or maintain within eight feet of such hydrant any bush, shrub or tree or other obstruction.

B. Violation of a provision of this section is a Class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 88-7 § 8.70)


9.20.080 Disorderly conduct at fire.

A. It is unlawful for any person at or near a fire to obstruct or impede the fighting of the fire, interfere with fire department personnel or fire department apparatus, behave in a disorderly manner, or refuse to observe or obey an order of a member of the fire or police department.

B. Violation of a provision of this section is punishable as a Class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 88-7 § 8.80)


Chapter 9.24 SOCIAL GAMBLING

Sections:

9.24.010    Definitions.

9.24.020    Social games.

9.24.030    Bingo, lotto, raffles, and Monte Carlo events.

9.24.040    Violation – Penalty.


9.24.010 Definitions.

A. The definitions contained in ORS 167.117 as constituted on October 23, 2013, are, by this reference, adopted in full and made a part of this chapter and code.

B. In addition to the definitions in the Oregon Revised Statutes adopted above:

“Premises,” for purposes of LCMC 9.24.020, means the parcel and building housing a charitable, fraternal or religious organization. Where more than one use is included within any building and single parcel involving a charitable, fraternal or religious organization, no portion of the building or parcel may include a use involving a for-profit enterprise. The entire building and parcel must be operated by a nonprofit, tax-exempt charitable, fraternal or religious organization. (Ord. 2013-12 § 1; Ord. 93-10 § 1; Ord. 87-12 § 1)


9.24.020 Social games.

A. The playing and conducting of social games within a private home or the premises of a charitable, fraternal or religious organization, organized primarily for purposes other than the conducting of social games, is authorized within the city where no house player, house bank or house odds exist, and there is no house income from the operation of a social game.

B. Charitable, fraternal or religious organizations, organized primarily for purposes other than the conducting of social games, may only conduct the playing of social games after receipt of a valid permit issued by the city.

C. To demonstrate that the charitable, fraternal or religious organization is organized primarily for purposes other than the conducting of social games, and therefore be eligible to make application for a permit, the charitable, fraternal or religious organization must be exempt from the payment of federal income taxes and have held that exempt status for at least one year preceding the application for a permit. Furthermore, the organization must be open and operating from premises within the city for a one-year period of time prior to making application for a social games permit.

D. Application for such permit shall be made annually to the city recorder upon such form as the city shall provide. A nonrefundable annual application fee of $200.00 shall be submitted with the completed application for a city permit. The applicant shall also be responsible for the full cost of all criminal background investigation (e.g., fingerprinting) necessary to process the request for a social games permit. The council may by resolution specify a different application fee for such permit.

E. Upon presentation of a complete application and supporting information together with a valid receipt from the finance director’s office evidencing payment of the fee referred to in subsection (D) of this section, the application shall be referred to the police department for background investigation and review. At a minimum, the investigation shall include fingerprinting, identification and an investigation of the criminal history, if any, of the applicant(s), including, but not limited to, all current officers of the organization or entity applying for a social games permit. The police chief may issue a social games permit if the background investigation is favorable.

F. Any organization whose application is denied may appeal the denial. Appeals must be made in accordance with the uniform administrative appeals process (Chapter 1.26 LCMC).

G. A social games permit may be suspended or revoked when it appears to the city council that the permittee, its officers, employees or agents have violated this chapter or the provisions of state law, including ORS Chapter 167, as they relate to gambling or have provided false information either on their application or to the chief of police in the conduct of his investigation. (Ord. 2013-12 § 2; Ord. 93-10 § 2; Ord. 87-12 § 2)


9.24.030 Bingo, lotto, raffles, and Monte Carlo events.

The playing and conducting of bingo, lotto, raffles, and Monte Carlo events by charitable, fraternal or religious organizations is authorized within the city, provided the organization has complied with the provisions of the Oregon Revised Statutes relating to the operation of bingo, lotto, raffle games, and Monte Carlo events conducted by charitable, fraternal or religious organizations. (Ord. 2013-12 § 3; Ord. 93-10 § 3; Ord. 87-12 § 3)


9.24.040 Violation – Penalty.

A. Conducting social games without the city permit required by LCMC 9.24.020, or in violation of any provision of this chapter or condition of such permit, is unlawful and a Class B violation.

B. Conducting bingo, lotto, raffle games or Monte Carlo events in the city without the required state license or in violation of any state license, regulation, or condition is unlawful and a Class B violation.

C. Knowingly participating in a social game that is operating without the required city permit is a Class B violation.

D. Conducting a bingo, lotto, raffle or Monte Carlo event without complying with state regulations and license requirements constitutes gambling and may be punished as provided by state law. All of the above city penalties are in addition to and not in lieu of applicable penalties provided by Oregon Revised Statutes.

E. Oregon Revised Statutes provide for the following penalties for unauthorized gambling:

1. A person commits the crime of unlawful gambling in the first degree if the person knowingly promotes or profits from unlawful gambling. Under ORS 167.127, unlawful gambling in the first degree is a Class C felony.

2. A person commits the crime of unlawful gambling in the second degree if the person knowingly places a bet with a bookmaker, or participates or engages in unlawful gambling as a player. Under ORS 167.122, unlawful gambling in the second degree is a Class A misdemeanor. (Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 2013-12 § 4; Ord. 93-10 § 4; Ord. 87-12 § 4)


Chapter 9.28 LIQUOR AND MARIJUANA

Sections:

9.28.010    Definitions.

9.28.020    Providing liquor to certain persons prohibited.

9.28.030    Persons not permitted to drink liquor on licensed premises.

9.28.040    Purchase or possession of liquor by minor.

9.28.050    Lawful consumption of liquor by minor.

9.28.060    Minors not permitted to loiter or drink on licensed premises.

9.28.070    Permitting minors on licensed premises.

9.28.080    Delivering or selling liquor by minor.

9.28.090    Sales by unlicensed persons prohibited.

9.28.100    Intoxicated persons on licensed premises.

9.28.110    Bringing liquor onto licensed premises.

9.28.120    Disposal of liquor containers.

9.28.130    Lawful hours of liquor sale.

9.28.140    Misrepresentation of age by minor.

9.28.150    Age of minor – Defense of written statement.

9.28.160    Liquor in public dance hall.

9.28.170    Consumption of liquor in public place prohibited.

9.28.180    Nuisance declared.

9.28.190    Marijuana – Use or possession of less than one ounce by a person under the age of 21.

9.28.200    Arresting officer to seize property.

9.28.210    Notification of Liquor Commission.

9.28.220    Violation – Penalty.


9.28.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:

“Alcoholic liquor” means any alcoholic beverage containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume, and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol and capable of being consumed by a human being.

“Commission” means the Oregon Liquor Control Commission.

“Licensed premises” means the room or enclosure at the address, within the corporate limits of the city, for which a license has been issued by the Commission for the serving, mixing, handling or selling of alcoholic liquor.

“Licensee” means a person who has an alcoholic liquor license from the Commission for the serving, mixing, handling or selling of alcoholic liquor.

“Minor” means any person under the age of 21 years.

“Person” means an individual, partnership, corporation, association or club.

“Responsible relative” means:

1. An adult who is the spouse of a minor;

2. An adult related to the minor, who has taken over the parental duties of governing the minor’s actions;

3. A duly appointed, qualified and acting guardian who has taken over the parental duties of governing the minor’s actions.

“Sell” means to solicit or receive an order; to keep or expose for sale; to deliver for value or in any way other than purely gratuitously; to peddle; to keep with intent to sell; to traffic in; or for any consideration, promised or obtained, directly or indirectly, or under any pretext or by any means, to procure or allow to be procured for any other person. (Ord. 82-21 § 1)


9.28.020 Providing liquor to certain persons prohibited.

No person shall sell, give, furnish, serve or otherwise make available any alcoholic liquor to:

A. Any minor, except as provided in LCMC 9.28.050;

B. Any person visibly intoxicated. (Ord. 82-21 § 2)


9.28.030 Persons not permitted to drink liquor on licensed premises.

A. No person shall allow or permit any person who is visibly intoxicated to drink or consume any alcoholic liquor upon any licensed premises.

B. No bartender shall drink or consume any alcoholic liquor, or be under the influence of alcoholic liquor, while on duty in a licensed premises. (Ord. 82-21 § 3)


9.28.040 Purchase or possession of liquor by minor.

A. Except as provided in LCMC 9.28.050, no minor shall attempt to purchase, purchase or acquire, or have in his possession any alcoholic liquor.

B. For the purposes of this section, possession of alcoholic liquor includes the acceptance or consumption of a bottle of such liquor, or any portion thereof, or a drink of such liquor. However, this section does not prohibit the acceptance or consumption by any person of sacramental wine as part of a religious rite or service. (Ord. 82-21 § 4)


9.28.050 Lawful consumption of liquor by minor.

Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting a parent or responsible relative of a minor from giving such minor alcoholic liquor and permitting him to consume the same within the home of such parent or at such other private place not in view of the public where the parent or responsible relative is present. (Ord. 82-21 § 5)


9.28.060 Minors not permitted to loiter or drink on licensed premises.

A. Except as provided in LCMC 9.28.070, no minor, whether or not he is accompanied by a parent or other responsible relative, shall enter, loiter or remain on any licensed premises, or any portion thereof, which has been posted by the Commission to prohibit the use thereof by minors.

B. No licensee or his employee or agent shall permit any minor to:

1. Consume any alcoholic liquor upon any licensed premises, whether or not such alcoholic liquor is given to the minor by a parent or responsible relative;

2. Loiter on such licensed premises which have been posted by the Commission to prohibit the use thereof by minors, except as provided in LCMC 9.28.070;

3. Remain upon such premises or any portion thereof, except as provided in LCMC 9.28.070.

C. The fact that a parent or other responsible relative has accompanied a minor upon any licensed premises shall not constitute a defense to any charge brought for violation of this section, except as provided in LCMC 9.28.070. (Ord. 82-21 § 6)


9.28.070 Permitting minors on licensed premises.

A. The provisions of LCMC 9.28.060 shall not be construed to prohibit:

1. Any minor from entering any licensed premises, or portion thereof, for the transaction of any business pursuant to his duties in the regular course of his lawful employment;

2. A minor spouse from entering and remaining on licensed premises, or any portion thereof, when he is in the immediate company of his spouse who is 21 years of age or older.

B. This section shall not be construed to authorize a minor spouse to consume alcoholic liquor on any licensed premises. (Ord. 82-21 § 7)


9.28.080 Delivering or selling liquor by minor.

A. Except as provided in subsection (C) of this section, no minor, either for himself or as agent or employee of another, shall sell, offer for sale or deliver any alcoholic liquor.

B. Except as provided in subsection (C) of this section, no person shall employ, hire or engage any minor to sell, offer for sale or deliver any alcoholic liquor.

C. Any employee 18 years of age or older of a store having a store license from the Commission may sell any alcoholic liquor authorized by such license on the licensed premises. (Ord. 82-21 § 8)


9.28.090 Sales by unlicensed persons prohibited.

No person shall sell alcoholic liquor unless he has a license from the commission to sell alcoholic liquor. Sales by a licensee or his employee shall be only such sales as are authorized by the license issued for the premises. (Ord. 82-21 § 9)


9.28.100 Intoxicated persons on licensed premises.

No licensee or his employee or agent shall permit a visibly intoxicated person to enter upon the licensed premises. (Ord. 82-21 § 10)


9.28.110 Bringing liquor onto licensed premises.

No licensee of the Commission, nor any agent or employee of such licensee, shall keep or knowingly permit to be kept, brought or consumed upon the licensed premises any alcoholic liquor not allowed to be sold or served upon the premises. (Ord. 82-21 § 11)


9.28.120 Disposal of liquor containers.

A. No licensee or his employee or agent shall permit any empty or discarded containers of alcoholic liquor to be in the public view on the exterior of his licensed premises or in parking areas maintained in connection with such premises.

B. No person shall discard, throw away or dispose of any container of alcoholic liquor, whether broken or not, upon any street, alley, public grounds or public place. (Ord. 82-21 § 12)


9.28.130 Lawful hours of liquor sale.

A. No package store licensee shall sell, dispense, deliver or permit the removal of any alcoholic liquor from the licensed premises except as authorized by the Commission.

B. No retail malt beverage restaurant or dispenser licensee shall sell, dispense, deliver or allow the consumption of any alcoholic liquor on any licensed premises or permit the removal of any alcoholic liquor from any licensed premises except as authorized by the Commission. (Ord. 82-21 § 13)


9.28.140 Misrepresentation of age by minor.

A. No minor shall falsely represent that he is of any age other than his true age, or produce any evidence that would falsely indicate his age, for the purpose of securing any right, benefit or privilege denied minors by this chapter.

B. No person shall falsely represent a minor to be 21 years of age or older for the purpose of securing or assisting such minor in securing any right, benefit or privilege denied to minors by this chapter. (Ord. 82-21 § 14)


9.28.150 Age of minor – Defense of written statement.

If a licensee or his employee or his agent is prosecuted in the municipal court under this chapter for selling alcoholic liquor to a minor, or permitting a minor to consume alcoholic liquor or enter or loiter upon the licensed premises, the licensee or his employee or agent may offer in his defense any written statement made by or for such minor prior to the violation, which statement was made and taken pursuant to the laws of Oregon and the rules and regulations of the Commission; and such statement shall constitute a prima facie defense. (Ord. 82-21 § 15)


9.28.160 Liquor in public dance hall.

No person shall possess, keep, sell, give away or otherwise dispose of or consume alcoholic liquor in any public dance hall, or in any room or building used for public dancing, that is not licensed by the Commission. (Ord. 82-21 § 16)


9.28.170 Consumption of liquor in public place prohibited.

No person shall drink or consume any alcoholic liquor in or upon any street, alley or public road, unless such way has been licensed for that purpose by the Commission. (Ord. 82-21 § 17)


9.28.180 Nuisance declared.

Any room, house, building, boat, structure or place of any kind where alcoholic liquor is sold, manufactured, bartered or given away in violation of the law; or where persons are permitted to resort for the purpose of drinking alcoholic liquors in violation of the law; or any place where alcoholic liquors are kept for sale, barter or gift in violation of the law; and all alcoholic liquor, whether purchased from or through the Commission or purchased or acquired from any source; and all property, including bars, glasses, mixers, lockers, chairs, tables, cash registers, music devices and all furniture, furnishings and equipment; and all facilities for the mixing, storing, serving or drinking of alcoholic liquor kept and used in such place, are declared to be a common nuisance; and any person who maintains or assists in maintaining such common nuisance is guilty of an offense under this chapter. (Ord. 82-21 § 18)


9.28.190 Marijuana – Use or possession of less than one ounce by a person under the age of 21.

A. No person under the age of 21 shall knowingly or intentionally use or possess less than one avoirdupois ounce of the dried leaves, stems and flowers of the plant marijuana unless used or possessed pursuant to a prescription valid within the state.

B. For purposes of this section, “marijuana” includes the leaves, stems, flowers and seeds of the plant Cannabis, family Moraceae, whether growing or not; but shall not include the resin or oil extracted from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation from such resin or oil, including hashish and natural or synthetic tetrahydrocannabinol; and shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, or other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature stalks, fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination. (Ord. 2015-12 § 1; Ord. 82-21 § 19)


9.28.200 Arresting officer to seize property.

When an officer arrests any person for violation of this chapter, the officer shall take into his possession all alcoholic liquor and other property included under LCMC 9.28.180 which the person arrested has in his possession or on his premises, which apparently is being used or kept in violation of this chapter. If the person arrested is convicted and the court finds that the alcoholic liquor and other property have been used in violation of this chapter, such forfeiture proceedings as are authorized under ORS Chapter 471 may be instituted. (Ord. 82-21 § 20)


9.28.210 Notification of Liquor Commission.

When a conviction is obtained against any licensee of the Commission, or a conviction is obtained against any person where the violation was committed on a licensed premises, the municipal court shall notify the Commission of such conviction. (Ord. 82-21 § 22)


9.28.220 Violation – Penalty.

Violation of any provision of this chapter is punishable, upon conviction, by a fine of not more than $200.00. (Ord. 82-21 § 21)


Chapter 9.32 CURFEW

Sections:

9.32.010    Curfew imposed.

9.32.020    Curfew hours.

9.32.030    Parental responsibility.

9.32.040    Police custody.

9.32.050    Refusal of parent or guardian to take custody.

9.32.060    Violation – Penalty.


9.32.010 Curfew imposed.

No minor under 18 years of age shall be on a street, highway, park, sidewalk, alley or other public place between the hours specified in LCMC 9.32.020, unless:

A. The minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person 21 years of age or over and authorized by the parent or by law to have custody of the minor;

B. The minor is engaged in travelling to or from a place of employment, or a school-sanctioned activity;

C. The minor is emancipated under the provisions of ORS Chapter 109. (Ord. 93-18 § 2)


9.32.020 Curfew hours.

For the purposes of this code, the applicable hours of curfew are:

A. For minors 16 and 17 years of age, the curfew is between 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on any days for which no school is scheduled;

B. For minors 16 and 17 years of age on any day immediately preceding a day for which public school is scheduled, and for minors less than 16 years of age on all nights, the applicable hours of curfew are the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following morning. (Ord. 93-18 § 2)


9.32.030 Parental responsibility.

No parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of a minor under the age of 18 years shall permit the minor to be in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 93-18 § 2)


9.32.040 Police custody.

Any police officer is authorized to take a minor violating a provision of this chapter into custody in accordance with the provisions of ORS Chapter 419. (Ord. 93-18 § 2)


9.32.050 Refusal of parent or guardian to take custody.

No parent, guardian, or other person having legal custody of a minor taken into police custody as provided in LCMC 9.32.040 shall refuse to come immediately and take custody of the minor upon being notified to do so by the police. (Ord. 93-18 § 2)


9.32.060 Violation – Penalty.

Any violation of LCMC 9.32.030 or 9.32.050 is punishable as a Class D violation, pursuant to Chapter 1.16 LCMC, for a first violation. A second violation within a calendar year is punishable as a Class C violation. A third violation within a calendar year is punishable as a Class B violation. A fourth and any subsequent violations within a calendar year are punishable as Class B violations pursuant to the Lincoln City Municipal Code. (Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 93-18 § 2)


Chapter 9.34 SIGNAGE

Sections:

9.34.005    Purpose/applicability/interpretation.

9.34.010    Definitions.

9.34.015    Reserved.

9.34.020    Temporary signage exempt from land use permitting.

9.34.030    Prohibited signs.

9.34.040    Temporary signs based on zoning and requiring a permit.

9.34.050    Reserved.

9.34.060    Reserved.

9.34.070    General standards, conditions and limitations for temporary signs.

9.34.080    Reserved.

9.34.090    Violation – Penalty – Abatement.


9.34.005 Purpose/applicability/interpretation.

The purpose of this chapter is to clarify the standards, conditions and limitations on content-neutral temporary signs which do not constitute land development and therefore are not subject to LCMC Title 17 or other applicable land development regulations. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the size, illumination, movement, location, and condition of all exempt temporary signs placed on private or public property for exterior observation, thus ensuring the protection of property values, the character of neighborhoods, and furthering public safety, including pedestrian and traffic safety. This chapter does not regulate permanent or temporary signs requiring a permit. This chapter must be interpreted in a manner consistent with the United States and Oregon Constitutional guarantees of free speech and expression. If any provision of this chapter is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such finding must not affect the validity of other provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision. (Ord. 2019-15 § 1; Ord. 2018-13 § 1)


9.34.010 Definitions.

The definitions set forth in LCMC 17.72.030 apply to this chapter and are incorporated herein by this reference. (Ord. 2019-15 § 2; Ord. 2018-13 § 1)


9.34.015 Reserved.


9.34.020 Temporary signage exempt from land use permitting. 

Subject to compliance with the standards, conditions and limitations set forth in this chapter, the following signs are not considered land development and are permitted and exempt from land use permitting requirements:

A. Temporary Signs Allowed at Any Time – On Property. A property owner may place one temporary sign with a sign face not exceeding four square feet on the owner’s property at any time. If such temporary sign becomes dilapidated, it must be removed or replaced. There is no restriction on the content of such sign. However, such signs shall also conform to all general standards, conditions and limitations of this chapter. This section does not permit snipe signs.

B. Temporary Signs Allowed at Any Time – In Window. Subject to design standards, a property owner may place signs in a window on the property that is visible from the right-of-way at any time. There is no restriction on the content of such sign. However, such signs shall also conform to all general standards, conditions and limitations of this chapter. Note: Some zoning districts have design standards which limit coverage of windows. See LCMC Title 17.

C. Temporary Signs Placed Outside during Specified State and Local Election Periods. Temporary signs with a sign face not exceeding eight square feet in area, for each such sign, may be erected on private property, with the permission of the property owner, for a period of 60 days prior to a state or local official election day and for five days following the day of the election. There is no restriction on the content of such signs. However, such signs shall also conform to all general standards, conditions and limitations of this chapter.

D. A single temporary sign placed outside during the period of time a real property is being marketed, in good faith, for sale or lease. Such temporary sign shall not exceed eight square feet in sign face area when located on a residential property as defined in LCMC Title 17 and 32 square feet in sign face area when located on a commercial property as defined in LCMC Title 17. Such signage may be erected beginning the day the property is offered for sale or lease and must be removed within 30 days after the property is no longer for sale or lease. There is no restriction on the content of such sign. However, such signs shall also conform to all general standards, conditions and limitations of this chapter.

E. During the period between November 20th to January 10th, each year, a property owner may place temporary signs on the owner’s property, and may use lights, including flashing lights, sized no larger than C9 incandescent or eight-millimeter LED lights and moving elements. During this period inflatable signs may be used when securely attached to the ground or structure, provided such signs do not exceed seven and one-half feet in height. There is no restriction on the content of such signage. However, except as exempted herein, such signs shall also conform to all general standards, conditions and limitations of this chapter.

F. A property owner may place up to three temporary flags, and two windsocks, attached to a pole or structure, on the owner’s property at any time. If such temporary sign becomes dilapidated, it must be removed or replaced. There is no restriction on the content of such signs. However, such signs shall also conform to all general standards, conditions and limitations of this chapter. A property owner in a commercial zone may substitute two feather banners not to exceed 16 square feet for two temporary flags. The allowance in this subsection to substitute two feather banners for two flags is affirmed, extended and reinstated and shall sunset on April 8, 2020. (Ord. 2019-27 § 1; Ord. 2019-15 § 3; Ord. 2018-13 § 1)


9.34.030 Prohibited signs. 

A. Temporary signs are prohibited in the city except when specifically authorized by permit under LCMC Title 17 or when exempted under this chapter. A temporary sign authorized by this chapter may not include any form of prohibited sign listed in LCMC 17.72.040(A). (Ord. 2019-15 § 4; Ord. 2018-13 § 1)


9.34.040 Temporary signs based on zoning and requiring a permit.

See LCMC 17.72.060 which provides for some temporary signage with a permit. (Ord. 2019-15 § 5)


9.34.050 Reserved.


9.34.060 Reserved.


9.34.070 General standards, conditions and limitations for temporary signs.

A. This chapter authorizes only temporary signs. A temporary sign is a sign which is intended to be displayed for a specified period of time and then be removed. A temporary sign is not affixed to a permanent sign structure requiring a land use approval or any type of building permit. 

B. This chapter does not authorize signs which require land use or building permits for the sign structure. A temporary sign authorized by this chapter may not include any form of prohibited sign listed in LCMC 17.72.040(A). Placement of prohibited signs subjects both the sign owner and property owner to citation and abatement proceedings by the city.

C. Any temporary sign placed as allowed under this chapter shall be removed by the end of the time period specified for the type of sign or the sign owner and property owner will be subject to citation and abatement proceedings by the city.

D. Nothing in this chapter authorizes temporary signs placed in the city right-of-way; such signs are not authorized by the property owner and are an offense against the city and subject to enforcement under this chapter as well as other city codes. 

E. Nothing in this chapter authorizes signs in violation of any applicable state or federal law. The sign owner is solely responsible for obtaining any required permits from state and federal agencies when required by applicable regulations. (Ord. 2019-15 § 6; Ord. 2018-13 § 1)


9.34.080 Reserved.


9.34.090 Violation – Penalty – Abatement.

A. Violation of any provision of this chapter, including the standards, limitations and conditions of temporary signs detailed herein, including but not limited to removal within the time specified, shall be considered a nuisance, is unlawful and an offense against the city, and shall be enforced as a Class B violation under Chapter 1.16 LCMC. Signs placed in public right-of-way without approval of the permitting authority shall be enforced as a Class A violation.

B. Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.

C. In addition to citation as noted above, failure to abate the nuisance under this chapter shall be subject to city abatement of the nuisance, including cost assessment and lien consistent with Chapter 8.12 LCMC nuisance abatement procedures. The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for violation of this chapter, but is an additional remedy. 

D. The city may, as an alternative to other remedies that are legally available for enforcing this chapter, institute a civil suit for an injunction, abatement or other appropriate proceedings to prevent, enjoin temporarily or permanently, abate or remove a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-13 § 1)


Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:

10.04    General Provisions

10.08    Administration

10.12    General Regulations

10.16    Discarded Vehicles

10.20    Taxicabs


Chapter 10.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

10.04.010    Title – Citation.

10.04.020    Adoption of Oregon Vehicle Code.

10.04.030    Adoption of procedural statutes.

10.04.040    Continuity between references.

10.04.050    Definitions.


10.04.010 Title – Citation.

The ordinance codified in this title may be cited as the “Lincoln City traffic ordinance.” (Ord. 88-8 § 1)


10.04.020 Adoption of Oregon Vehicle Code.

ORS Chapters 801 through 822, as constituted on November 4, 1993, are adopted by reference. Violation of an adopted provision of those chapters is an offense against the city. (Ord. 93-16 § 1; Ord. 88-8 § 2.01)


10.04.030 Adoption of procedural statutes.

The procedures applicable to the prosecution of traffic offenses as contained in the Oregon Revised Statutes, as constituted on November 4, 1993, including but not limited to the procedures set forth in ORS Chapter 153, are by this reference adopted in full and made a part of this title. (Ord. 93-16 § 2; Ord. 88-8 § 2.02)


10.04.040 Continuity between references.

A reference in any ordinance, resolution or regulation of the city to any state statute repealed on January 1, 1986, by Oregon Laws 1983, Chapter 338, Section 978, is deemed to be a reference to the corresponding section of Chapter 338, Oregon Laws 1983, as amended by Chapter 16, Oregon Laws 1985, which is codified in the Oregon Vehicle Code, ORS Chapters 801 through 822, which is adopted pursuant to LCMC 10.04.020. (Ord. 93-16 § 3; Ord. 88-8 § 2.03)


10.04.050 Definitions.

In addition to the definitions in the Oregon Vehicle Code, as adopted pursuant to LCMC 10.04.020, the following mean:

“Bus stop” means a roadway space designated by sign for use by buses to load or unload passengers.

“Holiday” means New Year’s Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and any other day proclaimed by the city council to be a holiday.

“Loading zone” means a roadway space designated by sign for loading or unloading passengers or materials during specified hours of specified days.

“Ocean shores” means the land lying between extreme low tide of the Pacific Ocean and the line of vegetation as established by ORS 390.770.

“Overnight” means between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.

“Person” means a natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.

“Street” means highway, road or street as defined in ORS 801.110, 801.305, 801.450 and 801.535, including the entire width of the right-of-way.

“Taxicab stand” means a roadway space designated by sign for taxicab use.

“Traffic lane” means that area of the roadway used for a single line of traffic movement. (Ord. 2005-09 § 3; Ord. 93-16 § 4; Ord. 88-8 § 3)


Chapter 10.08 ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

10.08.010    Powers of the city council.

10.08.020    Implementation of regulations.

10.08.030    Public danger – Installation of temporary traffic-control devices.

10.08.040    Standards for regulations.

10.08.050    Authority of police and fire officers.

10.08.060    Existing control devices and markings authorized.

10.08.070    Inventory of impounded or seized vehicle.

10.08.080    Penalties.


10.08.010 Powers of the city council.

A. Subject to state laws, the city council shall exercise all municipal traffic authority for the city except those powers specifically and expressly delegated by this title or another ordinance.

B. The powers of the council, which may be exercised by resolution, include, but are not limited to:

1. Designation of through streets;

2. Designation of one-way streets;

3. Designation of truck routes;

4. Designation of parking meter zones;

5. Designation of certain streets as bridle paths and prohibition of horses and animals on other streets, parks or property;

6. Authorization of greater maximum weights or lengths for vehicles using city streets than specified by state law;

7. Initiation of proceedings to change speed zones;

8. Establishment and revision of speed limits and traffic regulations in parks;

9. Temporary blocking or closing of streets;

10. Establishment of bicycle lanes and paths and traffic controls for such facilities;

11. Restriction of the use of certain streets by any class or kind of vehicle to protect the streets from damage;

12. Authorization of issuance of oversize or overweight vehicle permits;

13. Establishment, maintenance, removal or alteration of the following classes of traffic controls:

a. Crosswalks, safety zones and traffic lanes,

b. Intersection channelization and areas where drivers of vehicles shall not make right, left or U-turns, and the time when such prohibitions apply,

c. Truck parking areas, parking for disabled persons, parking areas and time limitations, including the form of permissible parking (e.g., parallel or diagonal),

d. Loading zones and stops for vehicles,

e. Traffic-control signals. (Ord. 88-8 § 4.01)


10.08.020 Implementation of regulations.

A. The city manager shall direct the implementation of the ordinances, resolutions and motions of the council by having traffic-control devices installed, maintained, removed and altered. The installation shall be based on the standards contained in the state manual specified under ORS 810.200.

B. The city manager shall compile and publish administrative schedules of parking regulations and traffic-control device regulations and prohibitions as established by council and by the manager, and shall maintain and update the schedules as needed. The manager shall periodically review such schedules and regulations with the city engineer, chief of police, and, if operational, the traffic safety committee.

C. The municipal traffic authority authorized pursuant to LCMC 10.08.010 is delegated to the city manager subject to review on appeal by the city council.

D. A decision of the city manager made pursuant to the authority granted in this section shall become effective immediately unless such decision is appealed to or called up by the city council. The manager shall post a notice of traffic order five days prior to the order’s issuance on or near the affected area. The manager shall, without undue delay, inform the council of the exercise of authority under this section. Any appeal must be filed within 10 days of posting of the traffic order on the city’s website and shall be filed as provided in the administrative appeals ordinance. A council decision to call up an order shall be made at the next regular council meeting following the posting of the order.

E. The city manager shall periodically submit administrative schedules of traffic regulations and designations to the city council for confirmation by resolution to the council. (Ord. 2018-09 § 1; Ord. 92-5 § 1; Ord. 88-8 § 4.02)


10.08.030 Public danger – Installation of temporary traffic-control devices.

Under conditions constituting a danger to the public, the police chief or his or her designee may install temporary traffic-control devices. (Ord. 88-8 § 4.03)


10.08.040 Standards for regulations.

The regulations of the manager or his or her designee shall be based on:

A. Traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations;

B. Standards, limitations and rules promulgated by the Oregon Transportation Commission;

C. Other recognized traffic-control standards. (Ord. 88-8 § 4.04)


10.08.050 Authority of police and fire officers.

A. It is the duty of police officers to enforce the provisions of this title.

B. In the event of a fire, parade, accident or other emergency, officers of the police and fire departments may stop, detour or direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of this title. (Ord. 88-8 § 4.05)


10.08.060 Existing control devices and markings authorized.

Parking and traffic-control devices and markings installed prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title are lawfully authorized. (Ord. 88-8 § 12.02)


10.08.070 Inventory of impounded or seized vehicle.

A vehicle that has been impounded, seized as evidence in a criminal investigation, or seized for forfeiture by a law enforcement officer shall be inventoried for condition and property contents consistent with LCMC 9.04.040. (Ord. 2017-15 § 2; Ord. 94-17 § 1)


10.08.080 Penalties.

A. A violation of any provision of this chapter, including but not limited to violation of any prohibitions, terms or conditions of a city council resolution or city manager order issued under authority of LCMC 10.08.010, is unlawful and an offense against the city and shall be enforced as a Class B violation under Chapter 1.16 LCMC.

B. Notwithstanding the above, a different class of offense may be specified in the resolution or order establishing the traffic control measure; in addition, any violation of a traffic control resolution or order which causes damage to city property (e.g., off-road vehicle use, exceeding weight limits, or other measures imposed to protect streets) shall be a Class B violation and shall also require full restitution for all damages caused by the violation.

C. Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.

D. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the criminal prosecution of violators who cause damage to city property when violating traffic control resolutions or orders of the city council or city manager. (Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 2013-07 § 1)


Chapter 10.12 GENERAL REGULATIONS

Sections:

10.12.010    Method of parking.

10.12.020    Prohibited parking or standing.

10.12.030    Prohibited practices.

10.12.035    Prohibited practices – Fee parking on residential zoned land.

10.12.040    Storing motor vehicles on streets.

10.12.050    Use of loading zone.

10.12.060    Unattended vehicles.

10.12.070    Standing or parking of buses and taxicabs.

10.12.080    Use of bus and taxicab stands.

10.12.090    Extension of parking time.

10.12.100    Exemptions from parking and standing regulations.

10.12.110    Citation on illegally parked vehicle.

10.12.120    Failure to comply with parking citation.

10.12.130    Cancellation of traffic citation.

10.12.140    Citation – Vehicle owner responsibility.

10.12.150    Registered owner presumption.

10.12.160    Crossing private or public property.

10.12.170    Damaging sidewalks or curbs.

10.12.180    Obstructing public ways.

10.12.185    Unlawful transfer on vehicular portion of the right-of-way.

10.12.190    Unlawful riding.

10.12.200    Cleated vehicles.

10.12.210    Exhaust brakes.

10.12.220    Removing glass and debris.

10.12.230    Operation of motor vehicle on ocean shore.

10.12.235    Reckless driving.

10.12.240    Horses in city.

10.12.250    Sleds on streets.

10.12.260    Bicycle operating rules.

10.12.270    Impounding bicycles.

10.12.280    Parades and processions – Permit required when – Fee.

10.12.290    Parade permit – Application – Issuance or denial.

10.12.300    Parade permit – Denial – Appeal to city council.

10.12.310    Interference with parade.

10.12.320    Parade permit revocable.

10.12.330    Funeral processions.

10.12.340    Impoundment of vehicles.

10.12.350    Violation – Penalty.

10.12.360    Parking fines.

10.12.370    Forfeiture of vehicles.


10.12.010 Method of parking.

A. No person shall stand or park a vehicle other than in the direction of traffic flow of the nearest lane; and where parking spaces are designated on a street, vehicles must be parked within a single marked space, unless the size or shape of the vehicle makes compliance impossible within a single marked space.

B. The operator who first begins maneuvering a motor vehicle into a vacant parking space on a street has priority to park in that space, and no other vehicle operator shall attempt to interfere.

C. When the operator of a vehicle discovers that the vehicle is parked close to a building to which the fire department has been summoned, the operator shall immediately remove the vehicle from the area, unless otherwise directed by police or fire officers. (Ord. 88-8 § 6.01)


10.12.020 Prohibited parking or standing.

A. No person shall park or stand a vehicle in violation of the State Vehicle Code or in violation of a parking limitation device.

B. No person shall park or stand a vehicle in an alley, except for a stop of not more than 30 consecutive minutes for loading or unloading persons or material.

C. No person shall stand a motor truck on a street in front of, or adjacent to, a residence, motel, apartment house, hotel, or other sleeping accommodation between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

D. No person shall park a vehicle on a city beach access between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.

E. No person shall park a vehicle overnight on a public park, public parking lot, or any ocean shore area under the jurisdiction of the Oregon Parks and Recreation Division. (Ord. 2005-09 § 3; Ord. 88-8 § 6.02)


10.12.030 Prohibited practices.

No operator shall park a vehicle, and no owner shall allow a vehicle to be parked, on a street or other public property for the principal purpose of:

A. Displaying a vehicle for sale;

B. Repairing or servicing the vehicle, except while making repairs necessitated by an emergency;

C. Displaying temporary advertising from the vehicle;

D. Selling merchandise from the vehicle, except when authorized. (Ord. 88-8 § 6.03)


10.12.035 Prohibited practices – Fee parking on residential zoned land.

A. No person shall park or stand a vehicle on property zoned R-1, R-M or RC under LCMC Title 17, as amended, if the person must pay a fee as a condition of parking or standing the vehicle on the property.

B. No owner, lessee, renter or other person with a real property interest in property zoned R-1, R-M or RC under LCMC Title 17, as amended, or agent, contractor, permittee or other representative thereof, shall allow any other person to park or stand a vehicle on the property if the person must pay a fee as a condition of parking or standing the vehicle on the property. (Ord. 96-6 § 1)


10.12.040 Storing motor vehicles on streets.

No person shall store or permit to be stored on a street or other public property, without the permission of the city manager, a motor vehicle or personal property for a period in excess of 72 hours. Failure to move a motor vehicle or other personal property for a period of 72 hours shall constitute prima facie evidence of storage of a motor vehicle. (Ord. 88-8 § 6.04)


10.12.050 Use of loading zone.

No person shall park or stand a vehicle in a place designated as a loading zone, when the hours applicable to that loading zone are in effect, for any purpose other than loading or unloading persons or material. Such a stop shall not exceed the time limits posted. If no time limits are posted, use of the zone shall not exceed 30 minutes. (Ord. 88-8 § 6.05)


10.12.060 Unattended vehicles.

A. When a police office finds a motor vehicle parked or standing unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, the officer is authorized to remove the key from the vehicle and hold the key at the police station, until claimed by the vehicle owner.

B. No person shall leave the ignition key within an unattended vehicle. (Ord. 88-8 § 6.06)


10.12.070 Standing or parking of buses and taxicabs.

The operator of a bus or taxicab shall not stop, stand or park the vehicle on a street in a business district other than at a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively; except that this provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping the taxicab outside a traffic lane while loading or unloading passengers. (Ord. 88-8 § 6.07)


10.12.080 Use of bus and taxicab stands.

No person shall park or stand a vehicle other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand or a bus in a bus stop, except that the operator of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily while loading or unloading passengers when the stop does not interfere with a bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the restricted space. The driver of such a vehicle must remain in the vehicle at all times. (Ord. 88-8 § 6.08)


10.12.090 Extension of parking time.

Where maximum parking time limits are designated, moving a vehicle to another parking space within the same block shall not extend the time limits for parking. (Ord. 88-8 § 6.09)


10.12.100 Exemptions from parking and standing regulations.

The provisions of this title that regulate the parking or standing of vehicles do not apply to:

A. A city, county, state or public utility vehicle being used for public works maintenance, construction or repair work;

B. A vehicle owned by the United States being used for collection, transportation or delivery of mail;

C. A vehicle of a disabled person who complies with the provisions of ORS 801.235 and 811.600 through 811.640. (Ord. 88-8 § 6.10)


10.12.110 Citation on illegally parked vehicle.

When a vehicle without an operator is found parked in violation of a restriction imposed by this title or state law, the officer finding the vehicle shall take its license number and any other information displayed on the vehicle that may identify its owner, and shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a parking citation instructing the owner to answer to the charge or pay the penalty imposed within seven days during specific hours and at a specific place. (Ord. 88-8 § 9.01)


10.12.120 Failure to comply with parking citation.

If the operator does not respond to a parking citation attached to the vehicle within seven working days, the municipal court clerk shall send a letter to the owner of the vehicle informing the owner of the violation and giving notice that if the citation is disregarded for a period of 30 days:

A. The fine will be doubled; and

B. If the vehicle has three or more outstanding citations or $50.00 or more in unpaid fines, it may be impounded, and an impounded vehicle shall not be released until all outstanding fines and charges are paid. (Ord. 88-8 § 9.02)


10.12.130 Cancellation of traffic citation.

No person shall cancel or solicit the cancellation of a traffic citation in any manner, except when approved by the municipal judge. This provision does not apply to a police officer or prosecutor acting within the course and scope of their authority. (Ord. 88-8 § 9.03)


10.12.140 Citation – Vehicle owner responsibility.

The owner of a vehicle that is in violation of a parking restriction shall be responsible for the offense unless the operator used the vehicle without the owner’s consent. (Ord. 88-8 § 9.04)


10.12.150 Registered owner presumption.

In a proceeding charging violation of a parking restriction against a vehicle owner, proof that the vehicle was registered to the defendant at the time of the violation constitutes a presumption that the defendant was the owner. (Ord. 88-8 § 9.05)


10.12.160 Crossing private or public property.

The operator of a vehicle shall not proceed from one street to an intersecting street by leaving the roadway and crossing private or public property. This provision does not apply to the operator of a vehicle who stops on the property to procure or provide goods or services. (Ord. 88-8 § 5.01)


10.12.170 Damaging sidewalks or curbs.

A. The operator of a motor vehicle shall not drive on a sidewalk or roadside planting strip except to cross at a permanent or temporary driveway.

B. No unauthorized person shall place dirt, wood or other material in the gutter or space next to the curb of a street with the intention of using it as a driveway.

C. No person shall remove a portion of a curb or move a motor vehicle or a device moved by a motor vehicle onto a curb or sidewalk without first obtaining authorization from the city and posting bond if required. A person who causes damage shall be responsible for the cost of repair. (Ord. 88‑8 § 5.05)


10.12.180 Obstructing public ways.

A. Except as authorized by ordinance or the city and in a manner prescribed by the city, no person shall obstruct the free movement of vehicles or pedestrians using the street, sidewalks or other public ways.

B. No person shall park or stand a vehicle in such a manner or location that it impedes traffic or obstructs the view or constitutes a hazard to public safety or an obstruction on a street, sidewalk or other public way. (Ord. 88-8 § 5.09)


10.12.185 Unlawful transfer on vehicular portion of the right-of-way.

A. A person commits the offense of unlawful transfer under this section if the person:

1. While a driver or passenger in a vehicle on the vehicular portion of a highway, road or street within the boundaries of the city of Lincoln City, gives or relinquishes possession or control of, or allows another person in the vehicle to give or relinquish possession or control of, any item of property to a pedestrian; or

2. While a pedestrian, accepts, receives or retains possession or control of any item of property from a driver or passenger in a vehicle on the vehicular portion of a highway, road or street within the boundaries of the city of Lincoln City.

B. For purposes of subsection (A) of this section, the phrase “on the vehicular portion of a highway, road or street” means located in the vehicular travel or turning lane or any associated shoulder or traffic divider area within the right-of-way where vehicles are reasonably expected to be encountered. The prohibitions of this section do not apply if the vehicle is parked in a legal parking space located on or off the right-of-way or during a law enforcement stop or action.

C. The prohibitions of subsection (A) of this section do not apply to persons participating in a “pedestrian activity,” as defined in OAR 734 Division 58, for which a permit has been issued by the Oregon Department of Transportation, so long as all terms of such permit are being met.

D. Any person found violating this section shall be guilty of committing a traffic violation punishable as a Class F violation. (Ord. 2016-17 § 2)


10.12.190 Unlawful riding.

A. The operator of a vehicle shall not permit a passenger to, and no passenger shall, ride on a vehicle on a street except within a part of the vehicle designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision does not apply to an employee engaged in the discharge of a duty or to a person riding within a truck body in space intended for merchandise.

B. No person shall board or alight from a vehicle while the vehicle is in motion on a street. (Ord. 88-8 § 5.03)


10.12.200 Cleated vehicles.

No person shall drive or operate, or permit to be driven or operated, on any improved portion of any street a cleated tractor or bulldozer, without first obtaining permission from the city manager and protecting streets with planks or similar materials as directed. (Ord. 88-8 § 5.08)


10.12.210 Exhaust brakes.

No person shall use a compression braking system in conjunction with the operation of a motor vehicle, except to avoid imminent danger to person or property. Compression braking systems, commonly found on trucks and buses and referred to as “Jake” brakes, convert an internal combustion engine into an air compressor for the purpose of slowing or stopping of a vehicle without the use of wheel brakes. (Ord. 88-8 § 5.10)


10.12.220 Removing glass and debris.

A party to a vehicle accident or a person causing broken glass or other debris to be upon a street shall remove the glass and other debris from the street. (Ord. 88-8 § 5.06)


10.12.230 Operation of motor vehicle on ocean shore.

No person shall operate a motor vehicle on the ocean shore except where specifically allowed and designated or pursuant to a permit issued by the Department of Transportation, the Oregon State Police or the city police department. (Ord. 88-8 § 5.07)


10.12.235 Reckless driving.

A. A driver of a vehicle commits the violation of reckless driving within the city if he or she commits two or more of the following violations in a single series of acts in such a way as to endanger the safety of persons or property:

1. Unlawful or unsignaled lane change;

2. Unsafe passing on the left or right;

3. Passing in a no-passing zone;

4. Following too close;

5. Illegal backing;

6. Unlawful stop or deceleration;

7. Failure to signal;

8. Violation of maximum speed limit in an urban area; or

9. Taking other actions that a reasonable driver would know endanger the safety of persons or property in an urban driving environment such as the city.

B. Notwithstanding LCMC 10.12.350, violation of this section shall be a violation punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000. (Ord. 2000-05 § 2)


10.12.240 Horses in city.

A. Except as authorized by a permit issued under LCMC 10.12.280 through 10.12.320:

1. No person shall ride, lead or tether a horse in the city except along a designated bridle path or upon private property with the consent of the owner.

2. No person shall use the improved portion of any street for leading, driving or riding a horse.

3. No person having horses for hire shall permit any such horses to be led, driven or ridden upon the improved portion of any street.

4. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (A)(1) through (3) of this section, a person having horses for hire may lead, drive or ride horses from a stable or pasture, over the improved portion of a street, to a destination not upon the improved portion of a street from which the horses will be hired out; provided, that the horses have been adequately diapered in order to maintain the improved portion of the street in a sanitary condition; and further provided, that the person has obtained a parade permit in accord with and subject to the provisions of LCMC 10.12.280 through 10.12.320. For purposes of this section, such leading, driving or riding shall be considered a parade regardless of the number of persons or horses involved. A single parade permit issued under this section may authorize such leading, driving or riding at multiple times and on multiple days.

B. As used in this section, “improved portion of any street” means the portion of a street which has been paved or oiled. (Ord. 98-6 § 1; Ord. 97-16 § 1; Ord. 88-8 § 5.02)


10.12.250 Sleds on streets.

No person shall use a street for traveling on skis, toboggans, sleds or similar devices except where authorized by the city manager. (Ord. 88-8 § 5.04)


10.12.260 Bicycle operating rules.

In addition to observing other applicable provision of this title and state law pertaining to bicycles, no person shall leave a bicycle:

A. Other than in a bicycle rack. If no rack is provided, the person shall leave the bicycle so that it does not obstruct a roadway, sidewalk, driveway or building entrance;

B. Secured to a tree, fire hydrant or police call box;

C. In violation of motor vehicle parking provisions;

D. On private property without consent of the owner or person in charge. Consent is implied on private business property unless bicycle parking is expressly prohibited;

E. On a stand or other public property for more than 24 hours. (Ord. 88-8 § 7.01)


10.12.270 Impounding bicycles.

A. A bicycle left on a street or other public property for more than 24 hours may be impounded by the police department.

B. A bicycle parked in violation of this title that also obstructs or impedes pedestrian or vehicle traffic or otherwise endangers the public may be immediately impounded by a law enforcement officer, in addition to any citation issued.

C. If a bicycle impounded under this title is licensed, or other means of identifying its ownership exist, the police department shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner. No impoundment fee shall be charged to the owner of a stolen bicycle that has been impounded.

D. Except as provided in subsection (C) of this section, a fee shall be charged to the owner of a bicycle impounded under this section.

E. A bicycle impounded under this title that remains unclaimed shall be disposed of in accordance with city procedures for disposal of abandoned or lost personal property. (Ord. 88-8 § 7.02)


10.12.280 Parades and processions – Permit required when – Fee.

No person shall organize or participate in a parade or event which may disrupt or interfere with traffic without obtaining a permit and paying the fee therefor in the amount set by council resolution. A permit shall always be required of a procession of people utilizing the public right-of-way and consisting of 50 or more persons or 10 or more vehicles. (Ord. 88-8 § 8.01)


10.12.290 Parade permit – Application – Issuance or denial.

A. Applications shall include the following information:

1. The name and address of the person responsible for the proposed parade or event;

2. The date of the proposed parade or event;

3. The desired route, including assembly and dispersal points;

4. The number of persons, vehicles and animals which will be participating in the parade or event, including the number of horses and devices pulled;

5. The proposed starting and ending time.

B. The application shall be signed by the person designated as chairman, who shall be responsible for the formation and orderly procession of the parade or event.

C. The application shall be accompanied by a liability insurance coverage rider.

D. If the chief of police, upon receipt of the application, determines that the parade or event can be conducted without endangering public safety and without seriously inconveniencing the general public, the police chief shall approve the route and issue the permit.

E. The chief of police may establish traffic control needs and set fees therefor, which fees shall not exceed the actual costs incurred by the city as a result of the additional traffic control needs. A deposit, based on the police chief’s estimate of the amount of costs that will be incurred by the city, shall be paid in advance of the parade or event. Any requests for waiver of the fee shall be submitted to the council for its consideration.

F. If the chief of police determines that the parade or event cannot be conducted without endangering public safety or seriously inconveniencing the general public, he may:

1. Propose an alternate route;

2. Propose an alternate date;

3. Refuse to issue a permit.

G. The chief of police may deny any permit for horses or other large animals which he determines will not be adequately diapered or for which he determines adequate sanitation will not be provided by the applicant. The chief of police also may deny a permit for any vehicle or device to be used on a public street which he determines lacks adequate safety devices and brakes.

H. The chief of police shall notify the applicant of the decision within 10 days of receipt of the application.

I. If the chief of police proposes alternatives or refuses to issue a permit, the applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision to the city council. (Ord. 97-16 § 2; Ord. 88-8 § 8.02)


10.12.300 Parade permit – Denial – Appeal to city council.

A. An applicant may appeal the decision of the chief of police by filing a written request of appeal with the city recorder within five days after the chief of police has proposed alternatives or refused to issue a permit.

B. The council shall schedule a hearing date, which shall not be later than the next regular council meeting following the filing of the written appeal with the city recorder, and shall notify the applicant of the date and time so that the applicant may appear, either in person or by a representative. (Ord. 88-8 § 8.03)


10.12.310 Interference with parade.

A. No person shall interfere with a parade or event or parade or event participant.

B. No person shall operate a vehicle that is not part of a parade or event between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade or event. (Ord. 97-16 § 3; Ord. 88-8 § 8.04)


10.12.320 Parade permit revocable.

The chief of police may revoke a parade or event permit if circumstances clearly show that the parade or event can no longer be conducted consistent with the public safety. (Ord. 97-16 § 4; Ord. 88-8 § 8.05)


10.12.330 Funeral processions.

A. No permit shall be required for a funeral procession.

B. A funeral procession shall proceed to the place of interment by the most direct route which is both legal and practicable.

C. All motor vehicles in the procession shall be operated with their lights turned on.

D. No person shall interfere with a funeral procession.

E. No person shall operate a vehicle that is not a part of the procession between the vehicles of a funeral procession. (Ord. 88-8 § 8.06)


10.12.340 Impoundment of vehicles.

A. Disposition of a vehicle towed and stored under provisions of state law for the removal of hazardous vehicles shall be in accordance with provisions of state law or city ordinance on impoundment and disposition of abandoned vehicles.

B. Impoundment of a vehicle does not preclude issuance of a citation for violation of a provision of this title.

C. Stolen vehicles may be towed from public or private property and stored at the expense of the vehicle owner. (Ord. 88-8 §§ 10.01 – 10.03)


10.12.350 Violation – Penalty.

Violation of any provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $250.00. (Ord. 88-8 § 11.01)


10.12.360 Parking fines.

A. Fines for parking violations are established as follows:

	Violation	Fine

	Over 72 hours	$50.00

	Prohibited area	25.00

	Parking in beach access	25.00

	No parking zone	25.00

	Loading zone	25.00

	Overtime parking	25.00

	Within 10 feet of hydrant	25.00

	Improperly parked	25.00

	Parked wrong direction	25.00

Note: Handicapped parking violations are controlled by state statute.

B. Fines automatically double after 30 days; after 60 days a 25 percent collection charge is added and account is sent to collection. (Ord. 2004-01 § 2)


10.12.370 Forfeiture of vehicles.

A. Lincoln County Code Sections 2.3000 through 2.3015, in effect as of May 9, 2005, and as amended in the future, relating to forfeiture of vehicles as the result of repeat driving while under the influence of intoxicants (DUII), are applicable in the city.

B. City staff shall work with county staff to provide the police department with procedures and forms to implement the county’s DUII forfeiture program in the city. (Ord. 2005-08 §§ 1, 2)


Chapter 10.16 DISCARDED VEHICLES

Sections:

10.16.010    Definitions.

10.16.020    Declaration of public nuisance.

10.16.030    Prohibited action.

10.16.040    Investigation.

10.16.050    Contents of notice.

10.16.060    Entry on private property.

10.16.070    Hearing by municipal court.

10.16.080    Abatement by the city and appraisal.

10.16.090    Low-value vehicle.

10.16.100    Public sale notice.

10.16.110    Public sale.

10.16.120    Redemption before sale.

10.16.130    Assessment of costs.


10.16.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following mean:

“Code enforcement officer” means and includes any authorized law enforcement officer of the city, the code enforcement officer, or another city employee authorized to enforce this chapter.

“Costs” means the expense of removing, storing, or selling a discarded vehicle.

“Discarded vehicle” means:

1. A vehicle that is in one or more of the following conditions:

a. Inoperative;

b. Wrecked;

c. Dismantled;

d. Partially dismantled;

e. Abandoned;

f. Junked.

2. Discarded vehicles include major parts of vehicles, including but not limited to bodies, engines, transmissions, and rear ends.

3. A vehicle that does not lawfully display registration plates with unexpired stickers shall be presumed to be abandoned. This shall be a disputable presumption.

“Person in charge of property” means an agent, occupant, lessee, contract purchaser, owner, or person having possession, control, or title to property where a vehicle is located.

“Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

“Vehicle owner” means an individual, firm, corporation, or unincorporated association with an individual or joint claim or a legal or equitable interest in a vehicle. (Ord. 92-26 § 1)


10.16.020 Declaration of public nuisance.

Accumulation and storage of discarded vehicles reduces property values, is unsightly, promotes neighborhood deterioration, invites plundering, creates fire hazards, is an attractive nuisance causing a hazard to minors’ health and safety, creates a harborage for rodents and insects, and is injurious to the health, safety, and general welfare. Therefore, a discarded vehicle on private property is a public nuisance which may be abated in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 92-26 § 1)


10.16.030 Prohibited action.

Storage of a discarded vehicle on private property in Lincoln City is prohibited unless the vehicle is completely enclosed by a building, stored behind a sight-obscuring fence, hedge or wall, or stored by a lawfully conducted business dealing in junked vehicles. (Ord. 92-26 § 1)


10.16.040 Investigation.

A. When a code enforcement officer investigates a discarded vehicle on private property and determines that a nuisance exists, the officer shall:

1. Attempt to discover the owner of the vehicle and the person in charge of the property on which the vehicle is located; and

2. Give written notice to them by personal service or by registered or certified mail that the vehicle is in violation of this chapter.

B. If the owner of the vehicle is not found, the officer shall place a notice on the windshield or some other part of the vehicle where it can be easily seen. (Ord. 92-26 § 1)


10.16.050 Contents of notice.

A notice issued under LCMC 10.16.040 shall state:

A. That the discarded vehicle is in violation of this chapter and that within 10 days after sending or posting the notice:

1. The vehicle must be removed from the city or to the storage yard of a lawfully conducted business dealing in junked vehicles, or

2. The vehicle must be completely enclosed within a building, or

3. The vehicle must be stored behind a sight-obscuring fence, hedge or wall;

B. That the alternative to compliance with subsection (A) of this section is to petition the municipal court clerk within the 10-day period described in subsection (A) of this section and make a written request to appear before the municipal court judge to show why the vehicle should not be immediately removed or properly stored;

C. That failure to comply with this chapter authorizes the city to remove the vehicle, charge the cost against the property from which it was removed, and to sell the vehicle to satisfy the costs of removal and storage. (Ord. 92-26 § 1)


10.16.060 Entry on private property.

A. A code enforcement officer is authorized to enter private property at all reasonable times and examine a vehicle to determine whether it is discarded. Except when an emergency exists, before entering onto private property, the officer shall obtain the consent of an occupant or a warrant of the municipal court authorizing entry for inspection.

B. No search warrant shall be issued under this chapter until an affidavit has been filed with the municipal court showing probable cause for the inspection by stating the purpose and extent of the proposed inspection, citing this chapter as the basis for the inspection, stating whether it is an inspection instituted by complaint, or giving other specific or general information concerning the vehicle in question or the property on which it is located.

C. No person shall interfere with or attempt to prevent a code enforcement officer from entering private premises and inspecting a vehicle when an emergency exists or when the officer exhibits a warrant authorizing entry. (Ord. 92-26 § 1)


10.16.070 Hearing by municipal court.

A. Following a request, the municipal court shall fix a time for a hearing to show cause why a vehicle should not be abated immediately and to receive evidence and the testimony of the code enforcement officer and other interested persons concerning the existence, location, and condition of the vehicle. After the hearing, the court may order the vehicle removed by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B. The court shall make its ruling in the form of an order declaring the vehicle to be a public nuisance. The court may order the removal of more than one vehicle and may consolidate the hearings and orders relating to more than one vehicle. People receiving the notice specified in LCMC 10.16.040 shall be sent copies of the order of the court.

C. The court may impose conditions and take other action it considers appropriate under the circumstances to carry out this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle when, in its opinion, circumstances justify such action. It shall refuse to order removal of the vehicle when the vehicle is not subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 92-26 § 1)


10.16.080 Abatement by the city and appraisal.

A. Ten days after giving the notice required in LCMC 10.16.040 or, if a hearing is held, 10 days after adoption of an order declaring a vehicle to be a public nuisance as required in LCMC 10.16.070, the city will have jurisdiction to abate the nuisance and may remove the vehicle by use of city employees or authorized independent contractors. No person shall interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow authorized persons to enter private property to remove a vehicle under this chapter.

B. After removing the vehicle, the city shall have it appraised. (Ord. 92-26 § 1)


10.16.090 Low-value vehicle.

A. If the vehicle is appraised at $750.00 or less, the code enforcement officer or independent contractor may dispose of the vehicle without notice and public sale if either of the following occur:

1. The owner of the vehicle and any lessor or security interest holder shown in the records of the Division sign a release, under oath, disclaiming any future interest in the vehicle;

2. The owner and any lessor or security interest holder shown in the records of the Division have been sent notification of the location of the vehicle and, within 15 days after the date the notification is mailed, the persons notified have not signed releases or the vehicle has not been reclaimed. Failure to sign a release or to reclaim the vehicle shall constitute a waiver of interest in the vehicle.

B. Prior to sale, the code enforcement officer or authorized independent contractor shall file an affidavit with the Motor Vehicles Division describing the vehicle, including the license plates, if any, stating the location and appraised value of the vehicle and stating that the vehicle will be junked or dismantled. The code enforcement officer or independent contractor may dispose of the vehicle and execute a certificate of sale without notice and public auction. (Ord. 92-26 § 1)


10.16.100 Public sale notice.

A. If the vehicle is appraised over $750.00, the code enforcement officer shall publish a notice of sale in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The notice of sale shall state:

1. The sale is of discarded property in possession of the city;

2. A description of the vehicle, including the type, make, license number, identification number, and any other information that will aid in accurately identifying the vehicle;

3. The terms of the sale;

4. The date, time and place of the sale.

B. The notice of sale shall be published twice. The first publication shall be made not less than 15 days before the date of proposed sale, and the second shall be made not less than seven days before the date of proposed sale. (Ord. 92-26 § 1)


10.16.110 Public sale.

A. If a vehicle is subject to LCMC 10.16.100, the code enforcement officer or independent contractor shall hold a sale at the time and place appointed, within view of the vehicle to be sold.

B. The vehicle shall be sold to the highest and best bidder. The city may specify a minimum bid price. However, if no bids are entered or the bids entered are less than the costs incurred by the city, the code enforcement officer may enter a bid on behalf of the city in an amount equal to the costs.

C. When the purchase price is paid, the code enforcement officer shall execute a certificate of sale in duplicate; the original shall be delivered to the purchaser and a copy filed with the city recorder. (Ord. 92-26 § 1)


10.16.120 Redemption before sale.

A. A vehicle impounded under the provisions of this chapter may be redeemed by its owner or by the person in charge of the property from which the vehicle was removed by applying to the code enforcement officer before sale or disposition has taken place. The person shall:

1. Submit satisfactory evidence of ownership or interest in the vehicle to the code enforcement officer;

2. Pay the costs owing at the time the application to redeem is made;

3. Give evidence that the nuisance character of the vehicle will not be resumed.

B. Upon compliance with subsection (A) of this section, the code enforcement officer or independent contractor shall execute a receipt and cause the vehicle to be returned. (Ord. 92-26 § 1)


10.16.130 Assessment of costs.

A. After disposing of the discarded vehicle and deducting any money received from sale of the vehicle from the costs, the code enforcement officer shall give notice by personal service or by registered or certified mail to the person in charge of the property from which the vehicle was removed:

1. Of the unpaid costs of abatement;

2. That the costs as indicated will be assessed to, and become a lien against, the real property unless paid within 30 days from the date of the notice;

3. That if the person in charge of the property objects to the indicated costs of the abatement, a written notice of objection may be filed with the municipal court clerk within 10 days from the date of the notice of unpaid costs.

B. Objections to the proposed assessment shall be heard and determined by the municipal court.

C. If the costs of the abatement are not paid within 30 days from the date of the notice, or within 10 days of a court determination made under subsection (B) of this section, assessment of the costs shall be made by order of the court and entered in the docket of city liens. When the entry is made, it shall constitute a lien on the real property from which the nuisance was removed or abated.

D. The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street improvements are enforced and shall bear interest at the rate of nine percent per year. Interest shall accrue from the date of the entry of the lien into the lien docket.

E. An error in the name of the person in charge of the property shall not void the assessment, nor will a failure to receive notice of the proposed assessment render the assessment void. The assessment shall remain a valid lien against the property. (Ord. 92-26 § 1)


Chapter 10.20 TAXICABS

Sections:

10.20.010    Definitions.

10.20.020    Certificate required.

10.20.030    Reissuance, transfer, cancellation, suspension or revocation of certificate or permit.

10.20.040    Surrender of certificate.

10.20.050    Certificate fees.

10.20.060    Inspection of vehicles.

10.20.070    Taxicab maintenance.

10.20.080    Operating regulations.

10.20.090    Equipment.

10.20.100    Approval of drivers – Permits required.

10.20.110    Insurance requirements.

10.20.120    Rates.

10.20.130    Complaints.

10.20.140    Certificate application requirements.

10.20.150    Issuance of certificate.

10.20.160    Indemnification.

10.20.170    Reports to the police department.

10.20.180    Violation – Enforcement.

10.20.190    Additional remedies.


10.20.010 Definitions.

A. Except where the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words shall mean:

“Certificate” means a numbered certificate issued under this chapter to operate a taxicab business.

“Driver” means every person who is, or acts under or at the direction of, the owner, agent, or employee, and is in charge of operating any taxicab.

“Flat rate” is a fare which remains constant regardless of the distance traveled or time involved.

“Limousine” is a chauffeur-driven motor vehicle that carries passengers for hire where the minimum fare charged is at least $50.00.

“Operate” means to drive a vehicle, to use a vehicle in the conduct of business, to receive money from the use of a vehicle, or cause or allow another person to do the same.

“Owner” means every person having use or control of any taxicab whether as owner, lessee, or otherwise.

“Permit” means police department authorization of a driver to operate a taxicab listed in a certificate.

“Street” means any street, alley, avenue, road, lane, highway or public place in the city used for the purpose of public travel.

“Taxicab” means any vehicle which carries passengers for hire whose journey has originated in the city, where the destination and route may be controlled by a passenger, and the fare is calculated on the basis of any combination of an initial fee, distance traveled, and delay, or the fare is a flat rate.

B. Any vehicle that has an appearance deceptively similar to a taxicab is a taxicab for the purposes of this chapter.

C. As used in this chapter, “taxicab” does not include licensed ambulances, nonemergency medical transport vehicles, regular-route scheduled buses, state-approved buses engaged in charter service, limousines, courtesy vehicles operated by hotels and motels as a convenience for registered guests where no charges are made, vehicles operated for the exclusive use of senior citizens or persons with disabilities, and airport shuttles licensed by the Port of Portland or other ports that license passenger transportation.

D. A “nonemergency medical transport vehicle” means a vehicle that carries a person for hire and such person requires nonemergency medical treatment or supervision by an emergency medical technician or first responder certified by the Oregon State Health Division while in the vehicle. (Ord. 2012-03 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2005-12 § 1)


10.20.020 Certificate required.

No person shall operate any taxicab business in the city without possessing a valid certificate for that business and its vehicles issued pursuant to this chapter, as well as any other license required by law including but not limited to a business occupation tax permit under Chapter 5.04 LCMC. (Ord. 2012-03 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2005-12 § 1)


10.20.030 Reissuance, transfer, cancellation, suspension or revocation of certificate or permit.

A. No certificate or permit may be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred without the written consent of the city manager. The city manager may impose conditions with respect to the transfer of a certificate as it may deem to be in the best interest of the public safety and the general welfare.

B. An application for transfer or reissuance of any certificate or permit is subject to the same terms, conditions, and requirements as the application for original certificate.

C. Any certificate or permit may be suspended or revoked by the city manager after a hearing under the procedure provided in LCMC 10.20.100(E) at which the certificate holder or permit holder is given an opportunity to appear if any one or more of the following conditions exist:

1. The owner ceases to operate any taxicab for a period of 15 consecutive days without obtaining permission to cease such operation from the city manager.

2. The owner or permit holder fails to operate the taxicab in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

3. The owner or permit holder fails to pay any of the fees or payments required to be paid by the provisions of this chapter.

4. The owner or permit holder no longer qualifies for a certificate or permit under LCMC 10.20.100 or 10.20.140.

D. After the city has issued a certificate with a vehicle list, any change in the driver name or vehicle list (not including elimination of a vehicle from the list) requires the applicant to apply for a new or reissued certificate, including completing an application, paying the application fee, meeting vehicle inspection for additional or replacement vehicles, and meeting insurance requirements for all drivers and additional or replacement vehicles. When all requirements of this chapter are met, the city will issue a new certificate with a new expiration date. 

E. The city may use any means of enforcement authorized by law to enforce the provisions of this section. (Ord. 2012-03 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2005-12 § 1)


10.20.040 Surrender of certificate.

Any certificate suspended or revoked by the city manager shall be surrendered to the police department and the operations of any taxicab covered by such certificate shall cease. Any owner who permanently retires any taxicab from taxicab service and does not replace it within 15 days shall immediately surrender any certificate granted for the operation of such taxicab to the police department and the owner may not secure an additional certificate for the operation of any taxicab without making application in the manner provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2012-03 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2005-12 § 1)


10.20.050 Certificate fees.

No certificate may be issued, or a taxicab business continue in operation, until the applicant has paid to the city an annual license fee as established by resolution of the city council for each vehicle listed in the certificate or operated within the city. (Ord. 2012-03 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2005-12 § 1)


10.20.060 Inspection of vehicles.

A. Prior to the operation of any vehicle under the provisions of this chapter and at least annually thereafter, the vehicle shall be thoroughly examined and inspected by either a certified mechanic or a governmental vehicle inspection entity located within Lincoln County and shall be found to be in safe operating condition. An inspection for safe operating conditions must include, but is not limited to, inspection of brakes including parking brake; all lights, signals and reflectors; exhaust system; steering system; wipers including washers; suspension components; mirrors; horn and other warning devices; tires and restraint system. Record of such inspections, clearly identifying by vehicle license number the vehicles inspected, must be made available to the city upon initial application and annual renewal. In this section the term “certified mechanic” means a person certified by the National Institute for Automotive Service Excellence.

B. In addition to the initial and annual inspections required above, inspection or testing of all parts vital to the safe operation of the vehicle such as brakes, steering gear, tires, lights, and signaling devices shall be made at the beginning of each shift or each day by the driver, and as often as necessary during use. Any condition found then or at any other time that will prevent the safe operation of the vehicle shall be corrected before the vehicle is used.

C. In the event a record of vehicle inspection is not produced within 24 hours of request, or if the record produced indicates the inspection occurred more than 12 months to date, the city shall notify the holder of a certificate to complete an inspection showing compliance with the standards of this chapter and deliver the record to the city within 24 hours of the oral or written notice.

D. Failure to timely produce a satisfactory record of inspection shall be grounds to suspend or revoke a certificate and also constitutes a violation of this chapter subject to enforcement under LCMC 10.20.180. (Ord. 2012-03 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2005-12 § 1)


10.20.070 Taxicab maintenance.

Every vehicle operating under this chapter is to be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. (Ord. 2012-03 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2005-12 § 1)


10.20.080 Operating regulations.

A. Unless otherwise directed by the passenger, any taxicab driver hired to transport passengers to a definite point shall use the most direct route possible that will carry the passenger to that destination safely and expeditiously.

B. Every driver, if requested, shall give a correct receipt upon payment of the correct fare.

C. No person may refuse to pay a lawful taxicab fare after hiring a taxicab.

D. Whenever a passenger occupies a taxicab, the driver must not permit any other person to occupy the taxicab except with consent of the original passenger. (Ord. 2012-03 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2005-12 § 1)


10.20.090 Equipment.

Every taxicab is to be equipped with the following:

A. Except for taxicabs charging flat rates, a taximeter in accurate operating condition with a lighted face which can be read at all times by the customer. Taxicabs charging flat rates must be equipped with a sign complying with LCMC 10.20.120 stating “Flat Rate” conspicuous to a passenger upon entry into the taxicab.

B. A top light identifying it as a taxicab.

C. The company name and telephone number where service can be requested displayed on the exterior of the vehicle.

D. A mobile communication device with a hands-free accessory or “state of the art” taxi radio on a clear coordinated taxicab radio frequency for customer comfort and rapid dispatching of calls for service.

E. The driver’s approved city taxicab driver’s permit conspicuously displayed in a permanent mounted position inside the vehicle, in a place where it can be easily viewed by a passenger. (Ord. 2012-03 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2005-12 § 1)


10.20.100 Approval of drivers – Permits required.

It is unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab in the city unless the person has been issued a taxicab driver’s permit by the police department in accordance with the terms of this chapter.

A. Application for a Taxicab Driver’s Permit. A person may apply for a taxicab driver’s permit by submitting a completed application to the police department accompanied by payment of a fee established by resolution of the city council. The application must include the name, address, age, and Oregon driver’s license number of the applicant and a photo of the applicant taken by the police department.

B. Upon receipt of such application, the police department shall be responsible for investigating the applicant’s background as necessary to verify compliance with subsection (C) of this section, including initiating a criminal background check.

C. The police department shall not issue a taxi driver’s permit unless the police department has verified the applicant:

1. Is 21 or more years of age;

2. Possesses a valid Oregon driver’s license;

3. Has not had a driver’s license revoked by any state within the last five years;

4. Did not make any false statements in the application;

5. Has been investigated by the police department, which has verified the applicant’s background is satisfactory.

a. In conducting the investigation of the applicant, the police department shall verify that the applicant has not been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor involving a crime against persons as defined in ORS Chapter 163, including but not limited to homicide, manslaughter, assault, kidnapping, sexual offenses, harassment and stalking; or any violation of the Oregon Vehicle Code defined as a felony or misdemeanor, including driving under the influence of intoxicants as defined in ORS Chapter 813; or any misdemeanor involving theft or fraud.

b. Where an applicant’s driver’s license has been suspended or revoked during the last five years, the police department shall verify that the applicant has been satisfactorily reinstated.

c. Where the application or other information provided by the applicant indicates a conviction for violation of ORS Chapter 811 (Rules of the Road for Drivers), the police department shall investigate the violation and determine whether the nature of the violation, when viewed in light of the circumstances of the violation and the city’s duty to protect the public, is such that a reasonable person would believe the driver so convicted is an unacceptable risk to public safety. If the person making the investigation believes such a risk exists, then the police department shall notify the city manager and the applicant that the applicant’s background check is not satisfactory, and the police department shall not issue a permit to the applicant.

D. If the police department determines that the applicant meets the requirements of this chapter, including paying any required fee, the police department shall issue the permit.

E. If the application is denied, or a permit is revoked or suspended, the applicant may appeal the decision by submitting an appeal in writing to the city manager within seven days of notice of the decision by the police department. Within three days of a written appeal, the city manager will set a time no later than seven days from the date of the written request to hear the appeal. Within three days after the hearing, the city manager shall issue a decision either affirming the police department decision or taking other action including remanding the application to the police department to issue the permit based on the information presented.

F. Any taxicab driver’s permit expires one year from date of issue and may be renewed from year to year upon application to the police department. The fee for a renewal permit shall be set by resolution of the city council.

G. As a condition of licensing, a taxicab driver shall agree in writing to notify the city manager within 10 days of conviction of any crime included in subsection (C)(5)(a) or (c) of this section. (Ord. 2012-03 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2005-12 § 1)


10.20.110 Insurance requirements.

A. No person may drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated, any taxicab in the city unless the certificate holder has on file with the police department a certificate of insurance written by a responsible and solvent insurance carrier authorized to write insurance policies in Oregon, that it has issued to or for the benefit of the certificate holder or taxicab driver a commercial auto liability policy which is in full force and effect, and designating in such policy the taxicabs which may be driven or operated and the drivers who may operate such taxicabs under this chapter. These requirements are intended to insure the vehicle and its operation by the driver.

B. The taxicab liability insurance policy shall insure the certificate holder and any other person using or responsible for the use of any such taxicab against loss from the liability imposed upon such operation of such taxicab by law for injury to, or death of, any person, or damage to property growing out of the maintenance, operation or ownership of any taxicab, in the amount of $1,000,000 combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage.

C. The policy required in this section shall include a statement that the policy is not cancelable nor the coverage reducible except on 30 days’ prior written notice to the police department.

D. The insurance minimum limits required by subsection (B) of this section apply when the city issues a new license or permit, or reissues or renews a license or permit. (Ord. 2012-03 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2005-12 § 1)


10.20.120 Rates.

A. Except for a taxicab charging a flat rate, the rates to be charged to passengers are to be based on the following: the mileage from the point of origin to the point of destination by the most direct route, the time involved, and the number of passengers. Each taxicab must be equipped with taximeter to compute the rate. In lieu of a computed rate, a flat rate may be charged.

B. The rate schedule must be posted in each taxicab in a place where passengers may readily see the schedule. No taxicab may charge more than the posted rate. (Ord. 2012-03 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2005-12 § 1)


10.20.130 Complaints.

Certificate holders shall maintain a record of all complaints received in writing or by telephone and shall keep posted in a conspicuous place in the passenger compartment of each taxicab a statement setting forth the address and telephone number of the owners to which complaints should be directed, and a notice that a record of all complaints shall be open to inspection and review by the city at any time on its request. (Ord. 2012-03 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2005-12 § 1)


10.20.140 Certificate application requirements.

A. An application for a certificate shall be filed with the police department. The application must be verified under penalty of perjury and contain or be accompanied by the following information and documentation:

1. The name, business address, and residence address of the owner or person applying.

2. The make, type, year of manufacture and seating capacity of the vehicle(s) for which application for certificate is made.

3. A description of the proposed color scheme, insignia, trade style or any other distinguishing characteristics of the proposed vehicle design.

4. A statement whether the applicant or any officers of the applicant have been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance or state law, including non-moving traffic violations and parking offenses, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed.

5. A policy of insurance in the manner and form required under LCMC 10.20.110.

6. Payment of a nonrefundable fee as provided in subsection (B) of this section.

B. The fee is to be set by resolution of the city council. The resolution shall include an exception to the fee requirement, during the first calendar year or portion thereof in which these regulations apply, in response to a request from a person who has demonstrated current payment of an occupation tax to the city. Such person shall be eligible to apply for a certificate prior to December 31st of that year without payment of the fee as required in subsection (A) of this section.

C. Before acting on any application for a certificate, the police chief shall be responsible for conducting an investigation of the owner or applicant within 60 days from the date the application is filed. Upon completion of such investigation the police chief shall report any findings and decision denying a certificate, in writing, to the city manager and the applicant. (Ord. 2012-03 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2005-12 § 1)


10.20.150 Issuance of certificate.

The police department will issue a certificate to operate a taxicab upon approval by the city manager or the city manager’s designee that the applicant has met the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-03 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2005-12 § 1)


10.20.160 Indemnification.

A. Any recipient of a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall agree to pay all damages and penalties that the city may legally be required to pay as a result of granting a certificate and shall agree to defend and indemnify the city against all claims resulting from the granting of such a certificate. These damages or penalties shall include, but not be limited to, damage arising out of the operation or maintenance of a taxicab as authorized herein, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter.

B. The certificate holder shall pay and, by its application and the granting of a certificate of public convenience and necessity, specifically agrees that it will pay all necessary and reasonable expenses incurred by the city in defending itself against all damages and penalties mentioned in subsection (A) of this section, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 2012-03 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2005-12 § 1)


10.20.170 Reports to the police department.

A. Every taxicab company shall immediately report to the police department as soon as any of the following events occur:

1. The arrest or conviction for any criminal offense of any officer or principal managing employee of the taxicab company involving the operation of the taxicab company;

2. Any taxicab accident required to be reported to the state involving a vehicle driven for the taxicab company;

3. The filing of a lawsuit against or on behalf of the taxicab company related to the operation of the taxicab company;

4. The initiation of bankruptcy proceedings or corporate or partnership dissolution by the taxicab company; or

5. Any information required to be disclosed by subsection (B) of this section.

B. Every taxicab driver shall report to the police department, and to the company for which he or she drives, the occurrence of the following:

1. Any arrest, charge, or conviction of the taxicab driver for any criminal offense, or any traffic violation, that occurs during, or arises out of, the taxicab driver’s operation of a taxicab;

2. Any arrest, charge, or conviction of the taxicab driver for any criminal offense involving theft, robbery, burglary, assault, sex crimes, drugs, prostitution, or any related offense;

3. Any vehicle accident required to be reported to the state involving any taxicab operated by the taxicab driver;

4. Any restriction, suspension or revocation of the taxicab driver’s motor vehicle driver’s license; or

5. Lapse, cancellation, or reduction of coverage of any insurance policy the city or police department relied on in issuing a certificate or permit or renewal thereof. (Ord. 2012-03 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2005-12 § 1)


10.20.180 Violation – Enforcement.

A. A violation of any provision of this chapter, including but not limited to operating a taxicab service from points originating within the city without holding a valid, approved certificate, or operating a vehicle without a valid, approved taxicab permit, shall be enforced as a Class B violation under Chapter 1.16 LCMC.

B. Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 2012-03 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2005-12 § 1)


10.20.190 Additional remedies.

Operating a taxi in violation of this chapter is declared detrimental to public health and safety and a nuisance as authorized by LCMC 8.12.130(B). As an alternative to any remedy provided for enforcement, the city may use the abatement procedures of Chapter 8.12 LCMC or institute injunctive or other appropriate proceedings to temporarily or permanently enjoin the operation of a taxi. (Ord. 2012-03 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2005-12 § 1)


Title 11 (Reserved)


Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES

Chapters:

12.04    Sidewalks

12.08    Grading and Erosion Control

12.12    Public Works Permit

12.16    Park Use Regulations and Exclusive Use Permits

12.18    Exclusions and Criminal Trespass – Public Places

12.24    Telecommunications Utility Privilege Tax

12.26    Small Wireless Telecommunication Facilities

12.28    Vehicular Access and Circulation


Chapter 12.04 SIDEWALKS

Sections:

12.04.010    Purpose.

12.04.020    City responsibility.

12.04.030    Defective sidewalk – Notice to property owner.

12.04.040    Permit for repairs.

12.04.050    Repair by city – Record – Report.

12.04.060    Repair by city – Assessment of costs.

12.04.070    Unobstructed sidewalks.


12.04.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to require owners of property adjoining any street in the city to be responsible for the maintenance, reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk fronting their property. The city’s subdivision ordinance (LCMC Title 16) requires sidewalks to be constructed in new developments, but does not spell out any continuing responsibility for the maintenance of said sidewalks. The city does not accept the responsibility for the maintenance, repair or reconstruction of sidewalks. This responsibility is the continuing responsibility of the property owners fronting any existing sidewalk. (Ord. 79-5 § 1)


12.04.020 City responsibility.

A. It is the responsibility of the city to require property owners fronting on any sidewalk to maintain, repair or reconstruct such sidewalks, once the city has received written notice of any defective sidewalk.

B. The city has the power and authority to determine the grade and width of all sidewalks, the material to be used, and the specifications for the repair thereof. (Ord. 79-5 § 2)


12.04.030 Defective sidewalk – Notice to property owner.

A. Once the city has received written notice of any defective sidewalk, and it has been verified by city staff, the city manager shall inform the city council of the situation. When ordered to do so by the city council, the city manager or his designee shall notify the property owner to maintain, repair or reconstruct the sidewalk, as the case may warrant.

B. Such notice shall consist of a letter sent to the property owner by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, and by posting a notice on the property, entitled “Notice to Repair Sidewalk,” and such notice shall direct the owner, agent or occupant of the property to immediately maintain, repair or reconstruct the sidewalk, as the case may be.

C. If, after due diligence, the owner is not notified by mail, the posting of the property shall constitute sufficient notice.

D. The owner, agent or occupant of the premises shall have 30 days from the date of posting of the property to bring the sidewalk up to city standards. (Ord. 79-5 § 3)


12.04.040 Permit for repairs.

The owner, agent or occupant, before making such repairs, shall obtain from the city a permit to do so, which shall prescribe the kind of repair to be made, the material to be used, and specifications therefor. (Ord. 79-5 § 4)


12.04.050 Repair by city – Record – Report.

If the owner, agent or occupant of any such lot or parts thereof, or parcel of land, fails, neglects or refuses to make the sidewalk repairs within the time designated, the city manager shall cause the same to be made and keep an accurate account of the cost of the labor and materials used in making the repairs in front of each lot or parcel of land, and shall report monthly to the city council the cost of such repairs and a description of the lot or part thereof, or parcel of land, fronting on the sidewalk upon which such repairs are made. (Ord. 79-5 § 5)


12.04.060 Repair by city – Assessment of costs.

The council shall, at least once each year, by ordinance, assess upon each of the lots or parts thereof, or parcels of land, fronting upon sidewalks which have been so repaired or laid, the cost of making such repairs or laying the same, including legal, administrative and engineering costs attributable thereto. In each case, all such assessments may be combined in one assessment roll, and the same shall be entered in the docket of city liens and collected in the same manner as is provided by law for the collection of city liens or assessments for local improvements. (Ord. 79-5 § 6)


12.04.070 Unobstructed sidewalks.

Utility providers shall keep a minimum of five feet of the sidewalk width clear of both permanent and temporary obstructions (e.g., utility poles and guy wires). Property owners shall keep a minimum of five feet of the public sidewalk adjacent to their property clear of both permanent and temporary obstructions (e.g., sandwich board signs, landscaping). (Ord. 2016-21 § 3)


Chapter 12.08 GRADING AND EROSION CONTROL

Sections:

12.08.010    Adoption of Appendix Chapter 33, Uniform Building Code.

12.08.020    Revisions to Uniform Building Code.

12.08.030    Erosion prevention and control findings.

12.08.040    Definitions.

12.08.050    Purpose and general requirement.

12.08.060    Erosion prevention and control plan required.

12.08.070    Submission of erosion control plan.

12.08.080    Review and approval.

12.08.090    Design and operation standards and requirements.

12.08.100    Maintenance of control measures.

12.08.110    Hazards on private property.

12.08.120    Review of city engineer decisions.

12.08.130    Violation – Injunctive relief – Other remedies.

12.08.140    Education.

12.08.150    Erosion prevention and sediment control within urban growth boundary.

Prior legislation: Ords. 83-9, 84-3 and 96-16.


12.08.010 Adoption of Appendix Chapter 33, Uniform Building Code.

Appendix Chapter 33 of the Uniform Building Code, 1997 Edition, a copy of which is on file and available for reference at the department of public works, is adopted by this reference, subject to the revisions set out in LCMC 12.08.020. (Ord. 2000-04 § 1; Ord. 97-13 § 1)


12.08.020 Revisions to Uniform Building Code.

Revisions to Appendix Chapter 33 of the Uniform Building Code, 1997 Edition, shall be as follows:

A. All references to the “building official” shall be to the city engineer. The “city engineer” means the city engineer or the city engineer’s designated representative.

B. The list of exemptions from the grading permit requirement, set out in Section 3306.2 (Exempted Work), shall be expanded by adding:

10. Emergency measures taken to clear roadways or to save endangered property; and

11. Grading on single-family residential lots when all of the following conditions are met:

a. There is no interference, encroachment, or alteration to any natural drainage course to any public drainage improvement,

b. There is no apparent danger to any property, and

c. The area does not lie within a landslide area as defined on the Environmental Quality Overlay Zone Natural Hazards of Lincoln City Map, or 500-year flood boundary, as defined on the Federal Emergency Management Administration Flood Insurance Rate Map. The Department of Public Works shall maintain a copy of each map on file and available for reference at the Department.

C. Section 3309.2 (Application) is amended by adding the following requirements:

1. Applications shall be submitted to the Department of Public Works.

2. Before a permit application is accepted as complete by the Department of Public Works, the city engineer shall visit the proposed project site with the applicant or the applicant’s representative, to aid the applicant in submitting an acceptable grading plan and in noting any special conditions.

D. The criterion in Section 3309.3 (Grading Designation) identifying grading that must be “engineered grading,” as distinguished from grading that may be “regular grading,” shall be grading involving 2,000 or more cubic yards rather than grading involving in excess of 5,000 cubic yards.

E. Section 3309.9 (Issuance) is amended by adding the following requirement:

After receipt of a completed application for a grading permit, the city engineer shall review the grading plan submitted with the application to determine whether the grading plan conforms to the provisions of this chapter and shall, in writing:

1. Approve the application, if the grading plan as submitted conforms to the provisions of this chapter;

2. Approve the application, subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary for the grading plan to conform to the provisions of this chapter; or

3. Disapprove the application, if the grading plan, either as submitted or with conditions, does not conform to the provisions of this chapter. A disapproval shall indicate the appeal procedure provided for in this chapter and the procedure for submitting a revised grading plan.

Any approval by the city engineer shall be subject to the condition that, prior to the implementation of the grading plan, a tree removal permit first must be obtained, as required by LCMC 17.52.220, if the grading plan will involve the removal of trees other than those exempt under LCMC 17.52.220(C).

F. Section 3311 (Bonds) is amended to read:

For any grading for which a permit is required, if the grading involves grading, paving, drainage, and erosion control measures, or any of them, with a total cost in excess of $100,000, the city engineer shall require a bond in such form and amount as the city engineer deems necessary to assure that the work, if not completed in accord with the approved plans and specifications, will be corrected to eliminate hazardous conditions.

In lieu of a surety bond, the applicant may file a cash bond or instrument of credit, in a form approved by the city engineer, in an amount equal to that which would be required in the surety bond.

(Ord. 2002-09 § 3; Ord. 2000-04 § 2; Ord. 97-13 § 1)


12.08.030 Erosion prevention and control findings.

A. Excessive quantities of soil may erode from areas undergoing development for uses including but not limited to the construction of dwelling units, commercial and other buildings, and industrial plants, the construction of roads and highways, the modification of stream channels and drainage ways, and the creation of recreational facilities.

B. The washing, blowing, and falling of eroded soils across and upon streets and roads endangers the health of users thereof by decreasing vision and reducing traction of road vehicles.

C. Soil erosion necessitates the costly repairing of gullies, washed-out fills, and embankments.

D. Sediment from soil erosion tends to clog storm drains and ditches and to pollute and silt up rivers, streams, wetlands, lakes, and wastewater treatment settling ponds.

E. Sediment limits the use of bays, lakes, and waterways for most beneficial purposes, destroys fish and other desirable aquatic life, leads to excessive growth of undesirable aquatic plants, and is costly and difficult to remove. (Ord. 97-13 § 1)


12.08.040 Definitions.

As used in LCMC 12.08.030 through 12.08.140:

“City engineer” means the city engineer or the city engineer’s designated representative.

“Clearing” means any activity that removes vegetative groundcover.

“Erosion” and “soil erosion” mean the wearing away of the land surface by running water, wind, ice, or other geologic agents, including such processes as gravitational creep; and detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice, or gravity.

“Erosion Prevention and Control Manual” means the Erosion Prevention and Control Manual as approved and amended from time to time by resolution of the city council. Copies of the manual shall be available for purchase from the department of public works.

“Excavation” means any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other material is cut into, dug, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated, or bulldozed by a person, including the conditions resulting therefrom.

“Fill” means any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other material is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved by a person to a new location, including the conditions resulting therefrom.

“Grading” means excavation or fill or any combination thereof.

“Land disturbing activity” means any clearing, grading, stripping, excavation, fill, or any combination thereof.

“Sedimentation” means the depositing of solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, or gravity.

“Stripping” means any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover including tree removal, clearing, and storage or removal of top soil.

“Watercourse” means any established channel where water draining from a land area collects and flows on the ground surface. (Ord. 97-13 § 1)


12.08.050 Purpose and general requirement.

A. It is the purpose of LCMC 12.08.030 through 12.08.100 to regulate land disturbing activities that may lead to soil erosion and sedimentation into watercourses, wetlands, riparian areas, and public and private property.

B. No land disturbing activity shall be conducted so as to cause slides of mud, soil, rock, vegetative material, or any erosional or depositional material to be pushed onto, deposited upon, or gravitated to the property of another, either public or private. (Ord. 97-13 § 1)


12.08.060 Erosion prevention and control plan required.

A. Plan Required. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (B) of this section, no person shall commence or perform any of the following activities without first receiving the city engineer’s approval of an erosion control plan:

1. Any land disturbing activity that will affect an area in excess of 1,000 square feet.

2. Any land disturbing activity that will affect an area in excess of 500 square feet if the activity is within 25 feet of a river, stream, lake, bay, watercourse, or wetland.

3. Any grading, excavation, fill, or any combination thereof that will exceed 50 cubic yards on a lot or parcel.

B. Exceptions. The following activities are exempt from the requirements of subsection (A) of this section:

1. Cutting brush where groundcover will remain intact.

2. Maintenance of public infrastructure by state or local government agencies. State and local government agencies, however, shall implement best management practices to prevent erosion and control sediment; and shall make regular inspections to ascertain that erosion and sediment control measures consistent with best management practices have been implemented and are being effectively maintained.

3. Emergency measures taken to clear roadways or to save endangered property. (Ord. 97-13 § 1)


12.08.070 Submission of erosion control plan.

In the event an erosion control plan is required by LCMC 12.08.060, the owner of the land or the owner’s agent shall submit an erosion control plan to the department of public works on a site plan at a scale sufficient to indicate the nature and extent of the work. The plan shall be prepared in accord with LCMC 12.08.030 through 12.08.100 using methods and standards shown in the Erosion Prevention and Control Manual. If an engineered grading plan is required for the project under LCMC 12.08.010 and 12.08.020, then the erosion control plan shall be prepared by the same person who prepared the engineered grading plan. Each erosion control plan shall include a certification that any land disturbing activity will be in accord with the submitted and approved erosion control plan. The erosion control plan shall contain the following information:

A. The location of the development site showing adjacent roads and streets and the development site boundaries.

B. Indication of north direction.

C. Any lakes, bays, rivers, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, or other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the development site.

D. Areas where existing vegetative cover will be retained and measures to protect vegetation from damage.

E. Accurate location, size, and shape of proposed and existing structures.

F. Direction of surface water flows.

G. Indication of slope steepness or existing and proposed contours at intervals of two feet or as approved by the city engineer.

H. Location of construction access driveway(s) and designated vehicle parking area(s).

I. Location of soil stockpiles.

J. Type and location of temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control measures, such as, but not limited to, silt fencing, matting, straw bales, mulching, seeding, and sodding.

K. A schedule of construction operations and phasing.

L. The name(s), address(es), and telephone number(s) of the owner of the land, the developer of the site, and the person responsible for placement and maintenance of temporary and permanent erosion control measures.

M. The general slope characteristics of adjacent property. (Ord. 97-13 § 1)


12.08.080 Review and approval.

The city engineer shall review each erosion control plan to determine whether it conforms to the provisions of LCMC 12.08.030 through 12.08.100. After receipt of a complete erosion control plan and following final review of the plan, the city engineer shall, in writing:

A. Approve the plan, if the plan conforms to the provisions of LCMC 12.08.030 through 12.08.100;

B. Approve the plan, subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary for the plan to conform to the provisions of LCMC 12.08.030 through 12.08.100; or

C. Disapprove the plan, if the plan, either as submitted or with conditions, does not conform to the provisions of LCMC 12.08.030 through 12.08.100. A disapproval shall indicate the appeal procedure provided for in this chapter and the procedure for submitting a revised erosion control plan. (Ord. 97-13 § 1)


12.08.090 Design and operation standards and requirements.

All land disturbing activities that are subject to the erosion control plan approval requirements of LCMC 12.08.060 shall be subject to the following standards and requirements:

A. Prior to initiation of land disturbing activities, on-site sediment barriers, including sediment fences or equivalent measures, shall be constructed and functional to control off-site runoff, as specified in the Erosion Prevention and Control Manual. Vegetated strips with a minimum width of 25 feet may be used as an alternative only where runoff in sheet flow is expected.

B. Disturbed areas shall be stabilized with temporary or permanent measures within seven calendar days, or as otherwise required by the city engineer, following the end of active disturbance, or redisturbance, consistent with the following criteria:

1. Appropriate temporary or permanent stabilization measures shall include matting, seeding, mulching, sodding, or nonvegetative measures, or a combination thereof.

2. Areas having slopes greater than 12 percent shall be stabilized with sod, mat, or blanket in combination with seeding, or an equivalent thereto.

C. Land disturbing activities in stream channels and riparian areas shall be avoided unless the city engineer determines there are no other points of access. If the city engineer determines such activities cannot be avoided, the following requirements shall be met:

1. Construction vehicles shall be kept out of the stream channel to the maximum extent possible. Where construction crossings are necessary, temporary crossings shall be constructed of non-erosive material, such as rip-rap or gravel.

2. The riparian area shall have erosion protection measures in place within 24 hours of disturbance, which time may be extended to a maximum of 48 hours at the discretion of the city engineer.

3. All required local, state, and federal permits shall be received prior to the activity.

D. Storm sewer inlets and culverts shall be protected by sediment traps or filter barriers meeting design standards and specifications approved by the city engineer.

E. Soil storage piles containing more than 10 cubic yards of material shall not be located with a down slope drainage length of less than 25 feet to a roadway or drainage channel. Filter barriers or impervious covering shall be installed to prevent or contain sediment runoff.

F. Each site shall have a graveled, or equivalent, entrance road(s) of sufficient length, depth, and width to prevent sediment from being tracked onto public or private roadways. Any sediment reaching a public or private roadway shall be removed by shoveling or street cleaning (not flushing) before the end of each workday and transported to a controlled sediment deposit area.

G. All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be disposed of within 30 days after final site stabilization is achieved with permanent soil stabilization measures. Trapped sediment and other disturbed soils resulting from the disposed-of temporary measures shall be permanently stabilized to prevent further erosion and sedimentation. (Ord. 2000-04 § 3; Ord. 97-13 § 1)


12.08.100 Maintenance of control measures.

A. The owner of land on which land disturbing activities are occurring, or the owner’s agent, shall maintain all erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the requirements of LCMC 12.08.030 through this section. The land owner or the land owner’s agent shall inspect erosion and sediment control measures every 24 hours during storm or rain events to ensure the measures are functioning properly.

B. The city engineer shall make regular inspections to ascertain that erosion and sediment control measures as proposed in the erosion control plan have been implemented and are being effectively maintained. (Ord. 97-13 § 1)


12.08.110 Hazards on private property.

If the city engineer becomes aware of or is notified of any land containing disturbed soil areas, or containing unprotected soil storage piles, creating erosion and sedimentation that affects property of another or is in violation of any provision of this chapter, the city engineer shall require the land owner to follow procedures and employ practices set out in this chapter to control the erosion and sedimentation. The land owner shall follow the required procedures and employ the required practices. (Ord. 97-13 § 1)


12.08.120 Review of city engineer decisions.

A professional judgment decision made by the city engineer under this chapter may be appealed by the owner, the owner’s agent or representative, or any other person subject to the decision, to a five person grading and erosion control review board appointed by the city council. The appeal shall be submitted in writing to the department of public works and shall state the relevant facts and the basis for the appeal. The decision of the review board shall be rendered within seven days of an appeal, shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter, and shall not be subject to further appeal within the city government. A decision of the city engineer shall be fully effective while an appeal is pending. (Ord. 97-13 § 1)


12.08.130 Violation – Injunctive relief – Other remedies.

A. Any violation of any provision of this chapter is classified as a Class B violation under Chapter 1.16 LCMC. Any violation may be enforced in accord with the provisions of Chapter 1.16 LCMC.

B. The city shall have, in addition to the remedies available under Chapter 1.16 LCMC, all other remedies allowed by the city’s ordinances and the laws of the state, including but not limited to the remedy of injunctive relief necessary to prevent violations of this chapter.

C. If the city engineer determines that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the city engineer may notify the owner of the land and the developer, general agent, architect, builder, contractor, or other person or entity who has participated in committing the violation, or any of them, to cease all further development until such time as the violation has been remedied, and the person or persons notified shall cease further development. If development continues in disregard of notice from the city engineer, the city may seek an injunction to stop further development until the violation is remedied.

D. If the city engineer determines that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the city engineer shall give written notice to the owner of the land and the developer, general agent, architect, builder, contractor, or other person or entity who has participated in committing the violation, or any of them, that a violation has occurred and that the violation must be remedied within a time specified. The amount of time to remedy the violation shall depend on the nature of the violation, the circumstance then existing, and whether an emergency exists. In the event of noncompliance within the time set by the city engineer, the city may take remedial steps to cure the violation and charge the costs, fees, and expenses of the remedial action to the owner of the land. This shall include any expenses, costs, and fees paid by the city to third persons for labor and materials to remedy the violation. Charges made under this subsection shall be a lien against the real property on which the violation arises, and the city recorder is authorized to enter the amount of such charges immediately in the docket of city liens. (Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 97-13 § 1)


12.08.140 Education.

A. The city shall declare each September to be Erosion Prevention Awareness Month and during September shall conduct events to promote a greater awareness of the problems with erosion and the solutions to prevent it.

B. The city, in cooperation with the Devils Lake Water Improvement District, shall sponsor an annual workshop on erosion prevention and sediment control. (Ord. 97-13 § 1)


12.08.150 Erosion prevention and sediment control within urban growth boundary.

A. To maximize the likelihood that appropriate erosion prevention and sediment control requirements will be followed within the Lincoln City urban growth boundary, the city shall not provide a new water service to any property, outside the city but inside the urban growth boundary, unless the property owner first enters into a written agreement, approved by the city engineer, that before, during, and following any land disturbing activity on the property, the owner will fully comply with all requirements, procedural and substantive, of this chapter, as though the property were within the city.

B. In the event land disturbing activity occurs in violation of an agreement entered into under subsection (A) of this section, the city engineer, as a remedy in addition to any other available remedy, may cause a termination of water service to the property. (Ord. 97-14 § 1)


Chapter 12.12 PUBLIC WORKS PERMIT

Sections:

12.12.010    Permit – Required.

12.12.020    Permit – Application.

12.12.030    Permit – Fee.

12.12.040    Additional fee for disruption of new streets.

12.12.050    Permit – Appeal.

12.12.060    Insurance required.

12.12.070    Bond required.

12.12.080    Compliance with state rules.

12.12.090    Approval of work and restoration – Guarantee.

12.12.100    Existing franchise agreements.

12.12.110    Violation – Penalty.


12.12.010 Permit – Required.

A. Whenever any person, firm or corporation, except city employees or contractors for the city, intends to install any facility in the city right-of-way, including the extension of city utilities, they shall first obtain a permit therefor.

B. Typical facilities covered by this chapter are signposts, utility poles, culverts, underground utilities, curbs, sidewalks or any manner of obstruction and/or construction which disturbs the surface and/or subsurface of the street, sidewalk or right-of-way.

C. A permit may be issued on an annual basis for activities authorized in a franchise agreement which are performed routinely on a frequent, repetitive basis. (Ord. 88-13 § 2)


12.12.020 Permit – Application.

A. Such person, firm or corporation shall first apply for a permit from the city. The permit application shall be accompanied by detailed plans and specifications covering the construction.

B. The permit shall require the approval of the department of public works, and, if the traveled way will be obstructed, notification of the police department shall also be required.

C. All plans shall be stamped by an engineer licensed to practice in the state or shall meet approved standard construction details on file with the city. (Ord. 88-13 § 3)


12.12.030 Permit – Fee.

A. A permit fee of not less than $25.00 shall accompany the application, for all applicants other than a utility subject to a franchise agreement where such franchise provides that the franchise fee is in lieu of any applicable permit fees.

B. For projects with an estimated cost of $15,000 or more, the actual costs incurred by the city will be computed and the costs so incurred will become an additional application fee due the city. (Ord. 88-13 § 6)


12.12.040 Additional fee for disruption of new streets.

A. When an underground utility installation is made within five years after improvement of a street to city standards, a disruption fee in addition to the fees prescribed in LCMC 12.12.030 shall apply. This additional disruption fee shall be five times the estimated cost of restoration as determined by the public works engineer if the installation is made during the first year after the street improvement is completed, four times during the second year, three times during the third year, two times during the fourth year, and equal to the estimated restoration cost during the fifth year; provided, however, the city shall notify all persons utilizing any portion of the city right-of-way under a franchise, and such other special districts and municipal corporations as may be subjected to such disruption fee, as soon as practicable following the final decision of the city to so improve a street.

B. Emergency repairs of underground utilities or work which as a matter of practical necessity can only be made by disruption of a new street are exempt from the requirements of this section. (Ord. 88-13 § 7)


12.12.050 Permit – Appeal.

If the permittee is aggrieved by the decision of the city as to the granting or denial of a permit, the permittee shall have 30 days within which to make written appeal to the city manager, setting forth the reason or reasons for such appeal. Such appeal shall be considered and passed upon by the city council, and the results of such consideration forwarded to the appellant within five days of the hearing thereon. (Ord. 88-13 § 8)


12.12.060 Insurance required.

Prior to commencing work pursuant to the permit granted under this chapter, the permittee or his contractor shall obtain, and maintain during the period of construction, public liability insurance for bodily injury and property damage to public or private persons or property, which insurance shall name the city as an additional insured, and provide coverage for all claims or damages for bodily injury, including wrongful death, to any one person in an amount not less than $250,000 and in an amount of not less than $500,000 on account of any one occurrence, and property damage liability insurance in an amount not less than $100,000 for each occurrence. Proof of such coverage shall be provided to the city, and may be made on an annual basis. (Ord. 88-13 § 9)


12.12.070 Bond required.

Prior to commencement of work with a construction estimate greater than $15,000 under a permit granted pursuant to this chapter, the permittee or the contractor for the permittee shall post with the city a bond with a surety qualified to do a bonding business in the state, or a cash deposit or an assigned savings account or other security acceptable to the city, in an amount equal to 100 percent of the cost of the work as estimated by the city’s public works engineer. Such bond, deposit or other security shall be conditioned upon the permittee or its contractor performing the work pursuant to the terms of this chapter, including the replacement of the street, sidewalk or other right-of-way within the time specified by the director of public works, and the maintenance and guarantee of such work and replacement for a period of one year after the completed job is accepted by the city. (Ord. 88-13 § 10)


12.12.080 Compliance with state rules.

Rules of all state departments having jurisdiction shall be strictly adhered to with respect to safety, construction methods and other state requirements. (Ord. 88-13 § 5)


12.12.090 Approval of work and restoration – Guarantee.

A. All work undertaken, including but not limited to excavation, backfilling, surface restoration, protection of utilities, traffic control, safety precautions, noise and dust control and cleanup, shall be approved by the city, which specifications shall meet or exceed, where necessary, the specifications for public works construction as adopted by the city. All work shall require restoration of the surface to original or better condition in accordance with such specifications.

B. The permittee shall guarantee the work and condition of the street, sidewalk or right-of-way for a period of one year after the completed job is accepted by the city. (Ord. 88-13 § 4)


12.12.100 Existing franchise agreements.

If any existing franchise agreements contain provisions contrary to any of the provisions in this chapter, the terms of the franchise agreement shall control. (Ord. 88-13 § 11)


12.12.110 Violation – Penalty.

Violation of this chapter constitutes a Class B violation as defined in Chapter 1.16 LCMC. (Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 88-13 § 12)


Chapter 12.16 PARK USE REGULATIONS AND EXCLUSIVE USE PERMITS

Sections:

12.16.000    Purpose.

12.16.005    Applicability.

12.16.010    Hours of closure.

12.16.015    Motorized vehicles.

12.16.020    Motor vehicle speed.

12.16.025    Parking facilities and prohibitions.

12.16.030    Open fires and camping prohibited.

12.16.035    Fireworks and explosives.

12.16.040    Smoking prohibited.

12.16.045    Prohibited commercial activity.

12.16.050    Alcohol prohibited – Exceptions.

12.16.055    Animals in parks and open space areas.

12.16.060    Litter, garbage and refuse disposal.

12.16.065    Protection of park and open space, facilities, flora and fauna.

12.16.070    Amplified sound.

12.16.075    Potentially dangerous equipment and activities.

12.16.080    Activities restricted to specially designated areas.

12.16.085    Free use – Permits and fees required.

12.16.090    Donations of functional items and volunteer projects.

12.16.095    Violation – Penalty.


12.16.000 Purpose.

The parks and open spaces of Lincoln City are areas of recreation, relaxation and enjoyment for the public. Their regulation and use shall permit enjoyment by a maximum number of people engaged in widely diverse interests and activities as is practical within the limits of space, design and accommodation available in each park or open space area. Limitations and restrictions on use ensure safe use of park and open space areas and protect park facilities, open space natural resources and the rights of surrounding neighbors. “Parks” generally refers to developed recreation areas with use consistent with Chapter 17.42 LCMC; “open space” generally refers to undeveloped areas where only educational activities or passive recreational uses are authorized consistent with Chapter 17.43 LCMC. (Ord. 2014-25 § 1)


12.16.005 Applicability.

The provisions of this chapter apply to all city-owned property zoned either as park (Chapter 17.42 LCMC) or open space (Chapter 17.43 LCMC), together with all city-owned property officially signed for city park or open space use, regardless of the zoning designation, and all other city-owned properties designated for recreation use (or interim recreation use) by the city council by resolution. The prohibitions of this chapter expressly apply to both open space and park lands, unless otherwise indicated. This chapter has extra-territorial application for designated city park and open space properties owned by the city, but outside the city limits. (Ord. 2014-25 § 1; Ord. 2013-08 § 1)


12.16.010 Hours of closure.

All public parks and open spaces of the city shall be open to the public only during daylight hours, or between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., whichever is more restrictive. Notwithstanding the above, when lights are operating and in use for a reserved athletic event, the Kirtsis ballfields shall be open to public or private use between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:30 p.m. The city council may by resolution establish different closure hours for properties designated for interim recreation use and require posting of same. Except for signed beach access trails, no person other than a city employee shall be in any city park or open space during the hours of closure, unless by permit issued by the city manager or city manager’s designee (hereinafter “city manager or designee” collectively referred to as “director”). (Ord. 2014-25 § 1; Ord. 2013-08 § 2; Ord. 2008-06 § 1; Ord. 93-14 § 1; Ord. 89-9 § 1)


12.16.015 Motorized vehicles. 

Except for authorized city vehicles and emergency vehicles on official business, motorized vehicles (such as but not limited to automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, personal transport (Segway-type) vehicles, motor-scooters, power-assisted bicycles, go-karts, snowmobiles, all-season vehicles, and all-terrain vehicles) shall operate, stop or park only upon designated paved park roadways or within designated paved or unpaved parking areas. Motorized vehicles are expressly prohibited on the Head to Bay trail. Vehicles causing damage to park or open space property, including but not limited to facilities or vegetation, are subject to impoundment as evidence in a criminal proceeding. The prohibitions of this section do not apply to motorized mobility devices serving persons with disabilities. (Ord. 2014-25 § 1)


12.16.020 Motor vehicle speed.

The designated speed for motor vehicles upon the roadways within any park or open space is 10 miles per hour unless otherwise posted. No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon any roadway in a park or open space at a speed greater than permitted by the basic rule as provided in ORS 811.100. (Ord. 2014-25 § 1)


12.16.025 Parking facilities and prohibitions.

Parking facilities within or abutting parks and open space areas are reserved for use by park and open space patrons only, unless otherwise designated by the city. In addition to traffic control resolutions and orders authorized under LCMC Title 10 parking prohibitions, the director may designate time limits or other parking restrictions for areas within city parks and open spaces with official traffic signs. Parking use is authorized; other uses such as commercial activities and camping are prohibited. Motor vehicles parked outside of approved parking areas will be towed at the owner’s expense. Auto repairs are not allowed anywhere at any time on park or open space property. Overnight parking is prohibited in park and open space parking lots, except pursuant to a permit issued by the director or in designated parking spaces which may include metered or self-pay spaces. (Ord. 2014-25 § 1)


12.16.030 Open fires and camping prohibited.

A. No person shall build or maintain any fire in a park or open space, except in fire rings or fireplaces as provided by the city or in a portable propane camp stove or portable charcoal barbecue unit where picnic tables are provided. Stoves and barbecues must be in safe operating condition and safely operated to avoid damage to city property. No person shall leave a fire unattended and/or leave the park area before extinguishing every fire. No person shall take firewood from any park for personal use. 

B. Except as provided in subsection (C) of this section, no camping, including overnight camping, is permitted in any city park or open space area; no person shall camp or sleep in a tent, shelter, camper, vehicle or trailer at any place within the boundaries of any park or open space, including public park roads or parking lots, during the hours of closure set forth in LCMC 12.16.010 or such other hours as are set by resolution. 

C. The director may, using reasonable discretion, issue permits for camping in designated special use areas. Camping is not permitted at any time or in any location without such designation. The permits may restrict authorized camping to tents, shelters, vehicles, campers or trailers as are deemed appropriate for the special use area in the park or open space. Camping shall be limited by permit conditions, including a reasonable time limitation, not to exceed five days. During a declared emergency, the city manager may waive the permit requirement for camping in the emergency order. (Ord. 2014-25 § 1; Ord. 2008-06 § 1; Ord. 89-9 § 4. Formerly 12.16.040)


12.16.035 Fireworks and explosives. 

No person shall ignite or use any type of firework, sparkler, snake, model rocket, rocket motor, other form of explosive, or smoke-producing device or instrument, in any city park or open space. (Ord. 2014-25 § 1)


12.16.040 Smoking prohibited.

No person shall smoke or carry any lighted smoking instrument in a city park or open space or in city-owned or managed recreational facilities to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including but not limited to parks, trails, open space, special use areas, and any partially or fully enclosed area. The no smoking prohibition extends to all areas of any city park or facility where a special event, such as a festival, concert, or similar public event is occurring, unless the special event permit expressly provides for designated smoking areas at the event. (Ord. 2014-25 § 1; Ord. 2008-06 § 1. Formerly 12.16.045)


12.16.045 Prohibited commercial activity.

A. Except for city personnel on city business, or when authorized in a city-approved concession or permit in compliance with this chapter, no person, corporation, or entity shall sell merchandise or services or operate any concession on public park or open space property, including within any enclosed or partially enclosed building or from any vehicle. 

B. The director may approve and execute an annual parks concession agreement, using the standard form of agreement approved by the city council by resolution. Unless otherwise agreed by council, the standard parks concession fee shall be no less than 10 percent of gross sale proceeds. Concessions are prohibited by zoning on city open space lands (Chapter 17.43 LCMC), but are permitted on city park lands (Chapter 17.42 LCMC). 

C. No person who holds a valid permit or concession shall sell merchandise or services within a park in violation of any conditions or requirements stated in that permit or concession.

D. The conditions and requirements of a permit or concession shall include a concession fee or equivalent reasonable contributions of labor in exchange for the applicant’s commercial use of park facilities and the applicant’s retaining the proceeds from concessions.

E. Permits or concessions for commercial activities in city parks shall not be reissued for another season until the applicant has submitted an annual report of the preceding season, including the following:

1. Park concession stands, gross sales, expenses and net receipts certified for accuracy by the authorized agent of the applicant.

2. Applicant improvements or fees to the park in the preceding 12 months, if any.

3. Applicant expenditures for park maintenance, including lighting, if any. 

F. Parks concessions operated by nonprofit organizations require a formal concession agreement or permit except that the normal concession percentage of gross revenues due to the city in subsection (D) of this section shall be considered a donation to the nonprofit entity. To qualify for such donation the organization must annually demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director its current nonprofit status. (Ord. 2014-25 § 1)


12.16.050 Alcohol prohibited – Exceptions.

A. No person, corporation, organization or entity shall bring, possess, consume, or permit any person to bring, possess or consume any intoxicating liquor, beverage or substance on city park or open space property or into any such park facility, except when authorized by a special event permit pursuant to Chapter 5.16 LCMC or when authorized in a negotiated park concession agreement, and only in strict compliance with the terms and conditions of such special event permit or concession. 

B. At a minimum, the concessionaire or special event organizer shall strictly abide by all parks rules and regulations, including permit requirements. All required OLCC licenses and permits shall be obtained by the concessionaire or event organizer. The corporation, organization or person shall strictly abide by all terms and conditions of the approved parks concession agreement or special event permit. (Ord. 2014-25 § 1; Ord. 2008-06 § 1; Ord. 89-9 § 2. Formerly 12.16.020)


12.16.055 Animals in parks and open space areas.

A. Except for designated off-leash areas (e.g., dog parks), domesticated animals must be on a leash at all times when on city park or open space properties.

B. Domesticated animals are prohibited from playground areas, sports fields, sports courts, ponds, streams and wetland areas, and inside park and recreation buildings and facilities, except as authorized under the Americans with Disabilities Act or when specifically authorized by the director.

C. Owners are responsible for the immediate removal of their animals’ fecal matter from parks and open space properties or facilities. 

D. No person shall ride or lead any horse or pony in a city park or open space, except upon a roadway, designated parking area, or designated bridle path, consistent with LCMC 10.12.240.

E. Notwithstanding the prohibitions above, and LCMC 6.08.040, the director pursuant to LCMC 12.16.080 may designate special use areas, including off-leash areas (dog parks), fenced or unfenced, and otherwise regulate the presence and activities of dogs and other domestic animals in a city park, including properties designated for interim recreational use. Prior to issuance of such order the director shall obtain a recommendation from the parks and recreation board. Dog parks are prohibited in open space areas. Nothing in this section relieves a keeper of a domestic animal from the requirement to maintain control of the animal by means sufficient to prevent escape and injury to persons or damage to property. The council may, by resolution, establish such interim special use areas designated by the director as permanently designated areas. 

F. The owner of any animal damaging or destroying park or open space property of the city will be held liable for the full value of the property so damaged or destroyed, in addition to any impounding fees and penalties otherwise lawfully imposed. 

G. Dog Park (Including Interim Facility) Regulations.

1. Dog owners must ensure compliance with the following:

a. Dogs must display identification tags showing proof of current license and rabies vaccination; and

b. Dogs must demonstrate appropriate social interaction. Dogs displaying aggressive behavior toward people or other dogs must be leashed and removed from the off-leash area immediately.

2. Dog handlers must:

a. Read and become familiar with all off-leash area rules before entering the area;

b. Carry a leash for each dog in your care, and leash your dog when outside the off-leash area;

c. Closely supervise young children. Children under 12 must be supervised by an adult;

d. Accept legal responsibility for any damage or injury caused by your dog. Lincoln City is not responsible for any damages or injuries caused by your dog;

e. Remain in the off-leash area to supervise your dog, keeping the animal within view and under verbal control at all times;

f. Remove pinch, choke, and spiked collars when off-leash to prevent injury;

g. Not bring a dog in heat to the off-leash area;

h. Not bring food (for humans) in the off-leash area;

i. Use of balls and other dog toys is permitted but shall be discontinued if such use creates conflicts with other dogs;

j. No human running in the off-leash area allowed;

k. No strollers or infants in the off-leash area;

l. Call 911 for biting or other serious incidents;

m. Not bring a puppy without a complete cycle of vaccinations to the off-leash area;

n. Not abandon your dog. Abandoned dogs will be impounded; and

o. Immediately remove fecal matter left by the dog in the off-leash area and remove such matter from the park for proper disposal.

p. Use of the off-leash area with regulations posted constitutes agreement to use the off-leash area in compliance with regulations. Any violation of regulations will lead to the removal of both animal or pet and owner/handler from the facility. (Ord. 2014-25 § 1; Ord. 2013-08 § 3; Ord. 2008-06 § 1; Ord. 89-9 § 3. Formerly 12.16.030, 12.16.035)


12.16.060 Litter, garbage and refuse disposal. 

A. No person shall discard or dispose of any litter, garbage or refuse of any kind, including landscape materials, in a park or open space, except in a receptacle provided for such garbage and other refuse.

B. No person shall take any garbage or other refuse, including landscape materials, into a public park or open space for the purpose of discarding or disposing of such garbage or other refuse; no person shall deposit such household garbage, refuse or material in a park or open space trash receptacle or elsewhere on park or open space property.

C. In addition to penalties provided herein, persons depositing household garbage or refuse in city parks or open space trash receptacles shall be referred to the appropriate prosecutor for possible criminal prosecution (e.g., theft of services – ORS 164.125). (Ord. 2014-25 § 1)


12.16.065 Protection of park and open space, facilities, flora and fauna.

A. No person other than a duly authorized city employee in the performance of duty or persons participating in city-approved activities shall excavate or dig in any park or open space, nor shall any person remove, harvest, destroy, injure, mutilate or cut any trees, plants, shrubs, groundcover, fungi, or other forest product, or any portion thereof, in any city park or open space. Notwithstanding the above, collection of small quantities of berries, mushrooms or other products for personal use is not prohibited. 

B. No person other than a duly authorized city employee in the performance of duty or persons participating in city-approved activities shall fish, hunt, or trap or otherwise harass or disturb fish, fowl, birds or wildlife residing in or using city park lands or open space.

C. No person other than a duly authorized city employee in the performance of duty or persons participating in city-approved activities shall alter, cut, break, injure, deface, mark, paint, move or disturb any building, monument, sign, fence, bench, structure, fountain, apparatus, equipment, pen, cage, or other park natural or manmade feature or improvement in a city park or open space.

D. No signs, banners, displays, flyers, bills or similar devices can be posted on or attached to city park or open space grounds, facilities or improvements, nor can such items be posted or attached to trees or other vegetation. No nails, screws or other foreign objects may be driven into the trees or other vegetation, nor may such items be driven into any city facilities or improvements. Similarly, trees and shrubs are not to be used as poles for game nets, hammocks, swings, or the like. 

E. Use of a metal detector in a park or open space is prohibited in city parks and open spaces, unless such use is pursuant to a permit issued by the public works director and/or such use is specifically authorized in a designated area. 

F. Park buildings and facilities are provided for public convenience. All persons who use park buildings or facilities do so on condition that they keep the premises neat and clean and show respect for the premises and future users thereof. Persons using such park or open space facilities (e.g., restrooms) may do so only for authorized purposes. Except for service animals, no animals are allowed in the park buildings or structures at any time. 

G. No person shall engage in fish cleaning, or field dress game, or engage in any other activity which creates an unsanitary condition while in a city park or open space.

H. No person shall enter any building, enclosure, or place within any of the parks upon which the words “No Admittance” or “Authorized Personnel Only” shall be displayed or posted by sign, placard, or otherwise, without the consent of or being accompanied by a city parks employee. Violation of no admittance may be prosecuted as criminal trespass. (Ord. 2014-25 § 1)


12.16.070 Amplified sound.

A. No person shall use any device to amplify sound in any park unless a valid special event permit has been issued pursuant to Chapter 5.16 LCMC or the amplified sound concerns an exempt organized athletic event or group activity under LCMC 9.10.040(A); provided, that the amplified sound is necessary to serve the participants and spectators at the event. 

B. Permission to use amplified sound for an athletic event or group activity or pursuant to a special event permit shall be subject to conditions noted above or otherwise included in such permit, and the director may revoke a permit or authorization if the terms of the permit are violated, or he or she may deny a permit to a person or group of persons who have violated the terms of a permit within the previous year. (Ord. 2014-25 § 1)


12.16.075 Potentially dangerous equipment and activities.

No person shall use or engage in any activity in a city park or open space that the director determines, in his or her reasonable discretion, creates an unreasonable risk or danger to other persons. Such activities include, but are not be limited to: the use of golf clubs and balls, archery equipment, discus, javelin or shot, metal spike lawn darts, horseshoes, or any form of model aircraft, rocket or missile powered by fuel or mechanical means; weapon usage or firearm discharge. If such activities will be permitted in a city park or open space, they will be permitted only in designated areas as provided in LCMC 12.16.080 and subject to regulations. (Ord. 2014-25 § 1)


12.16.080 Activities restricted to specially designated areas.

A. Activities that may be hazardous to persons using the park or public open space lands or which may damage facilities, grass or foliage or activities which may unreasonably conflict with other authorized uses are restricted to areas designated for such activities. The director is expressly delegated authority and specifically authorized to set aside, establish, alter, and/or discontinue special use areas, including limitations on designated trails and paths, in one or more of the city’s parks and open spaces by written administrative order. Prior to issuance of such administrative order the director shall present the proposed special use areas and associated regulations to the parks and recreation board for recommendation. The board shall address the consistency of the proposed special use areas with the applicable parks master plan. Signage shall implement such administrative orders and violation of such orders shall be considered a violation of this code. The administrative orders shall be of limited duration, not to exceed one year. Council may implement such orders on a permanent basis by resolution. 

B. Designated special use areas, which may or may not be authorized in a city park, include, but are not limited to, activities such as:

1. Horse or pony trails or paths; 

2. Mountain bike trails;

3. Hiking only trails;

4. Multi-use fields for rugby, soccer, or football;

5. Multi-use fields for softball or baseball;

6. Track and field use areas, including areas for projectiles, such as javelin, shot put, and discus;

7. Horseshoe pits;

8. Skateboard areas;

9. BMX bicycle areas;

10. Bicycle paths;

11. Rollerblade paths;

12. Primitive camping (by special permit) areas;

13. Metal detecting areas;

14. Remote control vehicle areas;

15. Remote control model aircraft areas;

16. Dog park (off-leash) areas;

17. Any one or more of those activities otherwise prohibited under LCMC 12.16.075.

Any designated special use area on open space lands must meet the requirements and limitations of the open space zone. 

C. Before establishing, altering or discontinuing such a special use area, the director shall determine, in his or her reasonable discretion, priority of need for such an area and whether the activity may be carried on without unreasonable interference or danger to participants or other persons. If the director establishes a special use area, the director may designate in the administrative order such hours or days of usage, the particular activity or activities that are permitted, and such conditions, limitations or regulations as he or she determines to be reasonably required for the safety and convenience of participants and other persons and property. He or she shall mark the boundaries of the special use area and post such signs and warnings concerning that special use area as he or she deems reasonably appropriate. No person shall use or injure any special use area, except for the purposes of one or more of the activities permitted in that special use area under any conditions specified by the director. No person or organization has a right to have an area of a park or open space designated as special use area. (Ord. 2014-25 § 1)


12.16.085 Free use – Permits and fees required.

A. Except where otherwise provided in city code, the city of Lincoln City permits free recreational use of the city’s park and open space properties and facilities, which are generally regarded as outdoor recreational areas, consistent with recreational immunity statutes, ORS 105.682 and 105.688.

B. An exclusive use permit (this chapter) or a special event permit (Chapter 5.16 LCMC) is necessary to reserve a public park or facility for exclusive use and shall be obtained from the director prior to occupancy of the park or facility. Special event permits and exclusive use permits are not issued for open space lands. Unless altered by subsequent order, the initial director’s designee for exclusive use permits review and processing is the parks and recreation director. Whether a special event permit or an exclusive use permit is required is based on the intensity of activities proposed. A breakdown of triggers for each type of permit is set forth below:

1. Exclusive Use Permit Triggers.

a. The person or persons engaged in the activity seek to exclude, or to have the right to exclude, member(s) of the public from their activity, the park, or portion thereof; or

b. The activity is intended to involve, or actually involves, as participants and/or spectators, at any one time, 50 or fewer persons; or

c. The activity includes the authorized placement of any temporary or permanent structure (e.g., fencing, stage, bleachers) or equipment that may cause damage to the park or create potential liability risk; or

d. A concession is permitted with an exclusive use permit provided such commercial activity is subject to an approved concession agreement or permit with the city, in the approved standard form and subject to standard conditions.

2. Special Event Permit Triggers. See Chapter 5.16 LCMC.

a. The activity involves charging admission, amplified sound (other than a sporting event), or the sale or use of alcohol or other commercial activity (except for approved concessions), or is likely to, or requires provision of, additional public safety or city services, including but not limited to: emergency medical services (EMS), fire, ambulance or police protection, water, sewer, placing, removing, opening or closing park access roads, access control bollards, gates or fences, or the special preparation of fields or other park facilities;

b. Except for Kirtsis Park, Regatta Park and Taft (51st) Park, the activity is intended to involve, or actually involves, as participants and/or spectators, at any one time, more than 50 persons; or

c. The activity is listed or is similar to an activity on the list of permit triggers in Chapter 5.16 LCMC.

C. Exclusive Use Permit Application Requirements and Fees.

1. Any person desiring an exclusive use permit shall apply at the community center on official forms prepared by the city.

2. Official city forms detailing application requirements shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. All applications shall be signed by the responsible parties under penalty of perjury and false swearing.

3. Permit fees, if any, shall also be established by council resolution.

4. Applications shall be submitted at least 10 days prior to requested usage. Applications should be submitted at least 30 days prior to usage to allow time for appeals, if any. Reservations are on a first come first served basis. Nothing in this section prohibits staff from processing an application on less than 10 days’ notice.

5. Staff shall not process incomplete applications, and incomplete applications do not reserve parks or other city facilities.

6. Staff will not accept an application for processing an exclusive use permit more than six months before the proposed event.

7. Staff shall not accept an application for processing an exclusive use permit or special event permit for a park or city facility that does not have an established rental rate. Consult the latest city fee schedule for available city parks and city facilities. It is the determination of city council that such parks and facilities are not available for exclusive use and/or special events, except when such events are conducted by or through the city of Lincoln City.

D. Exclusive Use Permit Approval Criteria.

1. The director shall issue the permit if a complete application, and any applicable fee or deposit, is filed and all of the following criteria and any applicable conditions of this chapter are met. In the event the proposed use does not meet all relevant criteria, the director shall deny the application, unless the director imposes conditions (e.g., issue a permit for a different date, time, park or park area) so as to meet such criteria. The criteria are as follows:

a. The proposed activity is lawful under federal, state and local law, is not adverse to the public interest, and is consistent with the size and capacity of the park and any specialized purpose(s) for which it is normally used, or for which the park can be adapted;

b. The proposed activity will not create adverse impact(s) from noise, litter or traffic in the park or surrounding neighborhood;

c. The proposed activity does not pose a significant risk to participants or spectators, or to public health or safety or to the physical integrity of the park or park facilities;

d. The applicant pays all required fees and deposits, if any, and agrees to comply with all conditions of the permit;

e. The proposed activity does not conflict with an activity scheduled for the park or for which a different permit has been applied for or issued;

f. The director is expressly authorized to impose reasonable permit conditions, including, but not limited to, alterations to adapt park facilities to a proposed use (including reimbursement for added facility costs and labor) to mitigate adverse impacts on neighbors or to protect city facilities, participants and the public (including, for example, hours of operation, deposit for cleanup, reimbursement overtime costs, participant liability waivers, physical separation of different uses), financial security, or such other conditions as deemed necessary or desirable to protect the public health, safety and welfare. When financial security is requested by the parks and recreation director or police chief to secure protection of city facilities or provision of needed services (e.g., added cleanup costs or overtime costs), financial security shall be required. An applicant who has previously been granted or denied an exclusive use permit or special event permit or who failed to obtain a permit, and staff has documented noncompliance with city ordinances and/or permit conditions, may be denied a permit on such basis unless there has been no incident within five years of the permit application.

g. The director is expressly authorized to impose reasonable permit conditions, including, but not limited to, insurance to cover damage to the facility or injury to participants or spectators. Unless waived or reduced by the city manager and the parks and recreation director, the following insurances shall be required:

i. An applicant for exclusive use/special event shall be required to provide general commercial liability insurance coverage for the applicant’s operations in an amount not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 aggregate. In addition, an applicant for exclusive use/special event shall provide property damage insurance coverage in an amount not less than $119,300 per occurrence and $596,400 aggregate, said amounts to be adjusted from July 1, 2019, and every year thereafter, as determined by the State Court Administrator pursuant to ORS 30.273. A copy of a certificate of insurance naming the city, its officers and employees as an additional insured shall be supplied prior to issuance of the exclusive use/special event permit. The insurance policy shall further provide that the policy shall not terminate or be canceled without 30 days’ written notice to the city. When an exclusive use/special event is located on park property, there shall be no reduction in insurance below applicable Oregon tort claim limits.

ii. All parks or special event vendors (concessionaires) operating under the exclusive use permit or special event permit in a city park shall be covered by the insurance required herein or have separate vendor insurance meeting the city’s requirements. The city shall be named as an additional insured, with the coverage provided being primary coverage.

iii. In lieu of the applicant or vendor providing insurance as provided above, the city may establish an alternative fee for use of the facility which fee includes the cost of insurance. Such option, when available, will be clearly set forth as an option on the approved parks fee resolution.

h. The director shall not allow for the use of a park during hours when the park is typically closed, unless a deposit to cover all additional costs, if any, is made at least 10 days prior to the proposed usage.

i. All vendors, whether authorized by exclusive use permit or special event permit, are permitted to operate in a city park only in approved locations to be determined by the director after consultation and approval of such locations by the city’s ADA coordinator. The exclusive use permit/special event permit shall reserve such location for the vendor only for a specified period of time as set forth in the permit. All applicable rental charges for such location shall apply. The applicant must be a person or legal entity registered to do business in the state of Oregon and possess an occupation tax permit (OTP) pursuant to Chapter 5.04 LCMC. Whether a special event or exclusive use, the applicant or the event organizer is also responsible to provide a list of all vendors engaging in commercial activity during the permit time frame and is responsible for providing evidence to the city that such vendors are registered to do business in the state of Oregon, possess OTPs and any applicable local, state or federal licenses for the activity performed (e.g., food handlers license). Except as provided below, all vendors shall pay a 10 percent concession fee on gross revenue to the city and the applicant is responsible to guarantee that such fees are remitted to the city. All vendors and the applicant/organizer are subject to audit. Failure to submit to audit disqualifies such applicant /organizer and individual vendors from future special event vending, regular exclusive use parks concessions, or street vending under Chapter 5.28 LCMC. In lieu of the 10 percent concession fee, the parks director, in the director’s sole discretion, may elect to use a daily flat rate concession fee (in addition to regular rental charges) for use of the park facility. Such flat rate shall be established by council fee resolution.

2. Actions by the director shall be completed within seven work days after an application is deemed complete. Any final action by the director concerning issuance or denial of a permit application will be done in writing and be available for pick up or sent by first class mail to the applicant.

E. Objection to Permit Denial or Conditional Permit – Appeal. Any applicant whose application is denied, is issued a permit other than as applied for, or who otherwise objects to the conditions imposed in the permit for use of the park or facility may only appeal pursuant to the uniform administrative appeals ordinance, Chapter 1.26 LCMC. If the applicant has failed to timely apply for the permit (30 days prior) such that there is insufficient time to hear an appeal, the appeal is deemed waived by the applicant.

F. Exemptions.

1. No permit shall be required under this chapter, nor condition imposed, if doing so would violate rights protected by either the Oregon or Federal Constitution.

2. No permit shall be required under this chapter in order for any person to participate in any activity programmed by or sponsored by the city of Lincoln City or a duly authorized agent thereof.

3. No exclusive use permit under this chapter is necessary when an event has been approved under the special event ordinance (Chapter 5.16 LCMC). All vendors under approved special events shall pay the rental fees and charges associated with the areas occupied and shall enter into the standard concession with the applicable fees, unless waived.

G. Permits to Be Exhibited. Any applicant will ensure that a permit is readily available or displayed for any activity for which a permit is required under the terms of this chapter.

H. Permits Subject to Ordinances and Regulations – Indemnification. All permits issued under this chapter shall be subject to any rules and regulations relating to park use as contained in the city code or adopted by resolution of council and such other city, state or federal regulations as may apply to the activity or person(s) involved therein, including specifically the Americans with Disabilities Act. Any applicant issued a permit under this chapter shall be liable for any loss, damage, or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall be issued, as well as for any breach of such rules, regulations, and ordinances, to the person or persons so suffering damages or injury, and shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city and its officers, employees and agents from any and all claims, demands, actions and suits (including all attorney fees and costs, through trial and on appeal) arising from the permittee’s use of the park under the permit. All persons to whom an exclusive use permit has been granted must agree in writing on the application form or permit to hold the city harmless and indemnify the city from any and all liability for injury to persons or property occurring as a result of the activity sponsored by permittee. Said persons shall also be liable to the city for any and all damages to parks, facilities and buildings owned by the city which result from the activity of permittee or are caused by any who participate in said activity. The indemnification provisions of this section cannot be waived or released by city staff.

I. Permits Nontransferable. Any permit issued under this chapter shall be personal to the permittee, and shall be void if transferred or assigned in any manner, except with the written consent of the manager.

J. Other Permits. Be advised: it may be necessary to obtain other permits or authorizations from the city or applicable state or federal agencies for the use proposed (e.g., alcohol sale or use in city parks requires a special event permit or approved concession (LCMC 12.16.050)) (e.g., process for OLCC temporary alcohol sales license (Chapter 5.20 LCMC)). (Ord. 2019-12 § 1; Ord. 2014-25 § 1; Ord. 2014-06 § 1. Formerly 12.16.015)


12.16.090 Donations of functional items and volunteer projects.

A. The city will accept cash donations for the purchase of functional items (e.g., a city standard bench) for placement on city park and open space properties in locations to be determined in the sole discretion of the director, after review and recommendation by the parks and recreation board. The donor will be acknowledged with a small commemorative plaque on the functional item. 

B. Donations of nonstandard items or proposed donations of materials and labor for proposed volunteer improvement projects must be approved and accepted by city council prior to any work or placement. Such projects must be reviewed by city staff for consistency with city code, have approved plans and permits if required, and reviewed by the parks and recreation board for a recommendation to council. The parks and recreation board may establish criteria and policies for such review. Any such nonstandard donation or volunteer improvement project must further the public interest, be durable and safe, and shall not result in any lien or encumbrance against the city property. (Ord. 2014-25 § 1)


12.16.095 Violation – Penalty.

A. Violation of any provision of this chapter, including interim regulations established by resolution, is unlawful and an offense against the city and shall be enforced as a Class B violation under Chapter 1.16 LCMC unless the section designates a different class of violation.

B. In addition to any fine imposed, any alcohol brought into city parks in violation of any provision of this chapter can be immediately seized, confiscated, and forfeited.

C. Notwithstanding the above, any violation of a park use regulation, including those established by resolution, which causes damage to city property shall be a Class B violation and shall also require full restitution for all damages caused by the violation.

D. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the criminal prosecution of violators who cause damage to city property when violating park use regulations. (Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 2014-25 § 1; Ord. 2013-08 § 4; Ord. 2008-06 § 1; Ord. 89-9 § 5. Formerly 12.16.050)




Chapter 12.18 EXCLUSIONS AND CRIMINAL TRESPASS – PUBLIC PLACES

Sections:

12.18.010    Purpose.

12.18.020    Authority.

12.18.030    Definitions.

12.18.040    Prohibited acts generally.

12.18.050    City manager authorized to adopt rules.

12.18.060    Rules of conduct.

12.18.070    Enforcement and exclusion.

12.18.080    Warning – Conduct subject to exclusion.

12.18.090    Notice.

12.18.100    Right to appeal – Hearing procedure.

12.18.110    Application for waiver.

12.18.120    Violation – Criminal trespass.


12.18.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to protect law-abiding citizens in their use of public buildings, public parks and city parking lots, and to authorize the city to exclude persons violating applicable laws from specific public places where such conduct is violent or disruptive of other city customers, city employees, or the conduct of city operations. (Ord. 2012-04 § 2)


12.18.020 Authority.

A. In addition to other remedies provided for violation of this code or any laws of the state of Oregon, a code enforcement officer or peace officer may exclude any person who violates any applicable provision of law in any place subject to this chapter in accordance with the provisions of this section. In addition, a police officer or authorized employee may exclude any person who violates any applicable provision of the rules of conduct in any place subject to this chapter. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the exclusion of any person lawfully exercising free speech rights or other rights protected by the Oregon or U.S. Constitution. However, a person engaged in such protected activity who commits acts that are not protected, but that violate applicable provisions of law or rules of conduct, shall be subject to exclusion as provided by this chapter.

B. The city manager may delegate his or her authority and assign a person or persons to be in charge of the various city properties for the purpose of enforcing rules of conduct. In addition, police and authorized employees shall have the authority to enforce the rules of conduct on city property, as deemed necessary by the person in charge, or when actually observed by the police officer or authorized employee. (Ord. 2012-04 § 2)


12.18.030 Definitions.

For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:

A. “Applicable provision of law” includes any applicable provision of this code, of any city ordinance applying to use of public places, any applicable criminal or traffic law of the state of Oregon, any law regarding controlled substances or alcoholic beverages, and any applicable Lincoln County ordinance or regulation. For purposes of this section, “applicable” means relating to the person’s conduct in the public place.

B. “City property” means any city owned or leased building, structure, or land, including but not limited to City Hall, Driftwood Public Library, and the community center, city parks, trails, and open space, and city parking lots within Lincoln City.

C. “Public place” means any public property, including city property.

D. “Rules of conduct” means rules and regulations implementing this chapter, including but not limited to LCMC 12.18.060, and adopted by the city manager under the authority of LCMC 12.18.050. (Ord. 2012-04 § 2)


12.18.040 Prohibited acts generally.

A. Any act or thing prohibited or the failing to do any act or thing commanded to be done in this chapter, in a public place, within the corporate limits of the city of Lincoln City and such other areas as may be specified in this chapter, is hereby declared to be an offense against the public peace, safety, health, morals and general welfare of the people of the city of Lincoln City.

B. Any act or omission made unlawful under this chapter shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing any such act or omission. (Ord. 2012-04 § 2)


12.18.050 City manager authorized to adopt rules.

A. The city manager or a designee is authorized to make such rules and regulations implementing LCMC 12.18.060 and not otherwise inconsistent or in conflict with other law as the city manager finds necessary for the better control and management of city property, including buildings, parking facilities, parks, trails, and open space. The rules of conduct may be posted at various city properties in abbreviated form and are not meant to be all-inclusive of the conduct prohibited or required by this chapter. Any person aggrieved by a rule or regulation may appeal to the city council to amend or repeal a rule by filing with the city recorder a petition which shall be presented to the city council at its next regular meeting. Until and unless amended or repealed by the council, any rule or regulation made by the city manager or a designee shall be in full force and effect as if it were an ordinance, as of the date of notice from the city manager adopting the rule or regulation.

B. Before adopting any rule, the city manager shall provide at least 30 days’ notice to the city council with a copy of the proposed rule. (Ord. 2012-04 § 2)


12.18.060 Rules of conduct.

While on or about city property:

A. No person shall violate any federal, state, or city of Lincoln City law.

B. No person shall enter or remain on any city property for purposes other than to conduct legitimate business with the city or to use that property lawfully under the laws and rules that apply.

C. No person shall enter or attempt to enter any secure portion of any city property that is not open to members of the general public without authorization from the city manager or a designee.

D. No person shall deface, damage, or destroy city property.

E. No person shall engage in conduct that degrades the appearance of city property, including but not limited to depositing trash, defacing property, or spitting.

F. No person shall engage in conduct that disrupts or interferes with operations of the city government, or disturbs city customers or employees, including but not limited to conduct that creates unreasonable noise or consists of loud or boisterous physical behavior.

G. No person shall engage in conduct that subjects customers or employees of the city government to annoyance or alarm, including but not limited to conduct that involves the use of abusive or threatening language or gestures.

H. Unless specifically authorized, no person shall use a public place for the purpose of housing or camping, including but not limited to placing objects such as vehicles, bicycles, backpacks, carts, or other items in a manner that interferes with free passage.

I. No person shall refuse to obey any direction of a city government employee.

J. No person shall violate any provisions posted on any city parking facility. (Ord. 2012-04 § 2)


12.18.070 Enforcement and exclusion.

A. An exclusion issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be for the following timeframes: 

1. Thirty days for an exclusion based on an offense not covered by subsection (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section.

2. Ninety days if the basis for the exclusion is a misdemeanor offense created by state law or city ordinance. In addition, if the person to be excluded has been excluded from any public place at any time within two years before the date of the present exclusion, the exclusion shall also be for 90 days.

3. One hundred eighty days if the basis for the exclusion is a felony or a sex offense as defined by state law. In addition, if the person to be excluded has been excluded from one or more public places on two or more occasions within two years before the date of the present exclusion, the exclusion shall also be for 180 days. 

4. Nothing herein precludes a no-contact condition of pretrial release or probation condition which operates to exclude the individual from specified public properties.

B. If a person is issued a subsequent exclusion while a previous exclusion is stayed pending appeal (or pending judicial review, should a court stay the exclusion), the stayed exclusion shall be counted in determining the appropriate length of the subsequent exclusion. If the previous exclusion is set aside, the term of the subsequent exclusion shall be reduced, as if the previous exclusion had not been issued. If multiple exclusions issued to a single person for one public place are simultaneously stayed pending appeal, the effective periods of those which are affirmed shall run consecutively. (Ord. 2013-11 § 1; Ord. 2012-04 § 2)


12.18.080 Warning – Conduct subject to exclusion.

Before issuing an exclusion under this chapter, the police officer (or person authorized to enforce rules implementing this chapter) shall first give the person a warning and opportunity to desist from the violation of law or rule. An exclusion shall not be issued if the person promptly complies with the direction and desists from violating the law or rule. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, no warning shall be required if the person is to be excluded for engaging in conduct that:

A. Is classified as a felony or as a misdemeanor under the following chapters of the Oregon Revised Statutes, or is an attempt, solicitation or conspiracy to commit any such felony or misdemeanor defined in the ORS:

1. ORS Chapter 162, Offenses Against the State and Public Justice;

2. ORS Chapter 163, Offenses Against Persons;

3. ORS Chapter 164, Offenses Against Property, except for ORS 164.805, Offensive Littering;

4. ORS Chapter 165, Offenses Involving Fraud or Deception;

5. ORS Chapter 166, Offenses Against Public Order; Firearms and Other Weapons; Racketeering;

6. ORS Chapter 167, Offenses Against Public Health, Decency and Animals;

7. ORS Chapter 475, Controlled Substances; Illegal Drug Cleanup; Paraphernalia; Precursors; or

B. Otherwise involves a controlled substance or alcoholic beverage; or

C. Has resulted in injury to any person or damage to any property; or

D. Constitutes a violation of any of the following provisions of this code:

1. Chapter 6.08 LCMC, Dogs;

2. LCMC 6.04.020, Dangerous animals;

3. LCMC 9.08.010, Loitering;

4. LCMC 9.08.020, Discharge of weapons;

5. LCMC 9.08.050, Overnight camping on public property;

6. LCMC 9.08.030, Urination or defecation in public places, except if the conduct involves only urination on a permeable surface (such as grass, dirt, mulch or other plant materials) in a park; or

E. Is conduct for which the person previously has been warned or excluded for committing in a public place. (Ord. 2012-04 § 2)


12.18.090 Notice.

Written notice shall be given to any person excluded from any public place. The notice shall identify the provision of law the person has violated and contain a brief description of the offending conduct, the places of exclusion, and the start date and end date of the exclusion period. The notice shall be signed by the officer or authorized employee and shall prominently display a warning of the consequences for failure to comply. The notice shall inform the excluded person of the right to appeal, including the time limit and the place of delivering the appeal. (Ord. 2012-04 § 2)


12.18.100 Right to appeal – Hearing procedure.

A. A person receiving a notice under LCMC 12.18.090 may appeal to the municipal court to have the exclusion rescinded or the exclusion period shortened. An appeal shall be filed by providing a written request for hearing within 10 business days of the date of the exclusion notice. Failure to file written notice of appeal within 10 business days will be deemed a waiver of any appeal rights.

B. The request for an appeal hearing must be in writing, contain a copy or description of the notice of exclusion, and a statement of the basis on which the decision to exclude is invalid, unauthorized, or otherwise improper.

C. The municipal court shall schedule a hearing on the appeal within 15 business days of receiving the request, unless the appellant requests a later date. Notice of the hearing time and date shall be given to the appellant and to the person issuing the exclusion notice.

D. At the hearing, the appellant may contest the validity of the exclusion and may present evidence. The city shall have the burden of proving the validity of the exclusion by a preponderance of the evidence. The city may present evidence either by testimony or by written report of the officer or employee. If the city’s evidence is presented only by written report and the municipal court judge cannot resolve a question by information contained in the report, the hearing may be held open for a reasonable time to complete the record.

E. If the municipal court judge finds the city has proved each element necessary to issue the exclusion notice, and if the exclusion is otherwise in accordance with law, the municipal court judge shall uphold the exclusion.

F. If the municipal court judge finds that the city has not met its burden of proof or that the exclusion is otherwise unlawful, then the municipal court judge shall enter an order rescinding the exclusion.

G. If an appeal of the exclusion is timely filed under this section, the effectiveness of the exclusion shall be stayed pending the outcome of the appeal. If the exclusion is affirmed, the remaining period of exclusion shall be effective immediately upon the issuance of the decision, unless the municipal court judge specifies a later effective date.

H. The determination of the municipal court judge is a final decision and is not appealable to the city council. Appeals from any determination by the municipal court judge under this chapter shall be by writ of review to the circuit court of Lincoln County, Oregon, as provided in ORS 34.010 through 34.100. (Ord. 2012-04 § 2)


12.18.110 Application for waiver.

At any time within the period of exclusion, a person receiving such notice of exclusion may apply in writing to the city manager for a limited waiver of some or all of the effects of the exclusion for good reason. If the city manager grants a waiver under this section, the city manager shall promptly notify the Lincoln City police chief and staff, as applicable, of such action. In exercising discretion under this section, the city manager shall consider the seriousness of the violation for which the person has been excluded, the particular need of the person to be in the public place during some or all of the period of exclusion, such as for work or to attend or participate in a particular event (without regard to the content of any speech associated with that event), and any other criterion the city manager determines to be relevant to the determination of whether or not to grant a waiver. Notwithstanding the granting of a waiver under this section, the period of waiver will be included for purposes of calculating the appropriate length of exclusion under LCMC 12.18.070. The decision of the city manager to grant or deny a waiver, in whole or in part, under this section is committed to the sole discretion of the city manager and is not subject to appeal or review. (Ord. 2012-04 § 2)


12.18.120 Violation – Criminal trespass.

No person shall enter or remain in any public place at any time during which there is in effect a notice of exclusion issued under this chapter excluding that person from that place. A person who knowingly violates a notice of exclusion from public places under this chapter commits the crime of criminal trespass. (Ord. 2012-04 § 2)


Chapter 12.24 TELECOMMUNICATIONS UTILITY PRIVILEGE TAX

Sections:

12.24.010    Definitions.

12.24.020    Grant of privilege.

12.24.030    Imposition of privilege tax.

12.24.040    Other fees and charges.

12.24.050    Reporting of funds.

12.24.060    Payment details – Quarterly.

12.24.070    Audit.

12.24.080    Dispute resolution.

12.24.090    Service/equipment modifications.

12.24.100    Indemnification.

12.24.110    Compliance with other laws.


12.24.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following words shall mean:

“City manager” means the city manager or designee.

“Exchange access services” means:

1. Telephone exchange access lines or channels which provide local access from the premises of a subscriber in this state to the local telecommunications network to effect the transfer of information; and

2. Unless a separate tariff rate is charged therefor, any facility or service provided in connection with the services described in subsection (1) of this definition.

“Gross revenue” means those revenues derived from exchange access services, less net uncollectibles from such revenues. (Ord. 90-23 § 1)


12.24.020 Grant of privilege.

Except as limited by general law, and subject to LCMC 12.24.100, the city grants a nonexclusive privilege to use the public way within the corporate limits of the city to construct and maintain communication facilities. Such privilege is granted to any telecommunications utility authorized by the Oregon Public Utility Commission to operate within this state. Except as otherwise provided or allowed by this chapter, the Lincoln City Municipal Code or LCMC Title 17, communications facilities which have been strung upon poles or other fixtures aboveground may be maintained and all new installations of such communications facilities shall be laid underground. The city manager or designee shall have the authority to prescribe which public ways will be used and the location of the communication facilities within the public way. (Ord. 90-23 § 1)


12.24.030 Imposition of privilege tax.

There is imposed on any telecommunications utility using the public way within the corporate limits of the city a privilege tax in the sum equivalent to seven percent of the gross revenues of the telecommunications utility earned within the boundaries of the municipality. (Ord. 90-23 § 1)


12.24.040 Other fees and charges.

Nothing in this chapter shall give the telecommunications utility any credit against any nondiscriminatory business tax or ad valorem property tax now or hereafter levied against real property or personal property within the city, or against any local improvements assessment levied on the telecommunications utility’s property. To the extent that separate fees are imposed by the city on telecommunications utilities for street openings, construction, inspection or maintenance of fixtures or facilities, such fees may be deducted from the privilege tax imposed by this chapter. However, telecommunications utilities shall not deduct charges and penalties imposed by the city for noncompliance with charter provisions, ordinances, resolutions or permit conditions from the privilege tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 90-23 § 1)


12.24.050 Reporting of funds.

A. With each privilege tax payment, the telecommunications utility shall furnish a certified statement from the chief financial officer or designee, setting forth the amount and calculation of the payment. The statements to the best knowledge and belief of the financial officer shall detail the revenues received by the telecommunications utility from its operation within the city, and shall specify the nature and amount of all exclusions and deductions from such revenues claimed by the telecommunications utility in calculating the tax. The city manager may require the telecommunications utility to provide any additional information necessary or convenient for administration of the tax.

B. Each telecommunications utility subject to the tax shall keep available and open to inspection by the city manager, or designee, during regular office hours, all accounts and books necessary or convenient for ascertaining the tax liability under LCMC 12.24.030. No information obtained from the telecommunications utility pursuant to this section shall be disclosed except as provided by ORS 192.410 through 192.505. (Ord. 90-23 § 1)


12.24.060 Payment details – Quarterly.

The privilege tax required by this chapter shall be paid to the city on a quarterly basis. For purposes of determining the due dates of quarterly payments, quarters shall be deemed to end March 31st, June 30th, September 30th and December 31st of each year. All quarterly payments must be received by the chief financial officer of the city not later than 30 days following the end of the quarter for which the payment is due. (Ord. 90-23 § 1)


12.24.070 Audit.

In the event that an audit results in an assessment by, and an additional payment due to, the city, such additional payment shall be subject to interest at the rate of the prime rate at the time of final audit, plus two percent per year from the date the original tax payment was due. (Ord. 90-23 § 1)


12.24.080 Dispute resolution.

A. The city manager shall be responsible for determining the telecommunications utility’s compliance with the terms of this chapter. Should the city manager determine that the telecommunications utility is not in compliance, the manager shall notify the telecommunications utility, in writing, of the deficiency. The telecommunications utility may appeal the decision of the city manager to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal, specifying the grounds therefor, with the city manager. The notice of appeal must be received by the city manager not later than 20 days from the date of the mailing of the letter, from the city manager to the telecommunications utility, notifying it of the deficiency.

B. After receiving a timely notice of appeal, the city council shall, within 60 days thereafter, hold a public hearing to review the appeal, and thereafter shall issue a decision, in writing, which decision shall be final. (Ord. 90-23 § 1)


12.24.090 Service/equipment modifications.

The city may require the telecommunications utility, by ordinance or otherwise, to make such modifications, additions and extensions to its physical equipment, facilities or plant or service within the city as shall be reasonable or necessary in the interest of the public, and designate the location and nature of all additions and extensions, the time within which they must be completed and all conditions under which they must be constructed. (Ord. 90-23 § 1)


12.24.100 Indemnification.

The telecommunications utility shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its agents, officers and employees, from any and all claims, demands and damages of any kind, including attorney fees, which may arise, in any manner, from the acts or omissions of the telecommunications utility, its agents, officers or employees, in connection with the telecommunications utility’s operations pursuant to the privilege granted in LCMC 12.24.020. (Ord. 90-23 § 1)


12.24.110 Compliance with other laws.

The telecommunications utility’s use of the public way shall comply with the standard specifications of the city, if any, and all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations now in effect or hereafter adopted. No work affecting the public way shall be done by any telecommunications utility without first obtaining all permits required by the city, which may include plan submittal, approval and obtaining a public works permit. (Ord. 90-23 § 1)


Chapter 12.26 SMALL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES

Sections:

12.26.005    Control of public right-of-way.

12.26.010    Permitting process.

12.26.020    General provisions.

12.26.030    Location.

12.26.040    Separation.

12.26.050    Wireless telecommunication facilities.

12.26.060    Poles.

12.26.070    Electrical service.

12.26.080    Logo, decals, flashing lights, and RF warning sticker.

12.26.090    Conduit and cabling.

12.26.100    Equipment and structure finishes.

12.26.110    Graffiti abatement.

12.26.120    Trees and vegetation.

12.26.130    Removal and disposal of obsolete equipment.

12.26.140    Severability – Savings.


12.26.005 Control of public right-of-way.

A. The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over each public right-of-way whether the city has a fee, easement, or other legal interest in the right-of-way.

B. The city has jurisdiction and regulatory control over each right-of-way whether the legal interest in the right-of-way was obtained by grant, dedication, prescription, reservation, condemnation, annexation, foreclosure, or other means.

C. Except when authorization is granted as provided in this municipal code, no person or entity may occupy or encroach on a public right-of-way without the permission of the city. The city grants permission to use public rights-of-way, by franchises, licenses, concessions and permits.

D. Fees and charges for franchises, licenses, concessions and permits, including application and ongoing usage fees, shall be established by council resolution based on actual cost, or, when applicable, set by federal authority, or, when applicable, as negotiated and set forth in applicable license or franchise agreements. (Ord. 2019-28 § 1)


12.26.010 Permitting process.

A network provider shall comply with the following permitting process when seeking to install small wireless telecommunication facilities (“wireless facilities”) in the public right-of-way (ROW):

A. Obtain a city of Lincoln City franchise or license; and

B. Obtain a public works permit; and

C. File a land use application, where applicable. (Ord. 2019-28 § 1)


12.26.020 General provisions.

A. “Network provider,” for the purposes of these standards, refers to the owner or operator of a small wireless telecommunication facility.

B. “Small wireless facilities” (also known as “wireless facilities”), for the purposes of these standards, includes any pole, conduit/cabling, antenna, cabinets, equipment or other materials used for the provision of such small wireless services.

C. A network provider shall construct and maintain wireless facilities in a manner that does not:

1. Obstruct, impede or hinder the usual travel or public safety on the public ROW.

2. Obstruct the legal use of the public ROW by other providers.

3. Violate or conflict with any laws, including but not limited to the city of Lincoln City ordinances or standards.

4. Obstruct, impede, or hinder any operations of the city’s infrastructure or systems, including but not limited to city wireless equipment, street light equipment, traffic signal equipment, etc.

5. Any items installed after the initial application will require an additional approval process with the city through a public works permit. Newly installed or updated equipment will be required to comply with any currently adopted standards at the time of installation.

6. Poles within the ROW will be categorized as follows:

a. Street Light Poles. Poles that include a street light. A network provider may upgrade (or replace) an existing street light pole in the same location for height or foundation requirements to support their wireless facilities without being considered a network provider pole.

b. Utility Poles. To be classified as a utility pole, the pole may not have a street light on it or be installed by a network provider for the sole purpose of providing wireless facilities. A network provider may upgrade (or replace) an existing utility pole in the same location for height or foundation requirements to support their wireless facilities without being considered a network provider pole.

c. Network Provider Poles. These poles serve only the network provider and are installed solely for the purpose of housing wireless facilities; such poles are not necessary or desirable and shall not be installed in the right-of-way in the first instance; that is, the network provider shall first examine the feasibility of co-locating small wireless facilities on the numerous existing utility or light poles in the city (including upgrade and replacement options above) before siting a network provider pole in the right-of-way. When such placement is necessary for the proper operation and maintenance of the telecommunications network, such poles shall be designed to internally conceal and hold all wireless facilities equipment and shall be made to resemble standard light poles or standard utility poles, to the maximum extent feasible.

7. In locations where a new or replacement street light or utility pole is installed, the city requires the pole be designed to internally conceal and hold all wireless facilities equipment.

8. In instances where an existing pole is located in the desired location, and the existing pole is shown to be structurally sound to support the proposed network equipment and sealed by a licensed professional structural engineer in the state of Oregon, the wireless facilities may attach to the existing pole so long as every effort is made to conceal the equipment inside the pole. In the event the proposed equipment cannot reasonably fit within the existing pole itself, and with the approval of the city engineer, the wireless facilities shall be installed consistent with LCMC 12.26.050. A network provider will work with the city and private utility providers to replace existing utility or street light poles with a new utility or street light pole which conceal wireless facilities inside the pole.

9. Any newly installed street light and power poles shall be standard metal poles such as the standard Pacific Power pole and standard Pacific Power light pole, the specifications for which may be approved by resolution of the city council.

10. There shall be no surface mounted conduit or exposed wiring on any exterior surface of the supporting pole, except when wireless facilities are installed on a utility pole.

11. There shall be no more than one network provider on any one pole.

12. Wireless facilities installed on a street light pole must connect to a Pacific Power power source that is separate from the power supply to the street light pole.

13. Aerial cable spans or aerial span power connections are not permitted, except for on utility poles where the existing power supply is aerial.

14. Network provider installations are limited within the public ROW to installation (in order of priority) on:

a. Street light poles.

b. Utility poles.

c. Network provider poles which upgrade or replace utility poles or street light poles.

d. Network provider poles made to look like standard utility or street light poles.

15. Network providers are required to send the city of Lincoln City a geographical information system (GIS) file of all current installations within the city’s geographical boundary and ROW on an annual basis. Current installations are defined as those that are active/in use or contain installed equipment waiting to be activated. Data in the GIS file must include locational coordinates, facility type, support type, mounting height, installation date, Pacific Power pole ID (where applicable) and other data the city deems necessary for inventory management.

16. Complete construction plans for the proposed infrastructure must be submitted through a public works permit application and bundled into a single PDF file, formatted to 11-inch by 17-inch sheets, sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Oregon, and including:

a. Each pole represented by a set of plans within the overall file, designed so that if any single pole is removed from the application, the remaining plan set remains valid. Overall sheets including details and notes are encouraged.

b. Structural analysis for each identified pole sealed by a professional engineer in the state of Oregon indicating the pole and foundation can handle the proposed equipment load and, where an existing pole is utilized, any existing loading. Street light pole analysis must also be approved by Pacific Power. Utility pole analysis must also be approved by the utility pole owner.

c. Electrical load analysis showing that the existing transformer, circuit and any associated wiring can handle the additional demand from the proposed equipment, or any proposed upgrades as needed, and approval of the design by Pacific Power.

d. Each plan set shall include the following:

i. A cover sheet containing a scaled city map including all pole locations included in the subject application, a list of each pole location including GPS coordinate, Pacific Power pole ID (where applicable) or utility pole owner ID, and a legend of all sheets.

ii. A page for each specific pole location referenced with pole title, name, location information, Pacific Power pole ID (where applicable) or utility pole owner ID, and photograph of the proposed location of the pole.

iii. “Required Notes for Each Set of Pole Plans” only if unique to the location and as such cannot be part of overall sheet notes.

iv. Labeled and dimensioned site plan and elevation plan, including the following as applicable:

(A) Key symbols, ROW lines, property lines, etc.;

(B) Street information including names, curb-lines, sidewalk, street amenities, vegetation, existing and proposed utilities;

(C) Identification of immediately adjacent property uses and public easements;

(D) Structural plans for pole and associated foundations that reference structural calculations and include depth, diameter, grounding, reinforcing, and foundation information as necessary;

(E) Labeled construction materials, color, finish, etc.;

(F) Pole dimensions and total maximum height from adjacent grade;

(G) Size and dimension of any projection(s) from pole;

(H) Detail of proposed communication conduit and electrical connection location;

(I) Typical conduit/duct bank installation section detail;

(J) All existing utilities, including but not limited to:

(1) Storm and sanitary sewer pipes and appurtenances;

(2) Any utilities 24 inches and greater depicted as double lines;

(3) Gas line (indicate size, high pressure, services, etc.);

(4) Electric lines (indicate power pole number, anchor pole, overhead line, and duct bank in actual dimensions);

(5) Water infrastructure including valves, fire hydrants, etc.;

(6) Adjacent private service line locations where known;

(K) Certification for each proposed site showing the wireless telecommunication facility operates within radio frequency exposure guidelines as established by the FCC.

v. Once installation is complete, the applicant is required to provide the city with a complete set of as-built drawings meeting the same information and requirements as the application set outlined in this subsection (C)(16) but updated for any approved changes that occurred in the field. (Ord. 2019-28 § 1)


12.26.030 Location.

A. All wireless facilities shall be located to avoid any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicle traffic, or in any manner create safety hazards to pedestrians, bicyclists or motorists.

B. All wireless facilities shall be positioned to not encroach or effectively narrow the clear path of any pedestrian, bicycle, or roadway facility.

C. Where a new pole is installed, or an existing pole replaced, that is located where disruption may occur to an identified pedestrian travel way (i.e., sidewalk, ramp, etc.), the network provider is required to replace/upgrade any disturbed or impacted area to be compliant with the Americans with Disabilities Act and city of Lincoln City design and construction standards.

D. Wireless facilities proposed to be sited in the ROW shall be sited according to the following priorities, in descending order of preference. If the priority is not followed, the owner must provide evidence why a higher priority location is not practical for use. For purposes of this subsection, streets shall have the classification set forth in the Lincoln City transportation system plan.

1. First priority: principal arterials;

2. Second priority: arterials;

3. Third priority: collectors;

4. Fourth priority: neighborhood routes;

5. Fifth priority: local residential streets.

E. Wireless facilities shall not be sited in a manner which interferes with city right-of-way or utility improvements. Wireless facilities must be relocated at the network provider’s expense when expansion of street or city utility improvements requires the relocation of the supporting pole. (Ord. 2019-28 § 1)


12.26.040 Separation.

A. The separation between wireless facilities and city of Lincoln City technology shall be a minimum of 300 feet. The city engineer may provide an exception to this standard if the network provider is able to demonstrate that their wireless facilities do not create any disruption or degradation in the service of the city wireless technology. If disruption is identified at any future date, the city reserves the right to require the network provider to mitigate the issue and restore the city wireless technology back to full operational capacity.

B. In residential areas, the wireless facilities shall be located where the shared property line between two residential parcels intersects the public ROW, where technically feasible.

C. A wireless telecommunication facility shall not be located in front of a building entrance or exit. (Ord. 2019-28 § 1)


12.26.050 Wireless telecommunication facilities.

A. Cabinets and Equipment.

1. Where wireless facilities are installed in the location of an existing street light pole, and the additional structural load cannot be accommodated by the existing street light pole and foundation, a new street light pole and foundation shall be installed and all equipment shall be concealed and located inside the pole, except for the antenna.

2. Where wireless facilities are installed and the additional structural load can be accommodated by the existing street light pole and foundation, every effort must be made to conceal the equipment inside the pole. In instances where the proposed equipment cannot reasonably be accommodated within the existing pole, the wireless facilities shall be concealed or enclosed in an equipment box, cabinet or other unit that may include ventilation openings as follows:

a. The network provider shall not install ground mounted cabinets or other equipment;

b. The base of all cabinets and equipment attached to poles shall be installed at least eight feet above the ground, and if any wireless facilities are projecting toward the street or bicycle facilities, for the safety and protection of the public and vehicular traffic, the base of the attachment shall be installed no less than 17 feet above the bicycle facility or street;

c. No protrusion from the outer circumference of the pole shall be more than 18 inches;

d. The color of all cabinets and equipment shall match its location;

e. The total volume of all installed equipment external to the pole (including but not limited to cabinets, vaults, boxes, antennas) shall not exceed 28 cubic feet. This maximum applies to all equipment installed at the time of original application and includes any equipment to be installed at a future date. If a network provider wishes to install cabinets and equipment that exceed these limitations, the installation will be subject to the wireless communication facilities provisions of LCMC 17.52.270 and all the associated standards for such facilities will be applied;

f. Equipment shall be orientated away from nearby residential windows, doorways and entrances, to the extent practical;

g. Where permitted, equipment located on poles must be attached with stainless steel banding sized to support the required equipment load, unless the network provider provides documentation that the pole owner approves of an alternative means and the alternative means is shown structurally sound by the licensed professional engineer;

h. Equipment shall not be placed adjacent to the walkway in a manner that diminishes the usability of the pedestrian walkway.

3. Where wireless facilities are installed on a new network provider pole (including replacement utility or street light poles), the network provider pole and foundation shall be installed and all equipment shall be concealed and located inside the pole, except for the antenna.

4. Where wireless facilities are installed in the same location of an existing utility pole, and either the existing utility pole or a newly installed utility pole and foundation are used, the installation must also comply with the following criteria:

a. For new utility poles only, the new installation may be fabricated using the same material, or better, as the pole to be replaced (i.e., an existing wood pole may be replaced with a wood pole, or better pole);

b. In instances where a new pole is fabricated using the same material as the existing pole, and the existing pole is solid in nature, wiring may be externally mounted. If the pole is not solid in nature (i.e., is partially hollow) all wiring must be internally contained;

c. The network provider shall not install ground mounted cabinets or other equipment;

d. The base of all cabinets and equipment attached to poles shall be installed at least eight feet above the ground, and if any wireless facilities are projecting toward the street or bicycle facilities, for the safety and protection of the public and vehicular traffic, the base of the attachment shall be installed no less than 17 feet above the bicycle facility or street;

e. The color of all cabinets and equipment shall match its location;

f. The total volume of all installed equipment external to the pole (including but not limited to cabinets, vaults, boxes, antennas) shall not exceed 28 cubic feet. This maximum applies to all equipment installed at the time of original application and includes any equipment to be installed at a future date. If a network provider wishes to install equipment that exceeds this maximum, the installation will be subject to the wireless communication facilities provisions of LCMC 17.52.270 and all the associated standards for such facilities will be applied;

g. Equipment shall be orientated away from nearby residential windows, doorways and entrances, to the extent practical;

h. Where permitted, equipment located on poles must be attached with stainless steel banding sized to support the required equipment load, unless the network provider provides documentation that the pole owner approves of an alternative means and the alternative means is shown structurally sound by the licensed professional engineer;

i. Equipment shall not be placed adjacent to the walkway in a manner that diminishes the usability of the pedestrian walkway.

5. If a network provider wishes to install cabinets and equipment that exceed these limitations, the installation will not be permitted in public right-of-way and wireless communication facilities provisions of LCMC 17.52.270 and all the associated standards for such facilities will be applied.

B. Antennas.

1. Antennas shall be built into any newly installed poles.

2. Where the network provider has demonstrated an existing pole can be used, the antenna must be mounted to existing pole in a manner that preserves the structural integrity and aesthetics of the pole and painted to match the existing pole.

3. Antenna structure may not exceed:

a. Maximum 10 feet in height;

b. Maximum diameter/width of 12 inches; and

c. Maximum three cubic feet in volume.

d. If a network provider wishes to install antennas that exceed these limitations, the installation will be subject to the wireless communication facilities provisions of LCMC 17.52.270 and all the associated standards for such facilities will be applied.

4. For equipment that includes a GPS antenna, integrate the GPS antenna into the same cylindrical shape on top of the main antenna in order to form the appearance of a single unit.

5. Panel antennas are not permitted, unless the network provider provides evidence as to why a cylindrical antenna is not technically feasible.

6. Pole top antenna mounts should not appear offset from the pole.

7. If a network provider wishes to upgrade or replace their antenna at any point during their permitted use of the right-of-way, they must remove any existing antenna which is not in use. (Ord. 2019-28 § 1)


12.26.060 Poles.

A. Newly installed street light, utility poles, or network provider poles (including those replacing and upgrading street lights or utility poles) must be designed to be consistent in size, color, and character with the existing street lighting within the project area or block face. This includes tapering the poles so they have the appearance of street lighting.

B. Newly installed poles that include street lighting must be submitted with an accompanying photometric analysis that meets the Illuminating Engineering Society (IES) RP-08-14 for street lighting. The photometric analysis must be sealed by a professional engineer in the state of Oregon.

C. The maximum diameter of any network provider installed pole shall not exceed four and one-half feet.

D. Newly installed poles must be set back from curbs, offset from driveways and offset from street trees.

E. Newly installed poles, or poles that are replaced in any manner, and accessory equipment, cannot be located within 10 feet of any energized line. Installation will conform to OAR 437-002-0047 and 437-002-2316.

F. Caution shall be exercised during design and installation of newly installed poles so they do not interfere or conflict with existing building overhangs and awnings.

G. Newly installed or replaced utility, street light, or network provider poles must use breakaway technology. (Ord. 2019-28 § 1)


12.26.070 Electrical service.

A. The network provider shall be responsible for coordinating with Pacific Power for electrical service to the wireless telecommunication facility. The city shall not be liable to the network provider for any stoppages or shortages of electrical power furnished to the wireless facilities, including, without limitation, stoppages or shortages caused by any act, omission or requirement of a public utility serving the structure or the act or omission of any other tenant or network provider of the structure, or for any other cause beyond the control of the city.

B. The network provider shall not receive power via a service used to supply power to any street lights, traffic signals, or other city asset without accompanying documentation from Pacific Power that demonstrates to the city’s satisfaction that measures are in place to ensure the city and network provider usages are tracked separately for billing purposes.

C. Meter and other enclosures shall match the infrastructure that it is attached to and shall be maintained, including regular painting and use of a graffiti-resistant paint. For all work in the right-of-way, network provider must comply with Chapter 12.12 LCMC (Public Works Permit) and applicable codes adopted in Chapter 15.04 LCMC.

D. Disconnect switches must be present and accessible by city and local utility staff for each wireless telecommunication facility installation and shall be stacked above or below the meter, instead of attached to the side of the meter.

E. Electric meters and disconnect switches shall be located as required by the city and local utility company. Electric meters and disconnect switches shall not be located on the side of the pole that faces the sidewalk.

F. All electrical service conduit and wiring shall be located inside the pole.

G. A network provider shall not allow or install generators or backup generators in the public right-of-way. (Ord. 2019-28 § 1)


12.26.080 Logo, decals, flashing lights, and RF warning sticker.

A. The network provider shall post its name, identifying information, permit number and 24-hour emergency telephone number in an area of the wireless telecommunication facility that is visible to the public. Signage required under this section shall also comply with FCC requirements.

B. All equipment manufacturer decals shall be removed. Except as required by law or by the utility pole owner, network provider may not post any signage on the wireless facilities.

C. Equipment may not have static or flashing lights that are visible when the enclosures are closed.

D. Equipment related features (e.g., cooling system fans) shall not exceed 50 decibels during the day and 40 decibels at night. (Ord. 2019-28 § 1)


12.26.090 Conduit and cabling.

A. Electrical systems for wireless facilities located within street light poles shall be contained in a dedicated conduit labeled to identify its dedicated use for wireless facilities.

B. All conduit runs must be marked with an underground marking tape per Section 00960.42(e) of the Oregon Standard Specifications for Construction and contain locate wires.

C. All conduits shall be Schedule 40 PVC and all elbows shall be fiberglass.

D. Install bushings on all conduit ends and seal the ends with an approved conduit plug.

E. All in-ground conduit must be located in the public utility easement (PUE) where available.

F. Where the network provider plans to install fiber optic cable as part of their wireless facilities installation, the city may, at its discretion, request that the network provider install dedicated conduit, fiber, and associated equipment on behalf of the city for which the city will reimburse the network provider their documented costs. (Ord. 2019-28 § 1)


12.26.100 Equipment and structure finishes.

A. Pole colors shall match the existing street light pole color scheme.

B. The antennas, mounting brackets, PVC, steel risers, strap, or other materials used in installation must match the color of the infrastructure to which it is attached, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer.

C. Poles and associated wireless facilities equipment shall be prepared and powder coated consistent with Section 00593 of the 2018 ODOT Standard Specifications. (Ord. 2019-28 § 1)


12.26.110 Graffiti abatement.

As soon as practical, but not later than 10 calendar days from the date that the network provider receives notice thereof, network provider shall remove all graffiti on any of its wireless facilities and related equipment located in the right-of-way. The foregoing shall not relieve the network provider from complying with any city graffiti or visual blight ordinance or regulation. For all work in the right-of-way, network provider must comply with Chapter 12.12 LCMC and codes adopted under Chapter 15.04 LCMC. (Ord. 2019-28 § 1)


12.26.120 Trees and vegetation.

A. Except in cases where normal tree or vegetation trimming is necessary to ensure the safe operation of the communications service or to protect the network provider’s wireless facilities, the removal, cutting, marring, defacing or destruction of any trees or other vegetation (other than grass) by network providers within the right-of-way is prohibited.

B. All such normal tree or vegetation trimming by the network provider must be performed in accordance with the requirements of LCMC 17.52.220. (Ord. 2019-28 § 1)


12.26.130 Removal and disposal of obsolete equipment.

As soon as practical, but not later than 30 calendar days from the date that the network provider discontinues use of equipment due to obsolescence or for any other reason, said equipment shall be removed from the pole if such equipment is located on the exterior of the pole. Such equipment shall be properly disposed of and such disposal shall be documented. For all work in the right-of-way, network provider must comply with Chapter 12.12 LCMC and codes adopted under Chapter 15.04 LCMC. (Ord. 2019-28 § 1)


12.26.140 Severability – Savings.

If the standards of this chapter or LCMC 17.52.270 are found in some particular not to comply with state and/or federal laws or regulations, the standards shall be interpreted as to be fully applicable except for the conflicting provisions, which shall be applied to the maximum extent permitted under federal and state law. (Ord. 2019-28 § 1)


Chapter 12.28 VEHICULAR ACCESS AND CIRCULATION

Sections:

12.28.100    Purpose.

12.28.200    Vehicular access and circulation.


12.28.100 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that developments adjacent to Highway 101 provide safe and efficient access and circulation for pedestrians and vehicles. LCMC 12.28.200 provides standards for vehicular access and circulation. (Ord. 2016-21 § 4, 2017; Ord. 2008-20 § 2)


12.28.200 Vehicular access and circulation.

A. Intent and Purpose. The intent of this section is to manage access to land uses and on-site circulation, and to preserve the transportation system in terms of safety, capacity, and function while providing reasonable access for residents and businesses.

B. Applicability. The standards of this section apply to lots adjacent to Highway 101 created, consolidated, or modified through a land division, partition, lot line adjustment, lot consolidation, or street vacation, and to properties subject to land use approval or site plan review. The requirements in this chapter are in addition to requirements relating to properties abutting Highway 101 imposed by the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) through the provisions of Oregon Administrative Rule 734-051. Where ODOT requires more restrictive provisions than city requirements, ODOT standards shall prevail.

C. Access Permit Required. Access to Highway 101 (e.g., a new curb cut or driveway approach) requires an access permit from Lincoln City and a valid approach road permit from the Oregon Department of Transportation. Access to the intersecting streets from properties adjacent to the highway also requires an access permit from the city. An access permit may be in the form of a letter to the applicant, or it may be attached to a land use decision notice as a condition of approval.

D. Notice to ODOT. Written notice of the following actions shall be provided to ODOT by Lincoln City. Said notice shall be provided when Lincoln City provides notice to other public agencies and city departments. When notice to other public agencies and city departments is not provided, Lincoln City shall provide written notice to ODOT at the same time and manner as public notice is provided to the general public.

1. Land use applications that require public hearings;

2. Subdivision and partition applications;

3. Other applications that affect private access to Highway 101 or the intersecting streets identified in subsection (B) of this section.

E. Traffic Study Requirements. The city may require a traffic impact study prepared by a qualified professional. ODOT may require such a study for properties abutting Highway 101. The city and ODOT will use the traffic impact study to make decisions about access, circulation, and other transportation requirements. It is the intent of the city to coordinate its traffic impact study requirements with ODOT so that an applicant need complete only one such study to comply with the requirements of both agencies.

F. Conditions of Approval. The city may require the closing or consolidation of existing curb cuts or other vehicle access points, recording of reciprocal access easements (e.g., for shared driveways), turn restrictions, development of a frontage street, installation of traffic control devices, and/or other mitigation as a condition of granting an access permit, to ensure the safe and efficient operation of the street and highway system. Installation of traffic control devices on Highway 101 must be approved by ODOT.

G. Corner and Intersection Separation – Backing onto Public Streets. New and modified accesses shall conform to the following standards:

1. Property access to Highway 101 is under the concurrent jurisdiction of the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT). Access to streets intersecting with the highway shall not be permitted within 100 feet of the intersection unless no other reasonable access to the property is available. Where no other alternatives exist, the city may allow construction of an access connection at a point less than 100 feet from such an intersection, provided the access is as far away from the intersection as possible. In such cases, the city may impose turning restrictions (i.e., right in/out, right in only, or right out only). Access to properties with frontage on Highway 101 and other public roads shall be provided only from the roads other than the highway whenever reasonable access can be provided.

2. Access to and from off-street parking areas shall not permit backing onto a public street, except for single-family dwellings.

3. The city may reduce required separation distance of access points to city streets where they prove impractical due to lot dimensions, existing development, other physical features, or conflicting code requirements, provided all of the following requirements are met. Where the statewide highway access point spacing requirements in OAR 734-051 cannot be met, all the following requirements must be met before the city can complete the “Land Use Compatibility Statement for a State Highway Approach” required for a highway approach road application.

a. Joint-use driveways and cross-access easements are provided in accordance with subsection (I) of this section;

b. The site plan incorporates a unified access and circulation system in accordance with this section; and

c. The property owner(s) enter in a written agreement with the city, recorded with the deed, that pre-existing connections on the site will be closed and eliminated after construction of each side of the joint-use driveway.

H. Site Circulation. New developments shall be required to provide a circulation system that accommodates expected traffic on the site. Pedestrian connections on the site, including connections through large sites, and connections between sites (as applicable) and adjacent sidewalks, must be sufficient to safely accommodate expected pedestrian traffic to, from, within, and across the site.

I. Joint- and Cross-Access – Requirement. The number of driveway and private street intersections with public streets should be minimized by the use of shared driveways for adjoining lots where feasible. When necessary for traffic safety and access management purposes, or to access flag lots, the city and/or ODOT (for access to Highway 101) may require joint access and/or shared driveways in the following situations:

1. For shared parking areas;

2. For adjacent developments, where access onto an arterial or collector is proposed;

3. For multitenant developments, and developments on multiple lots or parcels. For such joint accesses and shared driveways the city may require the applicant to incorporate any of the following, among other requirements:

a. A continuous service drive or cross-access corridor that provides for driveway separation consistent with the applicable transportation authority’s access management classification system and standards;

b. A design speed of 10 miles per hour and a maximum width of 24 feet, in addition to any parking alongside the driveway; additional driveway width or fire lanes may be approved when necessary to accommodate specific types of service vehicles, loading vehicles, or emergency service provider vehicles;

c. Driveway stubs to property lines (for future extension) and other design features to make it easy to see that the abutting properties may be required with future development to connect to the cross-access driveway;

J. Joint- and Cross-Access – Reduction in Required Parking Allowed. When a shared driveway is provided or required as a condition of approval, the land uses adjacent to the shared driveway may have their minimum parking standards reduced in accordance with the shared parking provisions of LCMC 17.56.060.

K. Joint- and Cross-Access – Easement and Use and Maintenance Agreement. Pursuant to this section, property owners shall:

1. Record an easement with the deed allowing cross-access to and from other properties served by the joint-use driveways and cross-access or service drive;

2. Record an agreement with the deed that remaining access rights along the roadway for the subject property shall be dedicated to the city and pre-existing driveways will be closed and eliminated after construction of the joint-use driveway;

3. Record a joint maintenance agreement with the deed defining maintenance responsibilities of property owners.

L. Access Connections and Driveway Design. All driveway connections to a public right-of-way (access) and driveways shall conform to all of the following design standards:

1. Driveways to city streets shall meet the following standards:

a. One-way driveways (one-way in or out) shall have a minimum driveway width of 10 feet, and a maximum width of 12 feet, and shall have appropriate signage designating the driveway as a one-way connection.

b. For two-way access, each lane shall have a minimum width of 10 feet and a maximum width of 12 feet.

Driveways to Highway 101 shall meet ODOT requirements for design and construction.

2. Driveways shall be designed and located to provide exiting vehicles with an unobstructed view of other vehicles and pedestrians, and to prevent vehicles from backing into the flow of traffic on the public street or causing conflicts with on-site circulation. Construction of driveway accesses along acceleration or deceleration lanes or tapers should be avoided due to the potential for vehicular conflicts. Driveways should be located to allow for safe maneuvering in and around loading areas.

3. Driveway aprons (when required) shall be constructed of concrete and shall be installed between the street right-of-way and the private drive, as shown in Figure 12.28.200A. Driveway aprons shall conform to ADA requirements for sidewalks and walkways, which generally require a continuous unobstructed route of travel that is not less than three feet in width, with a cross slope not exceeding two percent, and providing for landing areas and ramps at intersections.

Figure 12.28.200A Examples of Acceptable Driveway Openings Next to Sidewalks/Walkways
[IMAGE]


M. Fire Access and Turnarounds. When required under the Uniform Fire Code, fire access lanes with turnarounds shall be provided. Except as waived in writing by the fire marshal, a fire equipment access drive shall be provided for any portion of an exterior wall of the first story of a building that is located more than 150 feet from an existing public street or approved fire equipment access drive. The drive shall contain unobstructed adequate aisle width (14 to 20 feet) and turn-around area for emergency vehicles. The fire marshal may require that fire lanes be marked as “No Stopping/No Parking.”

N. Vertical Clearances. Driveways, private streets, aisles, turn-around areas and ramps shall have a minimum vertical clearance of 13 feet and six inches for their entire length and width.

O. Clear Vision Areas. No visual obstruction (e.g., sign, structure, solid fence, or shrub vegetation) may be placed in a clear vision area except in accordance with LCMC 17.52.060. The minimum clear vision area may be modified by the city engineer with the concurrence of the planning director upon finding that more or less sight distance is required (i.e., due to traffic speeds, roadway alignment, etc.). ODOT shall establish clear vision requirements for Highway 101, but if the city’s clear vision requirements are more restrictive, the city’s requirements shall prevail.

P. Construction. The following development and maintenance standards shall apply to all driveways and private streets, except that the standards do not apply to driveways serving one single-family detached dwelling. For properties abutting Highway 101, development and maintenance requirements established as a part of an ODOT approach road permit also shall apply.

1. Surface Options. Driveways, parking areas, aisles, and turnarounds may be paved with asphalt, concrete, or comparable surfacing, or a durable nonpaving or porous paving material may be used to reduce surface water runoff and protect water quality. Driveway and street materials shall be subject to review and approval by the city engineer.

2. Surface Water Management. When nonporous paving is used, all driveways, parking areas, aisles, and turnarounds shall have on-site collection of surface waters to eliminate sheet flow of such waters onto public rights-of-way and abutting property. Surface water facilities shall be constructed in conformance with applicable engineering standards.

3. Driveway Aprons. When driveway approaches or “aprons” are required to connect driveways to the public right-of-way, they shall be paved with concrete surfacing and conform to the city’s engineering design criteria and standard specifications. (See general illustrations in Figure 12.28.200A.) (Ord. 2016-21 § 5; Ord. 2014-05 § 3; Ord. 2008-20 § 2)


Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES

Chapters:

13.04    Local Improvements

13.06    Reimbursement District for Advance Financing of Public Improvements

13.08    System Development Charges

13.12    Water and Sewer System Rates and Charges

13.16    Water System Use Regulations

13.18    Cross Connection Control

13.20    Sewer System Use Regulations

13.30    Septage Disposal


Chapter 13.04 LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS

Sections:

13.04.010    Applicability.

13.04.020    Definitions.

13.04.030    Initiation – Resolution of intention.

13.04.040    Hearing – Notice.

13.04.050    Hearing – Decision by council.

13.04.060    Initiation – Alternative procedure.

13.04.070    Creation of local improvement district.

13.04.080    Manner of doing work.

13.04.090    Construction and improvement – Bids.

13.04.095    Alternate local improvement street and stormwater standard.

13.04.100    Assessable costs and expenses.

13.04.110    Assessment method – Alternative financing.

13.04.120    Assessment ordinance.

13.04.130    Notice of assessment.

13.04.140    Lien records – Collection and foreclosure proceedings.

13.04.150    Errors in assessment calculations.

13.04.155    Deferral of potential unit assessment payments.

13.04.160    Installment payment of assessments.

13.04.170    Filing of resolutions and ordinances.

13.04.180    Deficit assessments.

13.04.190    Rebates and credits.

13.04.200    Abandonment of proceedings.

13.04.210    Curative provisions.

13.04.220    Reassessments.

13.04.230    Remedies.

13.04.240    Segregation of liens.


13.04.010 Applicability.

The provisions of this chapter apply to all future local improvement districts and, to the extent further actions or proceedings may require, to all existing districts as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 84-15 § 26)


13.04.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the terms “local improvement,” “owner” and “lot” have the meanings given those terms by ORS 223.387, as constituted on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; and the property which is to be assessed for the cost or part of the cost of a local improvement and the property on which the local improvement is located shall be known together as a “local improvement district.” (Ord. 84-15 § 1)


13.04.030 Initiation – Resolution of intention.

A. Whenever the city council in its discretion deems it necessary to consider a local improvement, upon its own motion, or upon the petition of the owners of one-half of the property to benefit specially from the improvement, where such improvement would be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment according to benefits, then the city council shall by motion direct an appropriate city employee or agent to make a survey and written report for such project and file the same with the director of planning for the city. Unless the council directs otherwise, such report shall at a minimum contain the following information:

1. A map or plat showing the general nature, location and extent of the proposed improvement and the land to be assessed for the payment of any part of the cost thereof.

2. Preliminary plans, specifications and estimates of the work to be done; provided, however, that where the proposed project is to be carried out in cooperation with any other governmental agency, the report may adopt the plans, specifications and estimates of such agency.

3. An estimate of the probable cost of the improvement, including any legal, administrative and engineering costs attributable thereto.

4. An estimate of the unit cost of the improvement to the specially benefitted properties.

5. A recommendation as to the method of assessment to be used to arrive at a fair apportionment of the whole or any portion of the cost of the improvement to the properties specially benefitted.

6. The description and assessed value of each lot, parcel of land, or portion thereof to be specially benefitted by the improvement, with the names of the record owners thereof and when readily available the names of the contract purchasers thereof.

7. A statement of outstanding assessments against property to be assessed.

B. Council’s Action on Report. After the report has been filed with the city director of planning, the council may thereafter by motion approve the report; modify the report and approve it as modified; require additional or different information for such improvement; or it may abandon the improvement. The council shall not consider any improvement for the formation of a local improvement district unless the total assessed valuation of the area in the district to be specially benefitted by the improvements is at least double the estimated cost of the improvement, including any legal, administrative, and engineering costs attributed thereto, unless council excepts said project from the requirements of this subsection based on findings that indicate the estimated amount of the improvement costs that will be assessed and paid in installments shall not exceed one-half the assessed valuation of the area specifically benefitted by the improvements.

C. Resolution. After the city council has approved the report as submitted or modified, the council shall by resolution declare its intention to make such improvement, and provide the method and manner of carrying out the improvement. The improvement resolution may include alternative proposals relating to a proposed local improvement; provided, however, that all of the information required for a particular local improvement shall be included for each alternative proposal. (Ord. 90-28 § 1; Ord. 84-15 § 2)


13.04.040 Hearing – Notice.

A. After adoption of the improvement resolution, the city recorder shall cause notice of the proposed improvement and of the public hearing to be given by one publication, not less than 10 days prior to the public hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, and by mailing copies of the notice to the owner(s) of the lot(s) affected by the proposed improvement.

B. The notice shall contain:

1. A general description of the proposed local improvement and the property to be specially benefitted thereby. The description of the property need not be by metes and bounds, but shall be such that an average person can determine from it the general location of the property;

2. An estimate of the total cost of the improvement and the portion anticipated to be paid for by the special assessments;

3. The date, time and place of the public hearing at which time and place the city council will hear testimony and consider objections and remonstrances to the proposed improvement by any party aggrieved thereby;

4. A statement of a place where preliminary project design and other additional information concerning the improvement is available to the public; and

5. Any other information the council may direct to be included.

C. Any mistake, error, omission or failure with respect to the mailing of notice shall not be jurisdictional or invalidate the local improvement proceedings. (Ord. 90-28 § 2; Ord. 84-15 § 3)


13.04.050 Hearing – Decision by council.

A. At the time of the public hearing, the council shall hear and consider testimony, both oral and written, on the proposed local improvement; and may continue the hearing as it deems necessary. After such hearing the council may, in its discretion, order the improvement to be made. If the council elects to order such improvement, it shall, within 90 days after the date of the hearing, provide by resolution for the establishment of the local improvement district and the construction of the improvement.

B. Notwithstanding the fact that the proposed improvement was petitioned for by the owners of 50 percent of the property to benefit, the council may refuse to proceed with the improvement if it finds the proposed improvement to be untimely or not in the best interests of the city.

C. At the public hearing, the council may direct a modification of the proposed local improvement by revising the scope of the improvement, by reducing or enlarging the local improvement district which it deems will be benefitted by the improvement, or may make such other modifications in the proceedings as it finds reasonable. If the council modifies the scope of the improvement so that assessment is likely to be substantially increased upon one or more lots, or if the council enlarges the local improvement district, or if the council causes a substantial change in any of the particulars contained in the improvement resolution, a new improvement resolution shall be adopted, new estimates made and new notices mailed to the owners within the proposed local improvement district. However, no new publication shall be required. (Ord. 84-15 § 4)


13.04.060 Initiation – Alternative procedure.

Whenever all of the owners of any property to be benefitted and assessed for any local improvement have signed a petition, directed and presented to the council, requesting such local improvement, the council may initiate and construct such local improvement without mailing notice to the owners of the affected property if notice is published and a public hearing is held. (Ord. 90-28 § 3; Ord. 84-15 § 5)


13.04.070 Creation of local improvement district.

The council, by resolution, shall provide for the establishment of the local improvement district and the making of the local improvement in substantial conformity with the proposal set forth in the initiating resolution. (Ord. 84-15 § 6)


13.04.080 Manner of doing work.

Local improvements may be made in whole or in part by the city, by another governmental agency, by contract, or by any combination thereof. The city manager, on behalf of the city, shall determine the engineer for all work to be accepted by the city for public maintenance. (Ord. 84-15 § 7)


13.04.090 Construction and improvement – Bids.

A. Immediately after the date the resolution establishing the local improvement district is adopted, the engineer for the city shall cause necessary right-of-way and easements to be acquired and the improvements to be made in accordance with the terms of said resolution if the work is to be performed by the city or another governmental agency. If any part of the work of the improvement is to be done under contract bids, the engineer for the city shall cause detailed plans and specifications to be prepared and filed, and notice for bids to be published in accordance with requirements of public contracting laws as specified in the Oregon Revised Statutes and city ordinances and resolutions.

B. Contracts for all or part of the work of the local improvement may be let by the council to the lowest responsible bidder whose bid is in the best interest of the city as determined in the sole discretion of the council. The council shall have the right to reject any or all bids when they are deemed unreasonable or unsatisfactory in the council’s discretion. If the council rejects all bids, it may direct the engineer for the city to readvertise for bids or direct the work to be performed by city forces. The city shall provide for the bonding of all contracts for the faithful performance of any contract let under its authority, and the provisions thereof in case of default shall be enforced by action in the name of the city.

C. If the council finds, upon opening bids for the work of such improvement, that the bid in the best interest of the city is substantially in excess of the engineer’s estimate, it may, in its discretion, provide for holding a special hearing to consider objections to proceeding with the improvement on the basis of such bid. (Ord. 90-28 § 4; Ord. 84-15 § 8)


13.04.095 Alternate local improvement street and stormwater standard.

When authorized in the local improvement district formation resolution, an alternate local improvement street and stormwater standard is permitted. The resolution shall include an engineering report and the report shall review and approve use of an alternate local improvement street and stormwater standard as described herein for construction of the local improvement by the city. The subject local improvement must serve developed or partially developed residential areas in which right-of-way is constrained by natural features, topography or existing buildings. The constraint must be such that typical bicycle and pedestrian facilities and typical travel lane widths are not feasible. The minimum standard which may be authorized by the city engineer for the LID improvement shall be a minimum of 16 feet paved roadway with two-foot-wide compacted shoulders on both sides of the roadway. Design shall include stormwater management but instead of collecting stormwater and conveying runoff through inlets, curbs, gutters and pipes as typical, the alternate standard may include swales, ditches and overland flow to convey stormwater safely without causing erosion. The city engineer shall not authorize the alternate standard unless the following additional criteria are met:

A. Average daily traffic shall be 1,500 or less vehicle trips per day.

B. Minimum emergency response access shall be met.

C. Traffic calming elements shall be required. (Ord. 2016-02 § 1)


13.04.100 Assessable costs and expenses.

The costs and expenses of local improvements which may be assessed against the property specially benefitted by the improvement shall include the costs of construction and installation of the improvement; advertising, legal, administrative, engineering and assessment costs; financing costs, including interest charges; the costs of any necessary property, right-of-way or easement acquisition and condemnation proceedings; and any other necessary expenses. (Ord. 84-15 § 9)


13.04.110 Assessment method – Alternative financing.

A. The council, in adopting a method of assessment of the costs of any local improvements, may:

1. Use any just and reasonable method of determining the extent of the local improvement district consistent with the benefits derived;

2. Use any method of apportioning the sum to be assessed as is just and reasonable between the properties determined to be specially benefitted;

3. Authorize payment by the city of all or any part of the costs of a local improvement when, in the opinion of the council, the topographical or physical conditions, or unusual or excess public travel or use, or other character of the work involved warrants only a partial payment or no payment by the benefitted property of the costs of the local improvement.

B. Nothing contained in this chapter shall preclude the council from using any other available means of financing local improvements, including federal or state grants-in-aid, water or sewer fees or charges, revenue or general obligation bonds, or any other legal means of financing. If such other means of financing local improvements are used, the council may, in its discretion, levy special assessments according to the benefits derived to cover any remaining part of the costs of the local improvement. (Ord. 84-15 § 10)


13.04.120 Assessment ordinance.

When the estimated cost of an authorized local improvement has been ascertained on the basis of the contract award or estimate of costs of the engineer for the city, or after the work is done and the cost thereof has been actually determined, the council shall determine whether the property benefitted shall bear all or a portion of the cost. The city recorder, or such other person as the council may direct, shall prepare the assessment to the respective lots within the assessment district and file it in the appropriate city office. Notice of such assessment shall be mailed or personally delivered to the owner, or reputed owner, of each lot to be assessed. Such notice shall state the name of the owner or reputed owner, the description of the property proposed to be assessed, the amounts of assessment proposed on that property, and shall fix a date by which time objections shall be filed with the recorder, or other person designated by the council. Any such objection shall state the grounds for the objection. The city council shall consider such objections at a public meeting and may adopt, correct, modify or revise the proposed assessments and shall determine the amount of assessments to be charged against each lot within the district, according to the special and peculiar benefits accruing thereto from the improvement, and shall by ordinance spread the assessments. (Ord. 90-28 § 5; Ord. 84-15 § 11)


13.04.130 Notice of assessment.

Within 10 days after the ordinance levying assessments has been passed, the city recorder shall send by registered or certified mail a notice of assessment to the owner of the assessed property and shall publish notice of such assessment once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, which shall be made not later than 10 days after the date of the assessment ordinance. The notice of assessment shall include the name of the property owner, a description of the assessed property, the amount of the assessment, and the date of the assessment ordinance, and shall state that interest will begin to run on the assessment and the property will be subject to foreclosure unless the owner either makes application to pay the assessment in installments within 20 days after the date of the publication of notice or pays the assessment in full within 30 days after the date of the assessment ordinance. No application for installment payments shall be approved or filed by the city if the amount remaining unpaid upon such assessment together with the unpaid balance of any previous assessments for improvements against the same property exceeds the assessed valuation of the property, as shown by the last county tax roll. (Ord. 90-28 § 6; Ord. 84-15 § 12)


13.04.140 Lien records – Collection and foreclosure proceedings.

A. After passage of the assessment ordinance by the council, the city recorder shall enter in the city lien docket a statement of the amounts assessed upon each particular lot, parcel of land or portion thereof, together with a description of the improvement, the name of the owners and the date of the assessment ordinance. Upon such entry in the lien docket, the amount so entered shall become a lien and charge upon the respective lots, parcels of land or portions thereof which have been assessed for such improvement. All assessment liens of the city shall be superior and prior to all other liens or encumbrances on property insofar as the laws of the state permit. Interest shall be charged at a rate that shall be variable, depending on (1) the rate the city would earn in the local government investment pool on the date of final assessment, plus two percent, during any period during which the improvement is financed out of the city’s unbonded assessment fund; and thereafter (2) the average interest rate the city must pay the purchasers of Bancroft bonds, issued under the Bancroft Bonding Act procedures of state law, plus two percent to cover the city’s costs of financing, such as but not limited to bond risk, during any subsequent period during which the improvement is financed out of revenues from the sale of Bancroft bonds. If the owners of real property have signed applications to pay in installments, the owners shall pay at the time of submission of the application a processing fee in the amount of one-half percent of the final assessment to cover the costs of processing the application, and also shall pay the amount of the county recording fee for the assessment lien.

B. Any assessments for which the owners of real property have signed applications to pay in installments, which are more than 30 days delinquent, may be charged a late payment charge, equal to one and one-half percent interest per month or part thereof, provided the owners have been notified in writing in advance by the city.

C. After 60 days from the date the assessments are due and payable, the city may proceed to foreclose the liens or enforce collection of the assessments in the manner provided by the general law of the state.

D. The city may charge all assessment accounts which are delinquent and subject to collection the city’s reasonable attorney fees attributable to the collection process or foreclosure of the city’s lien.

E. If the owners of real property have signed applications to pay in installments, the owners at any time may pay to the city the unpaid balance of the amount of the assessment, together with the full amount of interest to the next installment date, charges, and late payment penalties and charges accrued thereon to the date of payment, in full payment thereof. (Ord. 2016-02 § 2; Ord. 96-2 § 1; Ord. 90-28 §§ 7, 8; Ord. 84-15 § 13)


13.04.150 Errors in assessment calculations.

Claimed errors in the calculation of assessments shall be brought to the attention of the city recorder, who shall determine whether there has been an error in fact. If the city recorder finds that there has been an error in fact, he shall recommend to the council an amendment to the assessment ordinance to correct such error. Upon enactment of any such amendment, the city recorder shall cause the necessary correction to be made in the city lien docket and shall cause a correlated notice of assessment to be sent by mail. (Ord. 84-15 § 14)


13.04.155 Deferral of potential unit assessment payments.

An owner may elect to defer payment of the amount of special assessment for a local improvement assessed on potential units pursuant to this chapter. The election shall be made by filing a claim for deferral with the city recorder after final assessment. The effect of filing the claim shall be to defer payment of the amount of special assessment for local improvement on potential units. Potential units are those lots identified as such in the resolution fixing the estimated and final assessments for a local improvement district. Potential units are determined by using the potential unit method which establishes the maximum number of potential units on properties within a proposed local improvement district by taking into consideration the zoning, densities, topography, transportation, utilities and such other factors as necessary to evaluate the development potential of the properties. The claim for deferral shall be effective for the calendar year for which it is filed and for each subsequent year until the occurrence of one or more of the events described in this section.

A. In order to qualify for deferral of payment of special assessment for local improvement amounts under this section, the owner must meet the following requirements at the time the claim for deferral is filed and thereafter so long as payment of the amount of special assessment for local improvement is deferred:

1. The owner filing the claim must own the fee simple estate or be purchasing the fee simple estate under a recorded instrument of sale.

2. The property with respect to which the claim is filed must have an assessment levied upon it for potential units. The deferment will only apply to the potential units, not lots or parcels which exist as of the date final assessments are imposed.

B. A claim for deferral under this section shall be in writing on a form prescribed by the city recorder and shall:

1. Describe the lot or parcel upon which the potential units exist.

2. Recite facts establishing the eligibility for the deferral under the provisions of this section.

3. Be verified by a written declaration of the applicant making the claim to the effect that the statements contained in the claim are true and correct under penalty of perjury and false swearing.

4. Be filed within 30 days after final notice of the assessment is received.

C. The city recorder shall show by an entry in the assessment lien record which property specially assessed is accorded deferral under this section.

D. Interest shall accrue on the amount of the deferred special assessment for local improvement at the rate established in the resolution imposing final assessments.

E. The liens for deferred special assessment for local improvement shall have the same priority as special assessment liens against real property.

F. All deferred special assessments for local improvement, including accrued interest, become payable when:

1. The property with respect to which deferral of collection of special assessment for local improvement is claimed is sold, or a contract to sell is entered into, or some person, other than the owner who claimed the deferral or other than a surviving spouse of such owner who elects to continue the deferral, becomes the owner of the property. The surviving spouse may elect to continue the property in its deferred status if the election is filed in the same manner as a claim for deferral is filed under subsection B of this section within six months of the death of the spouse who claimed the deferral. Thereupon, the property with respect to which the deferral is claimed shall continue to be subject to special assessment deferral.

2. When any sale, contract to sell or any other transfer occurs and a surviving spouse does not elect to continue the deferral, the amounts of deferred special assessment for local improvement, including accrued interest, shall be due and payable on the sale or transfer of the property.

3. When subsequent approval of a development order occurs (as in the case of a site plan for multifamily development) or approval of a subdivision; provided, that in the case of a subdivision the owner may elect to continue deferral until sale of the individual lots.

4. If the amounts falling due as provided in this section are not paid on the indicated due date, the amounts shall be deemed delinquent as of that date and the property shall become subject to foreclosure.

G. Potential unit/lot deferral is not available by right; any authorized potential unit/lot deferral (or partial deferral) must be specifically authorized in the formation resolution or subsequent assessment ordinance for the LID. Notwithstanding the above, a negotiated development agreement (ORS Chapter 94) may be used to bind a property owner to a specific unit/lot number and payment arrangement for purposes of the LID assessment. (Ord. 2013-17 § 1)


13.04.160 Installment payment of assessments.

The Bancroft Bonding Act (ORS 223.205, 223.210 through 223.295) shall apply to assessments levied in accordance with this chapter. If any of the provisions of this chapter differ from the statutory provisions of the Bancroft Bonding Act, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. The owner of any property assessed for a local improvement in accordance with this chapter, in the sum of $500.00 or more, at any time within 20 days after notice of the assessment is mailed, pursuant to LCMC 13.04.130, may file with the city recorder a written application to pay the whole of the assessment in equal semiannual installments over a period not to exceed 20 years, as the city council may provide by resolution, together with interest and charges as provided in LCMC 13.04.140. Until the city council by resolution shall adopt a different period, the period over which installments shall be paid shall be 10 years. If any part of the assessment has been paid, the unpaid balance of the assessment, in such installments, shall be charged with any such interest and charges. (Ord. 96-2 § 2; Ord. 90-28 § 9; Ord. 84-15 § 15)


13.04.170 Filing of resolutions and ordinances.

The city recorder shall file copies of the resolution establishing a local improvement district and the assessment ordinance with the county recorder; provided, however, that failure to file such resolutions and ordinances shall not invalidate or affect any proceedings in connection with the local improvement district and shall not impose any liability on the city, the city recorder or any official, officer or employee of the city. (Ord. 84-15 § 16)


13.04.180 Deficit assessments.

If the initial assessment has been made on the basis of estimated cost, and upon the completion of the improvement the actual cost is found to be greater than the estimated cost, the council may make a deficit or supplemental assessment for the additional cost. Proposed assessments upon the respective lots within the local improvement district for the proportionate share of the deficit shall be made, notices sent, a public hearing held and opportunity for objections considered, and determination of the assessment against each particular lot, block or parcel of land shall be made as in the case of the initial assessment, and the deficit or supplemental assessment spread by ordinance. The deficit assessments shall be entered in the city lien docket, notices published and mailed, and the collection of the assessment made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter relating to the original assessment. (Ord. 84-15 § 17)


13.04.190 Rebates and credits.

If assessments have been made on the basis of estimated cost, and upon completion of the improvement project the cost is found to be less than the estimated cost, the council shall ascertain and declare the same by ordinance; and when so declared, the excess amounts shall be entered on the city lien docket as a credit upon the appropriate assessment. In the event any assessment has been paid in full, the person who paid the assessment or his legal representative shall be entitled to repayment of the excess amount. (Ord. 90-28 § 10; Ord. 84-15 § 18)


13.04.200 Abandonment of proceedings.

The council shall have full power and authority to abandon and rescind proceedings for local improvements made under this chapter at any time prior to the final completion of such improvements. If liens have been assessed upon any property under such procedure, they shall be canceled, and any payments made on such assessments shall be refunded to the person paying the same, his assigns or successors. (Ord. 84-15 § 19)


13.04.210 Curative provisions.

No improvement assessment shall be rendered invalid by reason of failure to have all of the information required to be in any engineer’s or city recorder’s report, the improvement resolutions or the assessment ordinance, the lien docket or notices required to be published, mailed or posted; nor by the failure to list the name of, or mail notice to the owner of any property as required by this chapter; nor by reason of any other error, mistake, delay, omission, irregularity or other act, jurisdictional or otherwise, in any of the proceedings or steps herein specified, unless it appears that the assessment is unfair or unjust in its effect upon the person complaining. The council shall have the power and authority to remedy and correct all such matters by suitable action and proceedings. (Ord. 84-15 § 20)


13.04.220 Reassessments.

A. Whenever all or part of any assessment for any local improvement has been or shall be declared void or set aside for any reason or its enforcement refused by any court having jurisdiction thereof, or whenever the council is in doubt as to the validity of all or any part of such assessment, the council may make a new assessment or reassessment in the manner provided by the laws of the state.

B. For purposes of this section, the term “assessment” includes deficit and supplemental assessments or reassessments. (Ord. 84-15 § 21)


13.04.230 Remedies.

Subject to the curative provisions of LCMC 13.04.210 and the rights of the city to reassess pursuant to LCMC 13.04.220, all actions of the council taken pursuant to this chapter are reviewable solely and exclusively by writ of review in accordance with the procedures in ORS 34.010 through 34.100. Review of an ordinance levying any assessment may be commenced only by a property owner who has filed a written objection to the proposed assessment in accordance with LCMC 13.04.120. (Ord. 84-15 § 22)


13.04.240 Segregation of liens.

A. Whenever the ownership of any portion of a tract of real property, less than the entire tract, is transferred, any lien against such real property in favor of the city shall, upon request of the owners of any portion of the tract, be segregated as provided in this section and not otherwise.

B. Applications for the segregation of liens shall be made to the city recorder, describing the tract to be segregated and the names of the owners of the respective tracts. A certificate of the county assessor shall be furnished showing the assessed valuation of the various tracts of land concerned as of July 1st of the calendar year in which the segregation is requested or, if not available, as of July 1st of the preceding year.

C. The city recorder shall thereupon compute a segregation of the lien against the real property, upon the same basis as the lien was originally computed and apportioned, and reflect this segregation in the city lien docket; provided, however, that no segregation shall be made unless all parts of the original tract of land after the segregation have a true cash value, as determined from the certificate of the assessor, of 120 percent or more of the amount of the lien as to each of the various tracts concerned.

D. An application for segregation shall not be processed until the applicant pays a fee to defray the costs of evaluating the application. Such fee shall be calculated by the finance department and be based on the administrative and other costs incurred in processing the segregation. Apportionment of a special assessment under this section shall be done in accordance with a resolution of the council. The resolution shall describe each parcel of real property affected by the apportionment, the amount of the assessment levied against each parcel, the owner of each parcel and such additional information as is required to keep a permanent and complete record of the assessments and payments. (Ord. 96-2 § 3; Ord. 90-28 §§ 11, 12; Ord. 84-15 § 23)


Chapter 13.06 REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICT FOR ADVANCE FINANCING OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

Sections:

13.06.010    Definitions.

13.06.015    Application for a reimbursement district.

13.06.020    City engineer’s report.

13.06.025    Amount to be reimbursed.

13.06.030    Public hearing.

13.06.035    City council action.

13.06.040    Reimbursement agreement.

13.06.045    Annual fee adjustment.

13.06.050    Notice of adoption of resolution.

13.06.055    Recording the resolution.

13.06.060    Contesting the reimbursement district.

13.06.065    Obligation to pay reimbursement fee.

13.06.070    Public improvements become property of the city.

13.06.075    Collection and payment – Other fees and charges.


13.06.010 Definitions.

The following terms are definitions for the purposes of this chapter:

A. “City engineer” or “engineer” means the person holding the position of city engineer or such other officer, employee or agent designated by the council or city manager to perform the duties set out for the city engineer in this chapter.

B. “City” means the city of Lincoln City.

C. “Person” means a natural person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or any other legal entity, be it public or private and/or any agent, employee or representative thereof.

D. “Applicant” means a person who is required or chooses to finance some or all of the cost of a street, water or sanitary sewer or storm water improvement, which improvement is also available to serve or benefit property other than that of the applicant, and who in turn applies to the city for reimbursement of the expense of the improvement.

E. “Street improvement,” “water improvement,” “sewer improvement” and “storm water improvement” mean respectively:

1. A street or street improvement, including but not limited to streets, storm drains, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, bike paths, traffic control devices, street trees, lights and signs and public rights-of-way;

2. A water facility or water line improvement, including but not limited to extending a water line so that water service can be provided for the property and other benefitted property without further extension of the line;

3. A sanitary sewer, sewer line, or other facility improvement, including but not limited to extending a sewer line so that sewer service can be provided for the property and other benefitted property without further extension of the line; and

4. A storm water improvement, including but not limited to extending a storm water line so that storm water disposal can be provided for the property and other benefitted property without further extension of the line; conforming with standards and specifications set by the city. 

F. “Public improvement” means (as appropriate) all capital facilities (including plant facilities) associated with water, sanitary sewer, storm water, street (including bicycle lanes), and/or sidewalk facilities or the undergrounding of public utilities.

G. “Reimbursement agreement” means the agreement between an applicant and the city (as authorized by the city council and executed by the city manager) providing for the installation of and payment for public improvements within a reimbursement district.

H. “Reimbursement district” means the area determined by the city council to derive a benefit from the construction of public improvements financed in whole or in part by an applicant.

I. “Reimbursement fee” means the fee established by resolution of the city council and required to be paid by persons within a reimbursement district once they utilize the public improvement.

J. “Utilize” means to use or benefit from a public improvement, to apply for a building or other permit which will allow for the use or increase in the use of a public improvement or to connect to a public improvement. (Ord. 2013-10 § 1)


13.06.015 Application for a reimbursement district.

A. Any applicant who finances some or all of the cost of a public improvement available to provide service or benefit to property other than property owned by that person may, by written application filed with the city engineer, request the city establish a reimbursement district. The improvement(s) must be adequately sized to service intervening properties (generally a size greater than that which would otherwise ordinarily be required) and must be available to provide service to property other than that owned by the applicant. Examples include (but are not limited to):

1. Full street improvements instead of half street improvements;

2. Off-site sidewalks;

3. Connection of street sections for continuity;

4. Extension of water lines;

5. Extension of sewer lines; and

6. Extension of storm water lines.

B. All applications shall include the following:

1. A description of the location, type, size and cost of the public improvement eligible for reimbursement;

2. A map showing the properties to be included in a proposed reimbursement district;

3. The zoning for the properties;

4. The front or square footage of said properties (or similar data appropriate for calculating the apportionment of the cost of the improvement among the properties); and

5. A listing of the property(ies) owned by applicant.

6. All applications shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of administrative review and notice required by this chapter as established by city council resolution.

C. In the event an application is submitted after the construction of the public improvement, the application shall also include information as to when the city accepted the public improvement as well as the actual cost of the improvements, evidenced by receipts, invoices or other similar documents. Until receipt of said information, the affected application will be deemed incomplete.

D. In the event an application is submitted prior to the construction of the improvements, the application shall be accompanied by an estimate of the cost of the improvements as evidenced by bids, projections, or similar data. The application shall also include the estimated date of completion of the public improvement(s). Until the receipt of said information, the affected application will be deemed incomplete.

E. An application may be submitted at any time prior to the installation of the public improvement but in no event later than 180 days after acceptance of the improvement for which reimbursement is sought, unless the city engineer, in his/her sole discretion, waives this requirement. (Ord. 2013-10 § 1)


13.06.020 City engineer’s report.

The city engineer shall review the application and other supporting materials submitted therewith and prepare a written report for the council which will address (to the extent relevant) the following factors:

A. Whether the public improvement for which reimbursement is sought has capacity sufficient to allow use thereof by property other than property owned by the applicant;

B. The area proposed to be included in the reimbursement district;

C. The actual or estimated cost of the improvements within the area of the proposed reimbursement district and the portion thereof for which the applicant should be reimbursed;

D. A methodology for allocating the cost among the parcels within the proposed district and, where appropriate, defining a “unit” for applying the reimbursement fee to property which may be partitioned, subdivided or otherwise modified at some future date. The methodology should include consideration of the cost of the improvement(s), prior contributions by property owners, the value of the unused capacity, rate-making principles associated with the financing of public improvements, and such other factors as deemed relevant by the city engineer; 

E. The amount to be charged by the city for administering the agreement, to be fixed by city council and included in the resolution approving and forming the reimbursement district. The fee is due and payable to the city at the time the reimbursement agreement is signed;

F. The period of time that the right to reimbursement exists if that period is less than 10 years; and

G. Whether the street, storm water, water and sewer improvements will meet or have met city standards, including whether a variance to such standards is necessary or was approved. (Ord. 2013-10 § 1)


13.06.025 Amount to be reimbursed.

A. The potential amount of the reimbursement is limited to the following:

1. The costs of construction;

2. Engineering (including surveying and inspection) costs in an amount not to exceed 15 percent of the construction costs;

3. Off-site right-of-way purchase costs, limited to the reasonable market value of land or easements purchased by the applicant from third parties to complete off-site improvements;

4. Financing costs associated with the improvement to the extent the financing costs are not attributable to the applicant’s property or project; and 

5. Legal and other expenses incurred by the applicant to the extent said expenses relate to the preparation and filing of the application, the preparation of the report required by LCMC 13.06.020 and the hearing process set out in LCMC 13.06.030 and 13.06.035.

B. Regardless of amount or category, costs reimbursable or eligible for traffic impact fee credits or systems development charge credits which cannot be clearly documented or which are attributable to the applicant’s property or project are not reimbursable.

C. By submitting an application that seeks reimbursement of legal expenses, the applicant thereby waives any attorney/client or attorney work product privilege that may exist in attorney billing statements or records in support thereof.

D. A reimbursement fee shall be determined for all properties which fall within the proposed reimbursement district, including applicant’s property; however, the applicant shall not be reimbursed for that portion of the fee representing the benefit to the applicant’s property. 

E. The applicant shall not be reimbursed for the portion of the reimbursement fee computed for property owned by the city or other governmental body. (Ord. 2013-10 § 1)


13.06.030 Public hearing.

A. Within a reasonable time after the city engineer has completed the report required in LCMC 13.06.020, the city council shall hold an informational public hearing in which persons impacted by the creation of the reimbursement district shall be given the opportunity to comment thereon.

B. Notice of the hearing shall be given not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days prior to the public hearing date. Notice shall be given to the applicant and all owners of property within the proposed district, with notification by certified mail, return receipt requested or by personal service. Notice shall be deemed complete as of the date notice is mailed or served; failure to receive actual notice of the hearing shall not invalidate or otherwise affect any action of the city relative to the creation of the reimbursement district and/or the costs associated therewith.

C. Formation of a district does not result in an assessment or lien against property; as a result, the hearing is informational only and the district is not subject to termination as a result of remonstrances to the formation thereof. The city council has the sole discretion, after the public hearing, to decide whether the district is to be formed or not. If a district is to be formed, a resolution approving and forming the reimbursement district shall be adopted.

D. If a reimbursement district is formed prior to construction of the improvement(s), a second public hearing shall be held after the improvement has been accepted by the city when the council may modify the resolution to reflect the cost of the improvement(s). (Ord. 2013-10 § 1)


13.06.035 City council action.

At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall approve, reject or modify the recommendations contained in the city engineer’s report and manifest its action in a resolution. If a reimbursement district is established, the resolution shall include a copy of the city engineer’s report as approved or modified and specify that payment of the appropriate fee as determined by the council for each parcel is a precondition to receipt of any city permit necessary for development of that parcel. If a reimbursement district is established it shall be deemed formed as of the date the council adopts the resolution referred to in LCMC 13.06.030. (Ord. 2013-10 § 1)


13.06.040 Reimbursement agreement.

If the council approves the city engineer’s report and thereafter creates a district, the city manager shall cause the creation of an agreement between the applicant and city containing (at a minimum) provisions relating to the following:

A. That the public improvement(s) will or do meet all applicable city standards;

B. The amount of the potential reimbursement the applicant can expect along with a caveat that the total amount of any reimbursement will not exceed the actual cost of the public improvement(s);

C. The annual fee adjustment, if any; 

D. That the applicant will guarantee the quality of the public improvement(s) for a period of not less than 12 months after the date of their installation; 

E. That the applicant will defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all losses, claims, damage, judgments or other costs or expense arising as a result of or related to the city’s establishment of the district; and

F. That the applicant acknowledges that except as provided in LCMC 13.06.065, the city is not obligated to collect the reimbursement fee from affected property owners.

G. The city may include other provisions as the city council determines necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 2013-10 § 1)


13.06.045 Annual fee adjustment.

The city council may, in its discretion, grant an annual adjustment to the amounts established as the reimbursement fee at the time of the hearing on the engineer’s report. In the event such an adjustment is deemed appropriate, it shall be applicable to the fee beginning on the first anniversary of the date of the council’s approval of the application, be fixed and computed against the reimbursement fee as simple interest, and remain the same for each year the district exists. (Ord. 2013-10 § 1)


13.06.050 Notice of adoption of resolution.

The city shall notify all property owners within the district (as well as the applicant) of the adoption of the resolution manifesting creation of the district. The notice shall include a copy of the resolution, the date of its adoption and a short explanation of when the property owner would be obligated to pay the reimbursement fee, the amount thereof, as well as if there will be any adjustments thereto. (Ord. 2013-10 § 1)


13.06.055 Recording the resolution.

The city recorder shall cause notice of the formation and nature of the reimbursement district to be filed either in Lincoln County official records or in the city of Lincoln City electronic lien record in order to provide notice to potential purchasers of property within the district of its existence. Failure to make such recording shall affect neither the legality of the resolution nor the obligation to pay any fee. (Ord. 2016-04 § 1; Ord. 2013-10 § 1)


13.06.060 Contesting the reimbursement district.

Any legal action intended to contest the formation of the reimbursement district or fee must be filed within 60 days of the council’s hearing on the application consistent with the terms of ORS 34.010 to 34.100 (Writ of Review). (Ord. 2013-10 § 1)


13.06.065 Obligation to pay reimbursement fee.

A. A person applying for a permit related to property within a reimbursement district shall pay to the city, in addition to all other applicable fees and charges, the reimbursement fee established by the city council under the terms of this chapter if, within the time specified in the resolution establishing the district, the person applies for and receives approval from the city for any of the following activities:

1. A building permit for a new building or a permit for an addition, modification, repair or alteration to an existing building exceeding 25 percent of the value thereof within any 12-month period (not due to damage or destruction of the building by fire or natural disaster). “Value” as used above means the amount shown on the county’s department of assessment and taxation for the building’s real market value;

2. Any alteration, modification or change in the use of real property which increases the number of parking spaces required under the Lincoln City Municipal Code in effect at the time of permit application; 

3. Connection to or use of a water, sanitary sewer, storm water or street improvement, if the district is based on that improvement.

B. The obligation to pay the reimbursement fee arises and accrues as of the time property within the district utilizes the affected public improvement regardless of whether a person applies for and/or receives a permit connected with that utilization. 

C. The city council’s determination of which properties shall be liable for payment of the fee is final. Neither the city nor any officer or employee of the city shall be liable for payment of any reimbursement fee or portion thereof as a result of this determination.

D. A permit applicant whose property is subject to payment of a reimbursement fee receives a benefit from the construction of street improvements, regardless of whether access is taken or provided directly onto such street at any time. Nothing in this chapter is intended to modify or limit the authority of the city to provide or require access management.

E. No person shall be required to pay the reimbursement fee on an application or upon property for which the reimbursement fee has been previously paid, unless such payment was for a different type of improvement. 

F. The right to reimbursement shall not extend beyond 10 years from the district’s formation date, subject to renewal at the option of the council for one additional 10-year period. (Ord. 2013-10 § 1)


13.06.070 Public improvements become property of the city.

Public improvements installed pursuant to reimbursement district agreements shall become and remain the sole property of the city. More than one public improvement may be the subject of a reimbursement district. (Ord. 2013-10 § 1)


13.06.075 Collection and payment – Other fees and charges.

A. Applicants shall receive all reimbursement monies collected by the city for the public improvements they install. Such reimbursement shall be delivered to the developer for as long as the reimbursement district agreement is in effect. Such payments shall be made by the city within 90 days of receipt of the reimbursements monies.

B. The reimbursement fee is not intended to replace or limit any other existing fees or charges collected by the city.

C. An applicant may receive both system development charge credit and reimbursement under this chapter; however, the reimbursement shall be reduced by the (SDC) credit previously received (i.e., no double reimbursement). Similarly, SDC credit shall not be awarded if reimbursement equal to SDC credit has already been received. (Ord. 2013-10 § 1)


Chapter 13.08 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGES

Sections:

13.08.010    Findings.

13.08.020    Definitions.

13.08.030    Purpose.

13.08.040    Scope.

13.08.050    Systems development charge established.

13.08.060    Methodology.

13.08.070    Revenues and expenditures.

13.08.080    Collection of charge.

13.08.085    Installment payment.

13.08.090    Exemptions.

13.08.095    Deferrals.

13.08.100    Calculation where there is existing use – Credits.

13.08.110    Challenge to expenditure.

13.08.115    Appeal of calculation.

13.08.120    Prohibited connection.

13.08.130    Penalty.


13.08.010 Findings.

A. The system development charge established in this chapter is a charge upon the act of development by whoever seeks the development. It is a fee for service because it contemplates the development receive essential municipal services based upon the nature of the development. The timing of the development and the extent of the development is within the control and discretion of the developer, subject to city code requirements.

B. The system development charge imposed by this chapter is not intended to be a tax on property or on a property owner as a direct consequence of ownership of property within the meaning of Section 11b, Article XI of the Oregon Constitution or the legislation implementing that section.

C. The system development charge imposed herein is also found to be an incurred charge within the meaning of Section 11b, Article XI of the Oregon Constitution and the statutes implementing it because:

1. It allows the owner to control the quantity of the service by determining the extent of development to occur upon the property.

2. It allows the owner to determine when the service is to be initiated or increased by controlling when the development occurs.

3. State law and the ordinances of this city require the owner to provide certain basic utility services to the property when it is developed for human occupancy. The provision of these basic utility services is a routine obligation of the owner of the affected property and essential to the health and safety of the community.

D. The system development charge imposed by this chapter is based upon the actual costs of providing existing or planned-for capital improvements and does not impose charges on persons not receiving a service and imposing a burden upon the city’s existing capital improvements. (Ord. 91-30 § 2)


13.08.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, except where the context otherwise requires, words and phrases have the following meaning:

“Capital improvements” means facilities or assets used for any of the following:

1. Water supply, storage, treatment and distribution;

2. Wastewater collection, transmission, treatment and disposal;

3. Drainage and flood control, including but not limited to storm sewers, collection, transmission, treatment and detention;

4. Transportation, including but not limited to streets, sidewalks, bike paths, street lights, street trees, public transportation, vehicle parking, and bridges; or

5. Parks and recreation, including but not limited to mini-neighborhood parks, neighborhood parks, community parks, metropolitan parks, and other recreational facilities.

“Development” means the act of conducting a building or mining operation, or making a physical change in the use or appearance of a structure or land, which increases the usage of any capital improvements or which creates the need for additional capital improvements.

“Improvement fee” means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be constructed after the date the fee is adopted or modified as provided by this chapter.

“Reimbursement fee” means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements constructed, or under construction, on the date the fee is adopted or modified as provided by this chapter.

“Systems development charge” means the sum of the system development charge components, including reimbursement fees, improvement fees, or combinations thereof, assessed or collected at any of the times specified in this chapter. It shall also include that portion of a water or wastewater connection charge that is greater than the amount necessary to reimburse the city for its average cost of inspecting and installing connections with the water system or the wastewater system. “Systems development charge” does not include:

1. Any fees assessed or collected as part of a local improvement district;

2. A charge in lieu of a local improvement district assessment; or

3. The cost of complying with requirements or conditions imposed upon a land use decision. (Ord. 2003-13 § 1; Ord. 91-45 § 1; Ord. 91-30 § 2)


13.08.030 Purpose.

The purpose of the systems development charge is to impose a portion of the public cost of capital improvements upon those developments that create the need for or increase the demands on capital improvements. (Ord. 91-30 § 2)


13.08.040 Scope.

The system development charge imposed in this chapter is separate from and in addition to any applicable tax, assessment, charge, fee in lieu of assessment, or fee otherwise provided by law or imposed as a condition of development. A systems development charge is to be considered in the nature of a charge for service to be rendered or a service hookup charge. (Ord. 91-30 § 2)


13.08.050 Systems development charge established.

A. Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this chapter or other local or state law, a systems development charge is imposed upon all new development within the city, and all new development outside the boundary of the city that connects to or otherwise uses the wastewater facilities, drainage and flood control facilities, or water facilities of the city. For new development within the city, the systems development charge shall be the sum of the wastewater system, drainage and flood control system, water system, transportation system, and parks and recreation system development charge components. For new developments outside the boundary of the city, the systems development charge shall be the sum of the system development charge components for the specific systems to which the development connects and for the parks and recreation system.

B. A system development charge for each system shall be adopted and may be modified by resolution of the council. In adopting or modifying a system development charge, the city shall use the following procedure:

1. The city shall maintain a list of persons who have made a written request for notification prior to adoption or modification of the methodology for the system development charge components;

2. At least 90 days prior to the first hearing on adoption or modification of a system development charge component, the city shall mail written notice of the hearing to persons on the list of those who have requested notification. The failure of a person on the list to receive a notice that was mailed shall not invalidate an action of the city in adopting or modifying a system development charge component;

3. The written methodology supporting the system development charge component, as proposed to be adopted or modified, shall be available for public review at least 60 days prior to the first hearing on adoption or modification.

C. An adjustment in the amount of a system development charge component shall not be considered a modification for purposes of subsection (B) of this section, if the adjustment is based on the periodic application of a specific cost index that is incorporated in a methodology adopted in accord with subsection (B) of this section. (Ord. 2003-13 § 2; Ord. 91-30 § 2)


13.08.060 Methodology.

A. The methodology used to establish the reimbursement fee shall consider the cost of then-existing facilities, prior contributions by then-existing users, the value of unused capacity, rate-making principles employed to finance publicly owned capital improvements, and other relevant factors identified by the council. The methodology shall promote the objective that future systems users shall contribute no more than an equitable share of the cost of then-existing facilities.

B. The methodology used to establish the improvement fee shall consider the cost of projected capital improvements needed to increase the capacity of the systems to which the fee is related.

C. The methodology used to establish the improvement fee or the reimbursement fee, or both, shall be contained in a resolution adopted by the council. (Ord. 91-30 § 2)


13.08.070 Revenues and expenditures.

A. The revenues received from the systems development charges shall be deposited in accounts designated for such moneys and budgeted and expended as provided by state law. The five funds so established shall be denominated: water system development fund; wastewater system development fund; drainage and flood control system development fund; transportation system development fund; and parks and recreation system development fund. The accounting of such revenues and expenditures required by state law shall be included in the city’s annual financial audit required by ORS Chapter 294.

B. The capital improvement plan required by state law as the basis for expending revenues from the improvement fee portion of a system development charge component shall be adopted by resolution of the council. (Ord. 2003-13 § 3; Ord. 91-30 § 2)


13.08.080 Collection of charge.

A. The systems development charge is payable upon issuance of:

1. A building permit;

2. A development permit for development not requiring the issuance of a building permit;

3. A permit to connect to the water system;

4. A permit to connect to the wastewater system; or

5. A permit to connect to the drainage and flood control system.

B. If development is commenced or connection is made to the water system, wastewater system or drainage and flood control system without an appropriate permit, the systems development charge is immediately payable upon the earliest date that a permit was required, but the amount of the systems development charge shall be the amount in effect on the date of payment.

C. The finance director shall collect the systems development charges from the person responsible for or receiving the benefit of the development. The planning and community development director shall not issue any permit or allow such connection until the charge has been paid in full, unless an exemption or deferral is granted by this chapter. (Ord. 2011-05 § 1; Ord. 2003-13 § 4; Ord. 96-2 § 4; Ord. 91-45 §§ 2, 3; Ord. 91-30 § 2)


13.08.085 Installment payment.

A. Notwithstanding any other provision herein to the contrary, and when authorized in a local improvement district or reimbursement district ordinance or resolution, whenever a system development charge of $1,000 or more would otherwise be due and collectible, the owner of the parcel of land subject to the development charge may make application to the city manager for payment of the charge in installments, plus interest on the unpaid balance in accordance with ORS 223.208. In addition, SDC installment payment shall also be available to the owner of a parcel of land with an existing building on a septic system, when voluntarily connecting to installed or available city sewer or when required to connect to such sewer facilities under LCMC 13.12.160(A) (six-month time frame for connection), (B) (48-month time frame for connection), or (C)(1) or (4) (failure or significant repair of septic system). The installment payment agreement may be secured by property lien, bond(s), deposits, letter of credit or other security instrument, acceptable to the city manager and city attorney. Installment payment agreements may also be enforced after notice by disconnection of water service.

B. The city manager shall provide application forms for installment payments, which shall include an installment payment agreement and financial security or agreement and waiver of all rights to contest validity of the lien. An applicant for installment payments shall have the burden of demonstrating as part of the application the applicant’s ownership and authority to assent to the imposition of a lien or other security on the parcel and that the property interest of the applicant is adequate to secure payment of the lien or other security instrument.

C. Upon receipt of such an application, the city manager shall compute the amount of the system development charges, the dates upon which such charges are due, the name or names of the owner(s) and the description of the property upon which the development is occurring or has occurred.

D. The frequency of installment payments and the applicable interest rate shall be as established for the LID in the formation resolution or assessment ordinance. For reimbursement districts, the frequency of payments and interest rate shall be set forth in the formation resolution or modified resolution. If an owner of real property in the LID or reimbursement district has signed an application and agreement to pay in installments, the owner shall also pay at the time of submission of the application and agreement a processing fee in the amount of one-half percent of the final assessment to cover the costs of processing the application and agreement, and also shall pay the amount of the county recording fee for the lien or other security instrument.

E. If the manager elects to secure the charge(s) with a lien on real property, or other security instrument encumbering the property, the owner shall obtain the consent of all owners of record or of the contract purchaser or purchasers of record of the real property. The burden of showing the identity of the owner or owners of record or of the contract purchaser or purchasers of record of the parcel shall be upon the developer.

F. Any deferred payment secured with real property shall become a lien upon the property and the city manager shall docket the lien in the docket of liens; and from the time that docketing is completed, the city shall have a lien upon that described property for the total amount of the system development charge, together with interest on the unpaid balance at the range established by the council. To the extent permitted by law, that lien herein shall have priority over all other liens and encumbrances of any character. The lien shall be enforceable in the manner provided in ORS 223.505 to 223.650, or any other method allowed by law. (Ord. 2019-09 § 1; Ord. 2016-06 § 1; Ord. 2016-01 § 1)


13.08.090 Exemptions.

The following are exempt from the systems development charge or an increase in the charge:

A. A building or other structure for which a building permit application was filed prior to the effective date of the charge or increase in the charge, providing the information accompanying the application was sufficiently complete to meet the requirements for issuance of a building permit for the entire structure, and all previously applicable system development fees are paid and substantial construction begins within 180 days of the date the permit was issued.

B. The city of Lincoln City.

C. Any structure which is built to replace a structure that was destroyed, demolished or removed shall not be assessed systems development charges if construction of the new structure is completed within 18 months of the time that the original structure was destroyed, demolished, or removed; provided, however, that any new structure does not increase the usage of any capital improvement.

D. Additions to single-family dwellings that do not constitute the addition of a dwelling unit, as defined by the State Uniform Building Code, are exempt from all portions of the system development charge.

E. An alteration, addition, replacement or change in use that does not increase the parcel’s or structure’s use of a capital improvement is exempt from all portions of the system development charge. (Ord. 2011-05 § 1; Ord. 96-2 § 5; Ord. 91-30 § 2)


13.08.095 Deferrals.

A. The city council may approve an application for deferral of the requirement to pay systems development charges, or for continuation of an approved deferral, for a qualified entity that meets all the following criteria:

1. The use proposed by the applicant fits within a type of use identified by the city council by resolution as lacking in the city and urgently needed, such as child care;

2. The use serves a widespread community need, as identified by the applicant;

3. The deferral applicant is a nonprofit corporation, or any agency or subdivision of the federal, state or local government, or a private entity that has committed to the proposed use in a binding executed agreement with the city (e.g., a 30-year affordability covenant for workforce housing);

4. The applicant demonstrates the need for financial support to develop the use;

5. The applicant demonstrates local support for the use, such as through fundraising for the use;

6. The development will occur on property located within the city limits; 

7. The applicant agrees to enter into an agreement to pay systems development charges if the city approves the application.

B. An application for deferral of payment of systems development charges or a continuation of a deferral shall be submitted to the city manager for review. The city manager shall review the application and make a recommendation to the city council, which in its discretion may approve or deny the application, decline to take action, or take other action such as requesting additional information.

C. Any approval of an application for deferral or continuation of a deferral under this section shall be contingent on the city and the applicant entering into an agreement in which the applicant acknowledges the terms of the deferral and agrees to pay systems development charges in the amount calculated at the time the use no longer qualifies for deferral, as specified in subsection (D) of this section. If the applicant is not the property owner, the property owner will be required to consent to the deferral application and sign the agreement. The agreement shall be recorded and shall run with the land.

D. The deferral will apply until such time as a new use occupies the building that was constructed in conjunction with an approved deferral. If the new use would not meet the application criteria to qualify for continuation of the deferral of system development charges, prior to use or occupancy of the facility by a new use all applicable system development charges shall be paid. The system development charges owed will be based on the approved schedule and methodology of system development charges in effect for the new use at the time of occupancy.

E. The city council may approve a deferral of payment of systems development charges under this section for up to 10 years, with possible extensions of time as approved by the city council, provided the use continues to qualify for deferral. (Ord. 2016-01 § 2; Ord. 2011-05 § 1)


13.08.100 Calculation where there is existing use – Credits.

A. When development occurs that must pay a systems development charge under this chapter, and if there already is an existing use on the development site, which has not been abandoned, then each of the system development charge components that would comprise the systems development charge for the existing use shall be calculated using current systems development charge rates. In addition, each of the system development charge components that would comprise the systems development charge for the proposed use shall be calculated using current systems development charge rates. If, for a particular system, the calculated charge component for the existing use is less than the calculated charge component for the proposed use, then the system development charge component for that particular system shall be the system development charge component for the proposed use using current systems development charge rates, less credit for the existing use at current SDC rates. If, for a particular system, the calculated charge component for the proposed use is less than the system development calculated charge component for the existing use, then no system development charge shall be required; however, no refund or credit shall be given.

B. A credit shall be given for the cost of a qualified public improvement associated with a development. A “qualified public improvement” means a capital improvement that is required as a condition of development approval, is identified in the capital improvement plan adopted under LCMC 13.08.070, and is:

1. Not located on or contiguous to property that is the subject of the development approval; or

2. Located in whole or in part on or contiguous to property that is the subject of the development approval and required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development to which the improvement fee is related.

If a qualified public improvement is located in whole or in part on or contiguous to property that is the subject of the development approval, the credit shall be given only for the cost of the portion of the improvement that exceeds the city’s minimum standard facility size or capacity needed to serve the particular development project or property. The credit provided for by this subsection shall be only for the improvement fee portion, if any, of the system development charge component for the system of which the improvement being constructed will be a part and, except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, shall not exceed the improvement fee portion even if the cost of the capital improvement exceeds the applicable improvement fee portion.

C. Credit shall not be transferable from the system development charge component for the system of which the improvement being constructed is a part to the system development charge component for another system.

D. Credit shall not be transferable from one development or development phase to another, except that the city may enter into an agreement to allow a credit to be transferred when the city, at its sole discretion, determines it will be in the interest of the affected system to do so.

E. A person seeking a credit under this section shall have the burden of demonstrating that the person is entitled to the credit. (Ord. 2019-20 § 2; Ord. 2003-13 § 5; Ord. 96-1 § 1; Ord. 91-30 § 2)


13.08.110 Challenge to expenditure.

A. A person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of systems development charge revenues under ORS 223.297 through 223.314 may challenge the expenditure decision or the expenditure to the city council by filing a written notice of challenge with the city manager. A written notice of challenge must be filed either by its actual delivery to the office of the city manager or by its mailing via certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to: City Manager, P.O. Box 50, Lincoln City, OR 97367. A notice of challenge shall be considered filed on such actual delivery or mailing. To be considered, a notice of challenge must be filed within two years of the date of the challenged expenditure.

B. Challenge Filing Fees. A filing fee shall be required for the processing of a challenge and shall be in an amount set by resolution of the city council. The failure to submit a required fee with a notice of challenge, including returning of checks unpaid or other failure of consideration, shall be a jurisdictional defect and the city shall deem the appeal abandoned.

C. The notice of challenge shall state:

1. The name and address of the challenger;

2. The specific expenditure being challenged;

3. The specific provision of ORS 223.297 through 223.314 alleged to be violated;

4. The reason the expenditure violates the specific statutory provision.

D. If a challenger does not file a properly completed notice of challenge within the time permitted, the city shall dismiss the challenge.

E. Unless the challenger and the city agree to a longer period, a challenge shall be heard within 30 days of the receipt of the notice of challenge. At least seven days prior to the hearing, the city shall mail notice of the time and location thereof to the challenger.

F. The city council shall hear and determine the challenge on the basis of the challenger’s written statement and any additional evidence the city council deems appropriate. At the hearing, the challenger may present testimony and oral argument personally or by counsel. The rules of evidence as used by courts of law do not apply.

G. The challenger shall carry the burden of proving that the expenditure being challenged violates a provision of ORS 223.297 through 223.314.

H. The city council shall issue a written decision within 30 days after the hearing date and that decision shall be final. The written decision shall be provided to the challenger by certified mail, return receipt requested. The written decision shall include notice that the challenger has the right to petition for judicial review of the decision under ORS 34.010 through 34.100. (Ord. 2003-13 § 6; Ord. 91-30 § 2)


13.08.115 Appeal of calculation.

A. Any person required to pay a systems development charge may appeal the correctness of the city’s calculation of the charge to the city manager by filing a written notice of appeal. A written notice of appeal must be filed either by its actual delivery to the office of the city manager or by its mailing via certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to: City Manager, P.O. Box 50, Lincoln City, OR 97367. A notice of appeal shall be considered filed on such actual delivery or mailing. To be considered, a notice of appeal must be filed within 30 days of the date the appellant was given the appealed calculation.

B. The notice of appeal shall state:

1. The name and address of the appellant;

2. The specific reason the city’s calculation is incorrect; and

3. What the correct calculation should be.

C. If a appellant does not file a properly completed notice of appeal within the time permitted, the city manager shall dismiss the appeal.

D. The city manager shall determine the appeal on the basis of the appellant’s written statement and any additional information the city manager deems appropriate.

E. The appellant shall carry the burden of proving that the calculation being appealed is incorrect and what the correct calculation should be.

F. The city manager shall issue a written decision within 30 days after receiving the properly completed notice of appeal and that decision shall be final. The written decision shall be provided to the appellant by certified mail, return receipt requested. The written decision shall include notice that the appellant has the right to petition for judicial review of the decision under ORS 34.010 through 34.100. (Ord. 2003-13 § 7)


13.08.120 Prohibited connection.

No person may connect to the water, wastewater or drainage and flood control systems of the city unless the appropriate systems development charge has been paid. (Ord. 2003-13 § 8; Ord. 91-30 § 2)


13.08.130 Penalty.

Violation of LCMC 13.08.120 is punishable as a Class B violation. Any fine imposed as a result of such violation shall be in addition to the required systems development charge. (Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 91-30 § 2)


Chapter 13.12 WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM RATES AND CHARGES

Sections:

13.12.010    Sewage disposal system – City intent to provide and operate.

13.12.020    Water supply system – City intent to provide and operate.

13.12.030    Sewer system connection.

13.12.040    Water system connections.

13.12.050    Water service extensions, connections and equipment – Installation and maintenance responsibility.

13.12.055    Repealed.

13.12.060    Sewer user rates and charges.

13.12.080    Water user rates and charges.

13.12.090    Sewer and/or water – Application for service.

13.12.100    Billing – Disconnection for nonpayment – Reconnection fees.

13.12.110    Responsibility for payment of bills.

13.12.120    Requiring deposits.

13.12.130    Liens and other collection enforcement procedures.

13.12.140    Payment delinquency – Refusal of service request.

13.12.150    Abandoned and non-revenue-producing services.

13.12.160    Sewer availability – Connection required.

13.12.165    Improper discharge prohibited.

13.12.170    Failure to connect – Penalty – Alternative remedies.

13.12.180    Collection of rates and charges.

13.12.190    Wastewater treatment plant capital fund.

13.12.200    Water plant capital fund.

13.12.210    City liability.


13.12.010 Sewage disposal system – City intent to provide and operate.

Pursuant to the powers granted by the Charter of the city and the general laws of the state, the common council of the city declares its intention to provide, own, construct, equip, operate and maintain, within or without the city limits, a sewage disposal plant or plants, sewers, equipment and appurtenances necessary, useful or convenient for a complete sewer and sewage disposal system; also including maintenance and extension of the present system of the city and also including the reconstruction of such sewers as may be necessary or convenient, as deemed proper by the council. (Ord. 78-37 § 1)


13.12.020 Water supply system – City intent to provide and operate.

Pursuant to the powers granted by the Charter of the city and the general laws of the state, the common council of the city declares its intention to provide, own, construct, equip, operate and maintain, within or without the city limits, a water supply system treatment plant, storage facilities, distribution lines, equipment and appurtenances necessary, useful or convenient for a complete water supply system; also including maintenance and extension of the present system of the city and also including the reconstruction of such system as may be necessary or convenient, as deemed proper by the council. (Ord. 78-37 § 2)


13.12.030 Sewer system connection.

A. All expenses of whatever type and nature incurred in connecting to the public sewer and maintaining the connection line shall be borne solely by the property owner. The applicant shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation. The amount of the connection fee shall be set by resolution of the council based on the average cost of inspecting and installing connections to the sanitary sewer system. The point of connection with the public sewer by the property owner shall be at such place as determined by the city staff.

B. No sewer user shall uncover, make any connections with, use or alter any public sewer or appurtenances without first obtaining a permit from the public works director. The written permit will not be issued until the systems development charge has been paid to the city finance director as prescribed by city ordinances relating to systems development charges.

C. The sewer user shall notify the director of public works when the building sanitary sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sanitary sewer. The connection and installation shall be made in accordance with the city’s standards and shall be inspected and approved by the director of public works. The director may order the sewer user who connects to the sanitary sewer system of the city without an inspection and approval to uncover the connection so that an inspection can be made. Failure to request an inspection or to comply with an order of the public works director to uncover a connection made without inspection and approval constitutes a Class B violation which may be punished under the provisions of the code relating to violations.

D. All installation of sewer lines and service laterals shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.

E. Service Outside City Limits.

1. Outside City Limits. The utility is not required to construct or provide service to sewer mains specifically for uses outside the city limits, except where required to do so by written agreement. Individual service connections may be permitted, by option of the utility, on those mains owned and operated by the utility outside the city limits.

2. Discontinuation of Service. Except where service is required by written agreement, all sewer service delivered outside city limits shall be considered as a special service and not provided by the city as a common utility service. The city may reduce or entirely discontinue the service at any time, on a temporary or permanent basis, and by area or areas or by customer or classes of customers, in accord with such policies as the city may establish from time to time by ordinance or resolution adopted by the city council. The utility shall have no liability in any way to customers for failure to provide service or for any failure of the system.

3. Application and Rates. Except where service is required by written agreement, the utility reserves the right to act on each application for service on its merits without regard to any other past or present application for service. If service is approved, the cost of service connections shall be in accordance with the rate schedule for service connections in effect at the time of the application for outside-the-city services. Sewer rates shall be those in the applicable portion of the rate and fee schedule.

4. Consents to Annex.

a. Except where service is required by written agreement, no application for an initial connection to the sewer system shall be allowed until the property owner agrees in writing to the annexation of the property to the city at such time as the city shall determine that such annexation is in the best interests of the city, signs a separate agreement waiving the one-year time limit for consents to annex as provided in ORS 222.173, and acknowledges the city’s right to terminate the service as provided in subsection (E)(2) of this section, in a form approved by the city attorney. The consent to annex shall be an irrevocable covenant running with title to the land and shall be binding upon all heirs and assigns.

b. Except where service is required by written agreement, for a property connected to the city sewer system for which no annexation agreement and waiver has been filed, within 60 days after the city has allowed an application for a change in the person to be billed for the sewer service, as a condition of the property receiving continued service, the property owner shall agree in writing to the annexation of the property to the city at such time as the city shall determine that such annexation is in the best interests of the city, sign a separate agreement waiving the one-year time limit for consents to annex as provided in ORS 222.173, and acknowledge the city’s right to terminate the service as provided in subsection (E)(2) of this section, in a form approved by the city attorney. The consent to annex shall be an irrevocable covenant running with title to the land and shall be binding upon all heirs and assigns. If the city does not receive the agreement and waiver within the 60-day period allowed under this subsection, the city thereafter has the authority and the respective city departments are authorized to discontinue and disconnect the sewer service for delinquency in providing the required agreement and waiver, provided the city first has followed the same procedure as for turnoff due to delinquency in payment as set out in LCMC 13.12.100(B) through (E). As an alternative remedy, the city may institute injunctive or other appropriate proceedings to compel provision of the agreement and waiver as a condition of the property receiving continued service.

5. Limitation on Properties to which Service Will Be Provided. Except where service is required by written agreement, connections to the sewer system shall be limited to one connection serving one residential dwelling or its equivalent, for each lot as in existence on August 5, 1980, unless the city council by resolution has approved an application for an exception to this limitation as applied to a particular property. In deciding whether to approve an exception, the city council shall consider those factors it deems appropriate to the particular proposed exception, including but not limited to:

a. Whether the proposed exception will enhance the city’s ability to annex land within the urban growth boundary at such time that the city determines that annexation is in the best interests of the city;

b. Whether the proposed exception will enhance the city’s ability to provide public facilities and services in a timely, orderly, efficient, and economic manner; and

c. Whether the proposed exception, on balance, will enhance the city’s ability to implement relevant goals and policies of the city’s comprehensive plan.

6. Rules and Regulations.

a. All customers shall comply with and be bound by the rules and regulations of the utility.

b. Individuals shall cooperate to a reasonable and practicable extent with other customers in the extension or enlargement of common facilities. (Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 2005-01 § 1; Ord. 2004-16 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 2004-06 § 2; Ord. 91-29 § 1; Ord. 78-37 § 3)


13.12.040 Water system connections.

A. All expenses of whatever type and nature incurred in connecting to the city water system shall be borne solely by the property owner. Charges for new services and changes in existing services shall be paid for in advance and shall be in accordance with the rate and fee schedule in effect at the time the new service or change in existing service is installed. Such fee will be based on the amount necessary to reimburse the city for the average cost of inspection and installing connections to the water system.

B. For any new facility that includes both lodging facilities and a restaurant, the lodging facilities and the restaurant shall have separate water services. At the time of a change of an existing service to a facility that includes both lodging facilities and a restaurant, the lodging facility and the restaurant shall be converted to separate water services. This subsection shall not apply to bed and breakfast accommodations. (Ord. 2004-15 § 1; Ord. 91-29 § 2; Ord. 78-37 § 4)


13.12.050 Water service extensions, connections and equipment – Installation and maintenance responsibility.

A. Water Main Extensions Within the City Limits. Water mains may be extended inside the city limits with the consent of the city and shall be constructed in accordance with the utility’s standards and specifications, subject to inspection by the utility, with all necessary easements, rights-of-way and permits, as required, obtained in the utility’s name prior to construction. After completion, and if accepted by the utility, the water main, free of all liens and encumbrances, shall be transferred, along with all necessary easements, rights-of-way and permits, to the utility. The utility will then own, operate and maintain the water main. The water mains shall be constructed of pipe not smaller than six inches in diameter, unless the city finds that engineering considerations determine that a larger or smaller pipe should be installed. The installation shall include all valves, fire hydrants, blow-offs and such other apparatus as deemed necessary by the city. Where the city has determined that a water main larger or smaller than six inches in diameter is required or desirable, the city shall have the right to require the installation of the larger or smaller pipe. The developer or contractor may be required to pay all additional costs for the installation and materials for the installation of the larger pipe. In the event new construction occurs in the area of an existing water main, and it is determined by the city that fire flow requirements require a larger water main, the city shall have the right to reject the new construction or to require installation of a water main to meet fire flow requirements.

B. Service Outside City Limits.

1. Outside City Limits. The utility is not required to construct or provide service to water mains specifically for uses outside the city limits, except where required to do so by written agreement. Individual service connections may be permitted, by option of the utility, on those mains owned and operated by the utility outside the city limits.

2. Discontinuation of Service and Guarantee of Supply. Except where service is required by written agreement, all water delivered outside the city limits shall be considered as a special service and not provided by the city as a common utility service. The city may reduce the quantity of water supplied by the service or entirely discontinue the service at any time, on a temporary or permanent basis, and by area or areas or by customer or classes of customers, in accord with such policies as the city may establish from time to time by ordinance or resolution adopted by the city council. The utility shall have no liability in any way to customers for failure to provide service or for any failure of the system.

3. Application and Rates. Except where service is required by written agreement, the utility reserves the right to act on each application for service on its merits without regard to any other past or present application for service. If service is approved, the cost of service connections and meters shall be in accordance with the rate schedule for service connections and meters in effect at the time of the application for outside-the-city services. Water rates shall be those in the applicable portion of the rate and fee schedule.

4. Consents to Annexation.

a. Except where service is required by written agreement, no application for an initial connection to the water system shall be allowed until each of the conditions set out in subsection (B)(4)(c) of this section has been met.

b. Except where service is required by written agreement, for a property connected to the city water system for which no annexation agreement and waiver has been filed, within 60 days after the city has allowed an application for a change in the person to be billed for the water service, as a condition of the property receiving continued service, the property owner shall meet the conditions set out in subsections (B)(4)(c)(i) and (ii) of this section. If the city does not receive the agreement and waiver required under subsection (B)(4)(c)(i) of this section within the 60-day period allowed under this subsection, the city thereafter has the authority and the respective city departments are authorized to discontinue and disconnect the water service for delinquency in providing the required agreement and waiver, provided the city first has followed the same procedure as for turnoff due to delinquency in payment as set out in LCMC 13.12.100(B) through (E). As an alternative remedy, the city may institute injunctive or other appropriate proceedings to compel provision of the agreement and waiver as a condition of the property receiving continued service.

c. The conditions referred to in subsections (B)(4)(a) and (b) of this section are as follows:

i. The property owner agrees in writing to the annexation of the property to the city at such time as the city shall determine that such annexation is in the best interests of the city, signs a separate agreement waiving the one-year time limit for consents to annex as provided in ORS 222.173, and acknowledges the city’s right to terminate the service, in a form approved by the city attorney. The consent to annex shall be an irrevocable covenant running with title to the land and shall be binding upon all heirs and assigns;

ii. If the property is within the Roads End Sanitary District, the city determines that the property will be served by the city’s sewer system through its connection to the District’s system; and

iii. The city determines that a system of water storage and distribution facilities exists that is adequate to serve the property.

5. Consents to Annexation for Continued Service.

a. Except where service is required by written agreement, beginning January 1, 2011, any property connected to the city water system shall be allowed to continue to receive water service, provided each of the conditions set out in subsection (B)(4)(c) of this section has been met.

b. Except where service is required by written agreement, for a property connected to the city water system for which no annexation agreement and waiver has been filed, and as required by a resolution adopted by the city council determining it is in the best interests of the city to annex an area including the property so connected, then within 60 days after the city has provided notice to the person billed for the water service, as a condition of the property receiving continued service, the property owner shall meet the conditions set out in subsection (B)(5)(c) of this section. If the city does not receive the agreement and waiver required under subsection (B)(5)(c)(i) of this section within the 60-day period allowed under this subsection, the city thereafter has the authority and the respective city departments are authorized to discontinue and disconnect the water service for delinquency in providing the required agreement and waiver, provided the city first has followed the same procedure as for turnoff due to delinquency in payment as set out in LCMC 13.12.100(B) through (E). As an alternative remedy, the city may institute injunctive or other appropriate proceedings to compel provision of the agreement and waiver as a condition of the property receiving continued service.

c. The conditions referred to in subsections (B)(5)(a) and (b) of this section are as follows:

i. The property owner agrees in writing to the annexation of the property to the city at such time as the city shall determine that such annexation is in the best interests of the city, signs a separate agreement waiving the one-year time limit for consents to annex as provided in ORS 222.173, and acknowledges the city’s right to terminate the service, in a form approved by the city attorney. The consent to annex shall be an irrevocable covenant running with title to the land and shall be binding upon all heirs and assigns;

ii. If the property is within the Roads End Sanitary District, the city determines that the property is served by the city’s sewer system through its connection to the district’s system; and

iii. The city determines that a system of water storage and distribution facilities exists that is adequate to serve the property.

iv. Payment for the cost of recording the documents required under subsection (B)(5)(c)(i) of this section is the responsibility of the property owner. The city council may also by resolution approve a full or partial waiver of the fees required for recording with Lincoln County the documents required in subsection (B)(5)(c)(i) of this section. The standard for eligibility for a fee waiver shall at a minimum require the documents to be mailed or hand-delivered to the city recorder of the city of Lincoln City before the expiration of the 60-day notice period established in subsection (B)(5)(b) of this section. The burden of proof of date of mailing or delivery shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner.

6. Limitation on Properties to which Service Will Be Provided. Except where service is required by written agreement, connections to the water system shall be limited to one connection serving one residential dwelling or its equivalent, for each lot as in existence on August 5, 1980, or, if within the boundaries of the Roads End Sanitary District, as in existence on June 28, 2003, unless the city council by resolution has approved an application for an exception to this limitation as applied to a particular property. In deciding whether to approve an exception, the city council shall consider those factors it deems appropriate to the particular proposed exception, including but not limited to:

a. Whether the proposed exception will enhance the city’s ability to annex land within the urban growth boundary at such time that the city determines that annexation is in the best interests of the city;

b. Whether the proposed annexation will enhance the city’s ability to provide public facilities and services in a timely, orderly, and efficient manner; and

c. Whether the proposed exception, on balance, will enhance the city’s ability to implement relevant goals and policies of the city’s comprehensive plan.

7. Rules and Regulations.

a. All customers shall comply with and be bound by the rules and regulations of the utility.

b. Individuals shall cooperate to a reasonable and practicable extent with other customers in the extension or enlargement of common facilities.

c. No customer shall interconnect between water furnished by the utility and water from another source. Upon discovery that such an interconnection has been made, the utility may discontinue service and shall assess a penalty in accordance with the rate and fee schedule.

C. Responsibility for Equipment. The customer shall, at his own risk and expense, furnish, install and keep in good and safe condition all equipment which may be required for receiving, controlling, applying and utilizing water. The utility shall not be responsible for any loss or damage caused by the improper installation of such water equipment, or the negligence, want of proper care or wrongful act of the customer or any of his tenants or agents, in installing, maintaining, using, operating or interfering with such equipment. The utility shall not be responsible for damage to property caused by spigots, faucets, valves and other equipment which are open when water is turned on at the meter, either when the water is turned on originally or when turned on after a temporary shutdown.

D. Change in Location of Meters or Services. Meters or services moved for the convenience of the customer will be relocated only at the customer’s expense.

E. Change in Size of Meter or Service. If for any reason a change in size of a meter or service or both is required, the charges therefor shall be paid for in advance and shall be in accordance with the rate and fee schedule in effect at the time the change is made. Such change shall only be made with approval of the city after the public works director has made a determination that the requested meter size is appropriate for the estimated water consumption anticipated for that service.

F. Ownership. The service connection, whether located on public or private property, is the property of the utility, and the utility reserves the right to repair, replace and maintain it, as well as to remove it upon discontinuance of service.

G. Placement of Service Pipes. The service pipes must be arranged so that the supply to each separate house or premises may be controlled by a separate stopcock placed within or near the line of the street curb.

H. Charges for Service Pipes Connected without Permit. If premises are connected without approval of the city, such premises shall be immediately disconnected. Before a new connection is made, the applicant shall pay double the rate for the estimated quantity of water consumed while connected without a permit and shall be required to pay double the new connection fee. A new connection shall only be made upon compliance with provisions of this code.

I. Leaking Services. Where there is a leak between the main and the meter, the utility shall make all repairs free of charge. When a service pipe at the proper grade is damaged or destroyed by contractors or others, the person, contractor or company responsible for such damage or destruction shall pay the utility for the cost of repairing or replacing such pipes on the basis of the rate and fee schedule. The property owner shall be responsible for all the maintenance and repair and the costs associated therewith of the service line between the meter and building served.

J. Meter Error.

1. Meter Test on Customer Request.

a. A customer may, giving not less than one week’s notice, request the utility to test the meter serving his premises.

b. The utility may require the customer to deposit an amount as set forth in the rate and fee schedule to cover the reasonable cost of the test.

c. If the city owns the meter, the test deposit will be returned if the meter is found to register more than two percent fast. If the meter is not found to register more than two percent fast, the deposit will be retained by the city to reimburse the city for the cost of the test.

d. A customer or his representative shall have the right to be present when the test is made.

e. A written report giving the results of the test shall be available to the customer within 10 days after completion of the test.

2. Adjustment of Bills for Meter Error.

a. Fast Meters. When, upon test, a meter is found to be registering more than two percent fast under conditions of normal operation, the utility will refund to the customer the full amount of the overcharge based on corrected meter readings for a period of not exceeding three months that the meter was in use.

b. Slow Meters. When, upon test, a meter is found to be registering more than five percent slow, the utility may bill the customer for the amount of the undercharge based upon corrected meter readings for a period not exceeding three months that the meter was in use.

c. Nonregistering Meters. The utility may bill the customer for water consumed while the meter was not registering. The bill will be computed upon an estimate of consumption based either upon the customer’s prior use during the same season of the year, or upon a reasonable comparison with the use of other customers receiving the same class of service during the same period and under similar circumstances and conditions. (Ord. 2010-10 § 2; Ord. 2005-01 § 2; Ord. 2004-16 §§ 3, 4; Ord. 2004-06 § 3; Ord. 91-29 §§ 3 – 5; Ord. 90-16 § 1; Ord. 78-37 § 5)


13.12.055 Cross-connections.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-04. (Ord. 90-16 § 2)


13.12.060 Sewer user rates and charges.

A. Imposed. There are imposed upon all property owners having a connection with the sewer system of the city, both within and without the corporate limits of the city, and upon all subsequent users, just and equitable charges for service, maintenance, operation and replacement of the sewerage system. The just and equitable charges authorized by this section shall be reviewed annually and specified or amended as necessary by resolution of the city council.

B. How Determined.

1. Customers Inside City. For the purpose of fixing rates and charges for the furnishing of sewer service by the city, each customer within the corporate limits of the city shall be charged a base fee based upon the size of the meter and a commodity fee based on the amount of actual water usage over the maximum allowed consumption included within the base fee.

2. Customers Outside City. For the purpose of fixing rates and charges for the furnishing of sewer service by the city, each customer outside the corporate limits of the city shall be charged a base fee based upon the size of the meter and a commodity fee based on the amount of actual water usage over the maximum allowed consumption included within the base fee. (Ord. 2004-07 § 1; Ord. 89-6 § 1; Ord. 88-15 § 1; Ord. 86-5 § 1; Ord. 79-15 § 1; Ord. 78-37 § 6(1) – (2))


13.12.080 Water user rates and charges.

A. Imposed. There are imposed upon all property owners having a connection with the water system of the city, both within and without the corporate limits of the city, and upon all subsequent users, just and equitable charges for service, maintenance, operation and replacement of the water system. The just and equitable charges authorized by this section shall be reviewed annually and specified or amended as necessary by resolution of the city council.

B. How Determined.

1. Customers Inside City. For the purpose of fixing rates and charges for the furnishing of water and water service by the city, each customer within the corporate limits of the city shall be charged a base fee based upon the size of the meter, and a commodity fee based on the amount of actual water usage over the maximum allowed consumption included within the base fee.

2. Customers Outside City. For the purpose of fixing rates and charges for the furnishing of water and water service by the city, each customer outside the corporate limits of the city shall be charged a base fee based upon the size of the meter, and a commodity fee based on the amount of actual water usage over the maximum allowed consumption included within the base fee.

C. Water Meter Installation Charges. The charges for water meter installation shall be in an amount as specified or amended by council resolution. (Ord. 2004-07 § 2; Ord. 89-6 § 2; Ord. 88-15 § 2; Ord. 86-5 § 2; Ord. 78-37 § 7)


13.12.090 Sewer and/or water – Application for service.

A. Application for sewer and/or water connection shall only be made either in conjunction with a building permit or for an existing structure. Application shall be made to the department of public works upon forms approved by that department.

B. Application approval shall be conditional upon the availability of sewer and/or water as determined by the department of public works, and upon the payment in full of systems development charges. Water and/or sewer application approval shall expire upon building permit expiration, as defined by the Uniform Building Code, whereupon a new application shall be made to and approved by the department of public works. (Ord. 91-29 § 6; Ord. 78-37 § 8)


13.12.100 Billing – Disconnection for nonpayment – Reconnection fees.

A. Water meters shall be read at regular intervals for the preparation of water and sewer bills and as required for the preparation of opening, closing, and special bills. Bills for water and sewer service will be rendered monthly or bimonthly as determined by the city manager. Bills shall be mailed to the person responsible for payment as set out in LCMC 13.12.110, addressed to the last mailing address of the person responsible that is on file with the city for water and sewer account purposes. Closing bill charges shall be calculated from the actual amount of water used or the monthly user charges, whichever is greater. All bills are due and payable on the fifteenth of the month following the date of billing. Water and sewer charges shall be billed together in the same bill in accordance with LCMC 13.12.060 and 13.12.080.

B. A bill shall be delinquent if it is not paid on or before the fifteenth of the month following the date of billing. Delinquency in an account of a customer receiving service outside the city also occurs when the agreement and waiver required under LCMC 13.12.050(B)(4) are not provided within 60 days of an application for change in service, or when the agreement and waiver required under LCMC 13.12.050(B)(5) are not provided within 60 days of notice from the city. If a bill or account becomes delinquent, a delinquency turnoff notice shall be mailed, not later than 30 days after the due date, by first class mail to the person responsible for payment, to “occupant” at the address of the property served, and, if the person responsible for payment is not the owner or owner’s agent, to the last address of the owner or owner’s agent that is on file with the city for water and sewer account purposes. If payment, or agreement and waiver required of customers outside the city, has not been received within 10 days after mailing of the turnoff notice, the city has the authority and the respective departments are authorized to discontinue and disconnect both water and sewer service, or either of them, for delinquency as to either of the charges without further notice.

C. If the city has sent a delinquency turnoff notice and the person responsible for payment, the owner or owner’s agent, or a renter believes the account is not delinquent, then the person shall have the right to have the question of delinquency reviewed by a city representative designated to conduct such reviews. For delinquency under LCMC 13.12.050(B)(4) or (5), the right to review is reserved to the property owner. The person must exercise this right by either a written, telephone, or in person request for review to the city representative, which request must be received by the city representative not later than 5:00 p.m. of the tenth day after mailing of the notice of delinquency. If a person has exercised this right within the time allowed, the person not later than 5:00 p.m. of the fourteenth day after mailing of the notice of delinquency shall deliver to the city representative all information and evidence the person wishes the city representative to consider on the question of delinquency. The city representative thereafter shall review the information and evidence submitted, together with any other information and evidence the representative may have or receive, shall make a decision on the question of delinquency, and shall mail notice of the decision by first class mail to the person responsible for payment, to “occupant” at the address of the property served, and, if the person responsible for payment is not the owner or owner’s agent, to the last address of the owner or owner’s agent that is on file with the city for water and sewer account purposes. If the city representative has determined that the account is delinquent, and if payment, or agreement and waiver required of customers outside the city, has not been received within five days after mailing of notice of the decision, the city thereafter has the authority and the respective departments are authorized to discontinue and disconnect both water and sewer service, or either of them, for delinquency as to either of the charges without further notice. The city representative, for good cause, may extend the deadlines set out in this subsection.

D. A delinquency turnoff notice shall include advice that if the person receiving the notice believes the account is not delinquent, then the person has the right to have the question of delinquency reviewed by the city; that the person may request such a review either in writing, by telephone, or in person; that the city representative must receive the request for review not later than 5:00 p.m. of the tenth day after mailing of the delinquency turnoff notice; and that the city representative must receive all information and evidence the person wishes the city representative to consider on the question of delinquency not later than 5:00 p.m. of the fourteenth day after mailing of the delinquency turnoff notice. The advice shall include the title, office telephone number, mailing address, and office address of the city representative.

E. A reconnection fee shall be charged by the city and collected before service is restored where the service has been discontinued for a delinquent account. An additional fee shall be charged and collected for restoring service if the city staff subsequently removes the water meter, due to delinquency, abandonment, tampering (unauthorized turn-on by the delinquent account holder) or other cause. Increased fees shall also be charged if, pursuant to request, the service is restored after regular working hours or on weekends. The above fees and charges shall be established by resolution of the city council after an opportunity for public comment in accordance with ORS 294.160. The city’s designated representative, in cases of extreme hardship, shall have the discretion of renewing service to a delinquent account upon receipt of a plan, satisfactory to the city representative and, in the case of a renter, approved by the owner, for the payment in installments of the amount of the delinquency. However, interest shall be charged for all delinquent fees and charges from the due dates at the rate of one and one-half percent per month (18 percent per annum) until payment is made in full. If it is necessary to file a lawsuit for collection of any fees or charges, the property owner shall pay, in addition to the amounts owed and accrued interest, reasonable attorney fees and court costs incurred in the collection by the city, its agents, or any assignee of the claim.

F. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter but subject to the requirements of LCMC 13.12.110, the city shall not deny or discontinue service to a new owner or renter of property on account of a delinquency that occurred prior to the new owner or renter becoming an owner or renter of the property.

G. The city’s policy under subsection (B) of this section for disconnection of services due to delinquency shall be the same for all single-family residences, whether owner- or renter-occupied. (Ord. 2019-20 § 3; Ord. 2012-01 § 1; Ord. 2005-05 § 1; Ord. 78-37 § 9)


13.12.110 Responsibility for payment of bills.

A. The property owner shall be responsible for payment of all charges prescribed in this chapter. If the property is rented, the owner shall be billed for water/sewer usage, unless the owner executes an agreement requesting the renter be billed directly and agrees to assume responsibility for all unpaid billings. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to inform the city when the property is occupied by a different renter.

B. The property owner shall be responsible for a $15.00 charge for each name change requested on the account.

C. Any necessary repair to meters damaged by the owner or tenants of serviced premises shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises.

D. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any change in the person to be billed for service shall be subject to the provisions of LCMC 13.12.030(E)(4) and 13.12.050(B)(4), if applicable. This shall not, however, excuse an owner from the owner’s responsibility for payment as set out in this chapter. (Ord. 2005-05 § 2; Ord. 84-3 § 2; Ord. 78-37 § 10)


13.12.120 Requiring deposits.

A. If there is a history of delinquency in payment of water or sewer charges, the city may require, at the discretion of the city’s designated representative, a $25.00 deposit or a deposit equal to charges for one billing period, whichever is greater, before restoring service to a delinquent account turned off for nonpayment. The deposit shall be held by the city to ensure payment of the account.

B. The amount of the deposit shall always be maintained by the person responsible for payment at the above-mentioned amount; and if reduced below that amount by application to any arrearage, the amount of the reduction shall be treated as a delinquency subject to the procedures set out in LCMC 13.12.100(B). (Ord. 2005-05 § 3; Ord. 78-37 § 11)


13.12.130 Liens and other collection enforcement procedures.

Water and sewer use charges shall be a lien against the property served from and after the date of billing and entry on the ledger or other records of the city pertaining to its water/sewer system; and such ledger records or other records (lien docket) shall remain accessible for inspection by anyone interested in ascertaining the amount of such charges against the property. If a person makes a verbal request to the city for information about the status of an account and requests a verbal response, the city shall provide a verbal response within a reasonable time after receiving the request. Whenever a bill for water or sewer service remains unpaid 90 days after it has been rendered, the lien thereby created may be foreclosed in any manner provided for by state law or city ordinances. (Ord. 2005-05 § 4; Ord. 78-37 § 12)


13.12.140 Payment delinquency – Refusal of service request.

Any owner, renter, or other person requesting water or sewer services from the city, who owes the city any moneys and is delinquent with regard to such moneys, shall not be allowed such requested services until the person has entered into an agreement with the city to pay such moneys, in accord with a plan that is satisfactory to the city. (Ord. 2005-05 § 5; Ord. 78-37 § 13)


13.12.150 Abandoned and non-revenue-producing services.

When a service connection to a property has been abandoned or not used for a period of one year or longer, the city may remove it. Once removed, a service shall be restored only upon the customer’s application and payment for a new service connection. Specifically, to restore water and wastewater service, the customer must pay the meter re-install charges, public works permit fee, and all applicable SDCs as if it is a new service connection, [or] the customer must pay the meter re-install charges, public works permit fee, and all intervening base charges, including interest and penalties, if any, for water and sewer service from the commencement of the abandonment period to the reconnection date. Reconnection fees and charges are established by council resolution. (Ord. 2019-20 § 1; Ord. 78-37 § 14)


13.12.160 Sewer availability – Connection required.

A. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C) of this section, in any portion of the city where a sanitary sewer gravity line is installed, the property owner will have six months after the gravity sewer is installed to connect to the gravity sewer line. Within 30 days of connection, any septic tank, cesspools or similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be decommissioned to the satisfaction of the city. 

B. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C) of this section, in any portion of the city where a sanitary sewer low pressure line is installed, the property owner will have 48 months after the low pressure sewer is installed to connect to the low pressure sewer line. Within 30 days of connection, any septic tank, cesspools or similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be decommissioned to the satisfaction of the city. 

C. Notwithstanding the timeframes above, the following exceptions to the general rules above shall apply: 

1. Connection to an available gravity or low pressure sewer line is required immediately upon a documented failure of the existing septic system, cesspool or other sewage disposal system. 

2. Connection to an available gravity or low pressure sewer line is required when any enlargement, alteration, or change of use of an existing building is requested and when such request requires expansion, enlargement or replacement of an existing septic system. Connection is required prior to occupancy of the enlargement, or the altered or changed as to use building.

3. Connection to an available gravity or low pressure sewer line is required prior to any occupancy of any new residential or nonresidential building. “New” includes buildings proposed for redevelopment where the value of repairs exceeds 50 percent of the value of the existing structure. This value trigger is cumulative beginning with the date the sewer is first “made available for connection.”

4. Connection to an available gravity or low pressure sewer line is required when an existing septic system is proposed for replacement or repair in excess of 50 percent of the value of the system or $9,000, whichever is less.

5. Connection to an installed gravity or low pressure sewer line is required within 120 days of the sale of real property containing a dwelling or nonresidential building serviced by an existing septic system, cesspool or other sewage disposal system.

6. Subject to connection triggers in subsections (C)(1) through (5) of this section, connection to an available gravity or low pressure sewer system which is subject to an approved local improvement district is required as set forth in the LID formation resolution.

D. A gravity or low pressure sanitary sewer line is “installed” when the subject line is physically located within any portion of the right-of-way frontage of the subject lot or parcel and the subject line is accepted for service by the city of Lincoln public works department or a contract for such installation has been executed.

E. A gravity or low pressure sanitary sewer line is “available” or “made available for connection” when the subject line is accepted for service by the city of Lincoln City public works department and installed in public right-of-way or easement or said line is within 300 feet of the subject lot or parcel property line and the line is accessible via public right-of-way or a public or private utility easement. (Ord. 2015-14 § 1; Ord. 93-9 § 1; Ord. 91-29 § 7; Ord. 88-15 § 3(a); Ord. 78-37 § 15(1))


13.12.165 Improper discharge prohibited.

All wastewater and sewage from plumbing fixtures or waste-holding tanks shall only be discharged into a sewer system or alternate sewage disposal system approved by the Environmental Quality Commission or Department of Environmental Quality under ORS Chapters 468, 468A and 468B. (Ord. 2015-14 § 1)


13.12.170 Failure to connect – Penalty – Alternative remedies.

A. Each day that any owner and/or occupant of any building fails to connect to available sewer shall be deemed a separate offense.

B. Any owner or occupant of any building that violates any of the provisions of LCMC 13.12.160 and 13.12.165 shall be punished under the provisions of Chapter 1.16 LCMC. Any violation of this chapter shall be classified as a Class A violation. 

C. The city may, as an alternative to other remedies that are legally available, institute injunctive, abatement or other appropriate proceedings to enjoin temporarily or permanently, prevent, abate or remove a building that is occupied and is violating LCMC 13.12.160 or 13.12.165. (Ord. 2015-14 § 1; Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 88-15 § 3(b); Ord. 78-37 § 15(2))


13.12.180 Collection of rates and charges.

The finance department of the city is directed to collect the rates and charges provided for in this chapter from each user of the sewage facilities or of water from the city system. (Ord. 78-37 § 16)


13.12.190 Wastewater treatment plant capital fund.

All moneys in the wastewater treatment plant capital fund shall be utilized for capital improvements to the sanitary sewer system, including buildings, construction, development and expansion of the sewer system, for extra-capacity facilities and for any other unenumerated purpose consistent herewith. Design and administrative costs are a part of extra-capacity facilities. The design and administrative costs necessary for the work, including any costs associated with developing, implementing or revising a capital improvement plan for the sanitary sewer system, may be paid with the revenue. No systems development charge revenue collected as a result of system development charges imposed on or after July 1, 1991, shall be deposited in the wastewater treatment plant capital fund. (Ord. 91-29 § 8; Ord. 78-37 § 17)


13.12.200 Water plant capital fund.

All moneys in the water plant capital fund shall be utilized for capital improvements to the water system, including buildings, construction, development and expansion of the water system, for extra-capacity facilities and for any other unenumerated purpose consistent herewith. Design and administrative costs are a part of extra-capacity facilities. The design and administrative costs necessary for the work, including any costs associated with developing, implementing or revising a capital improvement plan for the water system, may be paid with the revenue. No systems development charge revenue collected as a result of system development charges imposed on or after July 1, 1991, shall be deposited in the water plant capital fund. (Ord. 91-29 § 9; Ord. 78-37 § 18)


13.12.210 City liability.

The city shall not be liable for damage to a customer’s property which may result when water service is turned on, discontinued or interrupted for improvements or repairs. (Ord. 78-37 § 19)


Chapter 13.16 WATER SYSTEM USE REGULATIONS

Sections:

13.16.010    Definition.

13.16.020    Prohibited acts.

13.16.030    Violation – Penalty – Alternative remedies.


13.16.010 Definition.

As used in this chapter, the term “person” means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association. (Ord. 78-43 § 1)


13.16.020 Prohibited acts.

A. As provided for in ORS 448.300, no person shall do any act which pollutes or is likely to impair the purity of the municipal water supply.

B. Acts prohibited by subsection (A) of this section shall include but not be limited to:

1. The injury to or destruction of a municipal water facility or appurtenances thereto;

2. The depositing of petroleum products; industrial wastes; animal carcasses or parts thereof; excrement; sewage; putrid, decaying or deleterious substances; garbage, litter or other noxious or unwholesome matter in waters or on property owned by the city, as provided for by ORS 448.295. (Ord. 78-43 § 2)


13.16.030 Violation – Penalty – Alternative remedies.

A. Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be sanctioned under the provisions of the city’s violation ordinance (Chapter 1.16 LCMC). Any violation shall be classified as a Class B violation. Any conviction shall bear an assessment of $500.00. Each day that any person violates any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense.

B. The city may, as an alternative to other remedies that are legally available, institute an injunctive, abatement or other appropriate proceeding to enjoin temporarily or permanently, prevent, abate or remove any violation. (Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 78-43 § 3)


Chapter 13.18 CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL

Sections:

13.18.005    Responsibility.

13.18.010    Purpose/adoption of rules.

13.18.020    Definitions.

13.18.030    Application and responsibilities.

13.18.040    Cross connections regulated.

13.18.050    Backflow prevention assembly requirements.

13.18.060    New construction.

13.18.070    Retrofitting.

13.18.080    Irrigation systems.

13.18.090    Thermal expansion.

13.18.100    Mobile units.

13.18.110    Installation requirements.

13.18.120    Pressure loss.

13.18.130    Fire suppression systems.

13.18.140    Temporary meters and hydrant valves.

13.18.150    Plumbing code.

13.18.160    Right-of-way encroachment.

13.18.170    Access to premises.

13.18.180    Annual testing and repairs.

13.18.190    Maintenance of assemblies.

13.18.200    Responsibilities of backflow prevention assembly testers.

13.18.210    Costs of compliance.

13.18.220    Recovery of costs.

13.18.230    Termination of service.

13.18.240    Falsifying information.

13.18.250    Violation citation/alternative remedies.


13.18.005 Responsibility.

Pursuant to Chapter 333, Division 061, of the Oregon Administrative Rules, it is the responsibility of the city of Lincoln City to protect the public water system from pollution and contamination by instituting and enforcing a cross connection control program. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)


13.18.010 Purpose/adoption of rules.

The purpose of this chapter and the city’s cross connection control program is to safeguard public health and protect the water supply and distribution system of the city of Lincoln City from contamination or pollution due to any existing or potential cross connections. Oregon Administrative Rules (Chapter 333, Division 061) require water suppliers to “conduct an active program for systematically identifying and controlling cross connections.” The city of Lincoln City hereby adopts by this reference and shall administer and enforce OAR 333-061, including OAR 333-061-0070, 333-061-0071, 333-061-0072, 333-061-0073 and 333-061-0074 as now constituted. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)


13.18.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. If a word or term used in this chapter is not contained in the following list, its definition, or other technical terms used, shall have the meanings or definitions listed in the Oregon Administrative Rules, Chapter 333, or the most recent edition of the Manual of Cross-Connection Control published by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California (“USC”).

“Approved air gap” means a physical separation between the free-flowing discharge end of a potable supply pipeline and an open or nonpressurized receiving vessel. This separation must be at least twice the inside diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically above the overflow rim of the vessel, and in no case less than one inch, and in accord with Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code, as now constituted.

“Approved backflow prevention assembly” or “backflow assembly” or “assembly” means an assembly to counteract backpressure and/or prevent backsiphonage. A reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly, reduced pressure principle-detector backflow prevention assembly, double check valve backflow prevention assembly, double check-detector backflow prevention assembly, pressure vacuum breaker backsiphonage prevention assembly, or spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker backsiphonage prevention assembly, of a make, model, orientation, and size approved by the Oregon Health Authority – Drinking Water Program (OHA). Assemblies listed in the currently approved backflow prevention assemblies list developed by the University of Southern California, Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, or other testing laboratories using equivalent testing methods, are considered approved by OHA.

“Auxiliary supply” means any water source or system other than the city of Lincoln City water system.

“Backflow” means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the distributing pipes of the Lincoln City water system from any sources other than its intended sources. Backflow is caused by backsiphonage or backpressure.

“Certified backflow assembly tester” shall mean a person who has successfully completed and maintains all requirements as established by the Oregon Health Authority to be a tester in the state of Oregon.

“Certified cross connection control specialist” shall mean a person who has successfully completed and maintains all requirements as established by the Oregon Health Authority to be a specialist in the state of Oregon.

“City” shall mean the city of Lincoln City.

“City water system” shall refer to and mean the city of Lincoln City water system, which shall include wells, treatment mechanisms or processes, pumping stations, reservoirs, supply trunk or feeder lines, service lines, meters and all other appurtenances, device lines and items necessary to the operation of the system and to supply water service to individual property or premises and shall include the city of Lincoln City potable water with which the system is supplied.

“Contamination” means the entry into or presence in a public water supply system of any substance which may be deleterious to health and/or quality of the water, including but not limited to any physical, chemical, biological, or radiological substance or matter in water that creates a health hazard.

“Cross connection” means any actual or potential unprotected connection or structural arrangement between the public potable water system and any other source or system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the potable system any used water, industrial fluid, gas, or substances other than the intended potable water with which the system is supplied. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, or other temporary or permanent devices through which, or because of which, backflow can occur are considered to be cross connections. Examples include any physical arrangement where a potable water supply is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other non-drinkable water system or auxiliary system, sewer, drain conduit, swimming pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, swamp coolers or any other device which contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage or other liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water system as a result of backflow.

“Degree of hazard” means the nonhealth hazard or health hazard classification that shall be assigned to all actual or potential cross connections.

“Director” means the director of the public works department or his/her designee.

“Double check valve backflow prevention assembly” means an assembly of two independently acting approved check valves, including tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient seated test cocks. This assembly is designed to protect against a nonhealth hazard, under both backpressure and backsiphonage conditions. “Double check detector assembly” or “DCDA” means an assembly which consists of two independently operating check valves which are spring-loaded or weighted. The assembly comes complete with a shut-off valve on each side of the checks, as well as test cocks to test the checks for tightness. It shall also be provided with a factory bypass arrangement with a meter and a minimum of an approved double check assembly.

“Health hazard” (contamination) means an impairment of the quality of the water that could create an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids, waste, or other substances.

“In-premises protection” means the appropriate backflow prevention within the consumer’s water system at or near the point at which the actual or potential cross connection exists.

“Mobile units” shall mean units that are temporary in nature, connecting to the water system through a legally permitted hydrant, hosebib, or other appurtenance of a permanent nature that is part of the city of Lincoln City water system or a permanent water service to premises. Examples can include but are not limited to the following: water trucks, pesticide applicator vehicles, chemical mixing units or tanks, waste hauler’s trucks or units, sewer cleaning equipment, carpet or steam cleaning equipment other than homeowner use, rock quarry or asphalt/concrete batch plants or any other mobile equipment or vessel that poses a threat of backflow in the city of Lincoln City water system.

“Nonhealth hazard” (pollution) means an impairment of the quality of the water to a degree that does not create a hazard to the public health, but does adversely affect the aesthetic qualities of such water for potable use.

“OAR” shall mean Oregon Administrative Rule.

“OHA” shall mean Oregon Health Authority.

“Person(s)” means any individual, corporation, association, firm, partnership, municipal, state or federal agency, or joint stock company, including any receiver, special master, trustee, assignee, or other similar representative thereof.

“Pollutant” means a substance that creates an impairment of the quality of the water to a degree which does not create a hazard to the public health, but which does adversely affect the aesthetic qualities of the water.

“Potable water” or “safe drinking water”’ means safe drinking water which has sufficiently low concentrations of microbiological, inorganic chemical, organic chemical, radiological or physical substances so that individuals drinking such water at normal levels of consumption will not be exposed to disease organisms or other substances which may produce harmful physiological effects.

“Premises” means any piece of property to which water service is provided, including, but not limited to, all improvements, mobile structures and other structures located upon it.

“Premises isolation” means the practice of protecting the public water supply from contamination or pollution by installing backflow prevention assemblies at, or near, the point of delivery where the water supply enters the premises. Premises isolation does not guarantee protection to persons on the premises.

“Reduced pressure detector assembly” or “RPDA” shall mean a specifically designed assembly composed of a line size approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. The meter shall register accurately for only very low rates of flow up to three gallons per minute and shall show a registration for all rates of flow. This assembly is designed to protect against a nonhealth hazard or a health hazard, under both backpressure and backsiphonage conditions.

“Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly” or “reduced pressure principle assembly” or “RP assembly” shall mean an assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operated, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves, and, at the same time, below the first check valve. The assembly shall include properly located test cocks and two resilient seated tightly closing shut-off valves. This assembly is designed to protect against a nonhealth hazard or a health hazard, under both backpressure and backsiphonage conditions.

“Resident” means a person or persons living within the area(s) served by the city of Lincoln City water system.

“Retrofitting” means to furnish a service connection with parts or equipment made available after the time of construction or assembly installation.

“Specialist” means an Oregon Health Authority-certified cross connection specialist, either employed with the city of Lincoln City or contracted by the city of Lincoln City.

“Spill resistant pressure vacuum breaker backsiphonage prevention assembly” means an assembly containing an independently operating, internally loaded check valve and independently operating loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly is to be equipped with a properly located resilient seated test cock, a properly located bleed/vent valve, and tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly. This assembly is designed to protect against a nonhealth hazard or a health hazard under a backsiphonage condition only.

“Submerged heads” means irrigation sprinkling or delivery devices that are located below the surface of the landscaped area in which they are installed.

“Supervisor” shall mean the public works director or designee.

“Thermal expansion” means the pressure increase due to a rise in water temperature that occurs in water piping systems when such systems become “closed” by the installation of a backflow prevention assembly or other means, and will not allow for expansion beyond that point of installation.

“Written program plan” or “WPP” shall mean the city’s current cross connection control written program plan. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)


13.18.030 Application and responsibilities.

This chapter applies throughout the city of Lincoln City water system and to every premises and property served by the city of Lincoln City water system, including those properties served outside the city limits. It applies to all premises, regardless of date of connection to the city of Lincoln City water system. Every owner, occupant or person in control of any premises served with city water is responsible for compliance with the terms and provisions contained in this chapter. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)


13.18.040 Cross connections regulated.

A. No cross connections shall be created, installed, used or maintained within the area(s) served by the city of Lincoln City water system, except in accordance with this chapter.

B. The city certified cross connection control specialist shall carry out or cause surveys to be carried out to determine if any actual or potential cross connection exists. If necessary, an assembly commensurate with the degree of hazard will be required at the service connection.

C. The owner, occupant or person in control of any given premises is responsible for all cross connection control within the premises.

D. All premises found in Table 48 referenced in OAR 333-061-0070, as now constituted, shall have installed a reduced pressure backflow assembly (RPBA) or an approved air gap at the service connection for premises isolation in accordance with OAR 333-061-0070 and this chapter. In lieu of premises isolation, the RPBA or air gap may be installed as point of use isolation, as approved by the city cross connection control specialist.

E. It is the responsibility of the property owner/occupant to purchase, install, test, repair and maintain all backflow assemblies.

F. If there is a change in ownership of any and all property within the city’s service area, it shall be the responsibility of the new owner to determine that all assemblies are in compliance with this chapter.

G. The owner, occupant or person in control of any given premises is responsible to notify the city certified cross connection control specialist if any chemical or substance is added to the water at that premises.

H. The use of any type of chemical spray attachment connected to the premises’ plumbing, including garden hose fertilizers and pesticide applicators, is not allowed within the city of Lincoln City water system without proper protection from the potential of backflow occurring.

I. The use of any type of radiator flush kits attached to the premises’ plumbing is not allowed within the city of Lincoln City water system without proper protection from backflow occurring. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)


13.18.050 Backflow prevention assembly requirements.

A certified cross connection control specialist employed by or under contract with the city of Lincoln City shall determine the type of backflow assemblies to be installed within the city of Lincoln City water system. All assemblies shall be installed at the service connection unless it is determined by the cross connection specialist and approved by the director that in-premises protection would be adequate. An approved assembly shall be required in each of the following circumstances, but the authority of the specialist is in no way limited to the following circumstances:

A. In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to permit entry into potable water system, the potable water system shall be protected by an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly.

B. When the nature and extent of any activity at a premises, or the materials used in connection with any activity at premises, or materials stored at a premises, could contaminate or pollute the potable water supply.

C. When a premises has one or more cross connections, as that term is defined in LCMC 13.18.020.

D. When internal cross connections present are not correctable.

E. When intricate plumbing arrangements are present making it impractical to ascertain whether cross connections exist.

F. When the premises has a repeated history of cross connections being established or reestablished.

G. When entry to the premises is restricted so that surveys for cross connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency to assure cross connections do not exist.

H. When materials are being used such that, if backflow should occur, a health hazard could result.

I. When an appropriate cross connection survey report form has not been filed with the Lincoln City cross connection specialist.

J. If an in-premises assembly has not been tested or repaired as required by this chapter, the installation of a reduced pressure principle assembly will be required at the service connection.

K. There is piping or equipment for conveying liquids other than potable city of Lincoln City water and that piping or other equipment is under pressure and installed and operated in a manner that could cause a cross connection.

L. Wherever there are any water return systems used on the premises, including but not limited to reclaimed water, harvested rain water, storm water recovery systems, ground water recovery systems, treated wastewater re-use systems, used water return systems, or ditch water, or irrigation water.

M. Where there is a fire protection service or irrigation service on the premises.

N. When there is a premises with an auxiliary water supply which is interconnected to the city of Lincoln City water service or supply system.

O. When installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is deemed by a specialist to be necessary to accomplish the purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)


13.18.060 New construction.

A. On all new nonresidential construction, an approved backflow assembly shall be installed at the service connection. The type of the assembly will be commensurate with the degree of hazard as determined by a specialist.

B. When a building is constructed on commercial premises, and the end use of the building is not determined or could change, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed at the service connection to provide protection of the public water supply in the event of the most hazardous use of the building.

C. A minimum of a double check valve assembly is required to be installed at the service connection if:

1. The water meter is two-inch or larger;

2. The city specialist determines that the backflow potential warrants installation of such a device. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)


13.18.070 Retrofitting.

Retrofitting shall be required at all service connections where an actual or potential cross connection exists, and wherever else the director or city cross connection specialist deems retrofitting necessary to comply with OAR Chapter 333, Division 061, as now constituted, and this chapter. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)


13.18.080 Irrigation systems.

All irrigation systems shall be protected with a double check backflow assembly. In the event any system is equipped with an injector system, a reduced pressure principle assembly will be required at the service connection. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)


13.18.090 Thermal expansion.

If a closed system has been created by the installation of a backflow prevention assembly, or other appurtenances, it is the responsibility of the property owner, the occupant, or person in control of the property to eliminate the possibility of damage from thermal expansion in accordance with the Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code as adopted by LCMC Title 15. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)


13.18.100 Mobile units.

Any mobile unit or apparatus, as defined in LCMC 13.18.020, which uses the water from any premises within the city of Lincoln City water system, shall first obtain a permit from the city of Lincoln City and be inspected to assure that approved backflow protection (e.g., an approved air gap or reduced pressure principle assembly) is installed on the unit. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)


13.18.110 Installation requirements.

A. All backflow prevention assembly installations shall follow the requirements as stipulated by the city in this chapter and OAR Chapter 333, Division 061, as now constituted, and the Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code, as now constituted.

B. If the premises isolation assembly is allowed to be installed at an alternate location, per OAR 333-061-0070(8), as now constituted, the city must have access to the assembly. No connections can be made between the meter and the backflow assembly.

C. If a premises listed on Table 48 (OAR 333-061-0070), as now constituted, is allowed by the city to have the required RPBA or approved air gap installed at an alternate location, the city may require a DCVA to be installed at the service connection.

D. The type of backflow prevention assembly required shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard that exists and must, at all times, meet the standards of the Oregon Health Authority. All backflow prevention assemblies required under this section shall be of a type and model approved by the OHA.

E. Backflow assembly installations must be performed by a state of Oregon licensed plumber, a state of Oregon licensed landscape contractor with a “limited backflow device installation” endorsement, or private property owners performing work on their own property.

F. All backflow assembly installers must obtain a state of Oregon Building Code plumbing permit and a city “permit for backflow assembly installation” prior to performing an installation. Failure of an installer to obtain a city permit prior to installation shall be considered a violation of this chapter and may result in penalties up to and including termination of water service. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)


13.18.120 Pressure loss.

Any decrease in water pressure caused by the installation of a backflow assembly shall not be the responsibility of the city of Lincoln City, its officers or employees. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)


13.18.130 Fire suppression systems.

A. Stand-alone fire suppression systems shall be protected commensurate with the degree of hazard as determined by the specialist.

B. An approved double check detector assembly shall be the minimum protection on all new fire sprinkler systems using piping material that is not approved for potable water use, and/or that does not provide for periodic flow-through.

C. A reduced pressure principle detector assembly must be installed, if any solution other than potable water can be introduced into the sprinkler system.

D. Retrofitting on fire sprinkler systems will be required in each of the following circumstances:

1. Where improper maintenance has occurred;

2. On all high hazard or health hazard systems;

3. Wherever a specialist deems necessary;

4. Wherever required by the OAR 333, Division 061, as now constituted.

In the event an assembly is installed on a designated lateral, a detector assembly commensurate with the degree of hazard will be required. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)


13.18.140 Temporary meters and hydrant valves.

Backflow protection will be required on all temporary meters and hydrant valves before any use. The type of assembly will be commensurate with the degree of hazard and will be determined on a case-by-case basis by the director and city cross connection specialist. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)


13.18.150 Plumbing code.

As a condition of water service, customers shall install, maintain, and operate their piping and plumbing systems in accordance with the current Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code. If there is a conflict between this chapter and the Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code, the more stringent requirements shall apply. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)


13.18.160 Right-of-way encroachment.

Nothing in this chapter authorizes encroachment into city right-of-way without an appropriate permit from the city public works department, including payment of appropriate fees and charges. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)


13.18.170 Access to premises.

Authorized personnel of the city of Lincoln City, with proper identification and sufficient notice, shall have access during reasonable hours to all parts of a premises and within the structure to which water is supplied. However, if any owner, occupant or person in control refuses authorized personnel access to a premises, or to the interior of a structure, during these hours for inspection, a reduced pressure principle assembly must be installed at the service connection to that premises. City personnel and contractors are expressly authorized to pursue issuance of an administrative inspection warrant in the event consent to enter the premises or structures to inspect is refused. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)


13.18.180 Annual testing and repairs.

All backflow prevention assemblies installed within the area(s) served by the city of Lincoln City shall be tested immediately upon installation, and at least annually thereafter by an Oregon Health Authority certified backflow assembly tester or the city’s specialist. All such assemblies found not functioning properly shall be promptly repaired or replaced at the expense of the owner, occupant or person in control of the premises. In the event an assembly is moved, repaired or replaced it must be retested immediately. All repairs on backflow assemblies within the city of Lincoln City service area must be performed according to all state and county regulations. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)


13.18.190 Maintenance of assemblies.

Backflow prevention assemblies shall be maintained, tested and repaired in accordance with the requirements set out in this chapter, OAR 333, Division 061, as now constituted, and any and all other applicable state agencies’ regulations. The assembly owner is responsible for protecting their assembly from freezing and vandalism or other damage.

In the event an assembly is not properly tested and repaired, the city of Lincoln City will have the assembly tested and repaired and apply all costs associated with the testing and repair to the assembly owner’s water bill or the water service will be terminated as permitted by OAR 333, Division 061, as now constituted. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)


13.18.200 Responsibilities of backflow prevention assembly testers.

A. All backflow assembly testers operating within the city of Lincoln City water system service area shall be certified in accordance with all applicable current regulations of the Oregon Health Authority and/or Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code and must abide by the requirements of this chapter.

B. Persons certified as backflow assembly testers shall agree to abide by all requirements of the United States Occupational Safety and Health Administration (“OSHA”) and Oregon Occupational Safety and Health Administration (“OR-OSHA”).

C. It is the responsibility of backflow assembly testers to submit records of all backflow assembly test reports to the city of Lincoln City within 10 days of completing the test. Test report forms shall be complete, legible, and in a form and manner acceptable to the cross connection specialist and the director. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)


13.18.210 Costs of compliance.

A. All costs associated with purchase, installation, surveys, testing, replacement, maintenance, parts and repairs of the backflow prevention assembly, and all costs associated with enforcement of this chapter, are the financial responsibility of the property owner, occupant, or other person in control of the premises.

B. The fees for the inspection and test will be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)


13.18.220 Recovery of costs.

Any water customer violating any of the provisions of this chapter and who causes damage to or impairs the city of Lincoln City water system, including but not limited to allowing contamination, pollution, any other solution or used water to enter the city of Lincoln City water system, shall be liable to the city of Lincoln City for any expense, loss or damage caused by such violation. The city of Lincoln City shall collect from the violator the cost incurred by the city of Lincoln City for any cleaning, purifying, repair or replacement work or any other expenses caused by the violation. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall result in the termination of service.

All costs associated with any disconnect or reconnect fees resulting from the enforcement of this chapter are the sole responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)


13.18.230 Termination of service.

A. The city shall have the authority to discontinue water service to a premises for any violation of OAR 333, Division 061, including but not limited to the following reasons, as specifically authorized by OAR 333, Division 061, as now constituted:

1. Failure to remove or eliminate an existing unprotected or potential cross connection;

2. Failure to install an approved backflow prevention assembly as required;

3. Failure to maintain an approved backflow prevention assembly;

4. Failure to conduct the required testing of an approved backflow prevention assembly; or

5. Failure to submit a city “permit for backflow assembly installation” prior to installing a backflow prevention assembly.

B. In the case of an extreme emergency or where an immediate threat to life or public health is found to exist, termination of water service to the premises shall be immediate.

C. The city may, at the property owner’s expense, in lieu of termination of service, provide for the installation of a reduced pressure assembly or other approved backflow device in the discretion of the cross connection specialist at the meter. All future testing, freeze protection, maintenance and repair of the assembly will be the responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)


13.18.240 Falsifying information.

Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation, record, report or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any backflow assembly, device or method required under this chapter shall be subject to civil and/or criminal penalties provided by state law. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)


13.18.250 Violation citation/alternative remedies.

A. Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be sanctioned under the provisions of Chapter 1.16 LCMC. Any violation shall be classified as a Class B violation. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a conviction shall bear a minimum fine of $500.00. Each day that any person violates any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense.

B. The city may, as an alternative to other remedies that are legally available, institute an injunctive, abatement or other appropriate proceeding to enjoin temporarily or permanently, prevent, abate or remove any violation. (Ord. 2017-04 § 1)




Chapter 13.20 SEWER SYSTEM USE REGULATIONS

Sections:

13.20.010    Certain wastes prohibited in all sewers.

13.20.020    Restrictions on wastes permitted in sanitary sewers.

13.20.030    Industrial waste – Restrictions.

13.20.040    Preliminary treatment facilities.

13.20.050    Acceptance of extra strength industrial waste.

13.20.060    Extra strength industrial waste – Basis for charge – Measurement.

13.20.070    Extra strength charges – Base rate.

13.20.080    Extra strength charges – Composite strength rate (city sampling equipment).

13.20.090    Extra strength charges – Average strength rate (occupant’s equipment).

13.20.100    Special extra strength charges.

13.20.110    Extra strength charges – Billing.

13.20.120    Resampling requests – Fees.

13.20.130    Industrial wastes – Limitation or termination of acceptance.

13.20.140    Industrial wastes – Sampling procedures.

13.20.141    Grease traps – Purpose.

13.20.142    Grease traps – Definitions.

13.20.143    Grease traps – New or altered food service establishments.

13.20.144    Grease traps – Existing food service establishments.

13.20.145    Grease traps – Design, installation, operation, and maintenance.

13.20.146    Grease traps – Inspection and monitoring.

13.20.147    Grease traps – Notice of noncompliance – Response – Compliance.

13.20.148    Grease traps – Surcharge.

13.20.149    Grease traps – Responsible persons – Remedies for violations.

13.20.150    Enforcement authority.

13.20.151    Food waste disposal units in food service establishments.

13.20.160    Violation – Penalty – Alternative remedies.


13.20.010 Certain wastes prohibited in all sewers.

It is unlawful for any person directly or indirectly using public sewer facilities inside the city or under city control to discharge or cause to be discharged into any pipe, main, conduit, manhole, street inlet, gutter or aperture of the public sewer system any of the following:

A. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, alcohols, fuel oil, mineral oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas, except in emergency when directed by the director of public works or the chief of police;

B. Any solid or viscous substance capable of obstructing sewage flow or of interfering with the operation of the sewage works or treatment facilities. These substances include, but are not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, stone dust, dirt, gravel, mud, straw, insoluble shavings, sawdust, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, creosote, plastics, wood, animal paunch contents, offal, blood, bones, meat trimmings and wastes, fish or fowl heads, entrails, trimmings and wastes, lard, tallow, baking dough, chemical residues, paint residues, vegetable waste bulk solids, hair and fleshings, or plastic or paper dishes, cups or food or beverage containers, whether whole or ground;

C. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance which either singly or by interaction with other wastes is capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or preventing entry into a sewer or pump station;

D. Any radioactive material, except radioactive wastes discharged into the sewer system in time of disaster or civil defense emergency under direction of authorized federal, state or local officials, or radioactive wastes of short half-life which may be discharged into the sewer system upon permit issued by the State Health Division and approved by the director of public works, and which, in the determination of the director of public works, will not be hazardous to structures, equipment or personnel working on sewage disposal or sewer repair, or to receiving waters;

E. Any material from a cesspool or septic tank, except such material received at a city treatment plant under city contract. (Ord. 84 § 1, 1969)


13.20.020 Restrictions on wastes permitted in sanitary sewers.

It is unlawful for any person to discharge or permit the discharge of waste into any public sanitary sewer under city control or into any sewer which discharges into a public sewer under city control, which waste has any of the following characteristics:

A. Any garbage that has not been properly comminuted to one-fourth inch or less in any dimension;

B. Any water or waste which contains in excess of 100 milligrams per liter, or a lesser amount as fixed by the director of public works for a particular establishment, of fat waste, oil or grease, whether or not emulsified, ether-soluble matter, or any substance which may solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures above 32 degrees Fahrenheit;

C. Any soluble waste or wastewaters having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0 or having any other corrosive property which reasonably could be hazardous to structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage disposal and sewer repair divisions of the city, such as, but not limited to, battery or plating acids and wastes, copper sulfate, chromium salts and compounds, or salt brine;

D. Any water or waste containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to create any hazard to the receiving waters or storm water overflows or to the effluent of the sewage treatment plant. Liquids containing copper, zinc and similar toxic substances at the point of discharge to the city sewer or in combination with the total sewage treatment plant flow shall not exceed the following limits:

	 	Entry Into Sewer (mg/l)	Sewage Treatment Plant (mg/l)

	Arsenic	1.0	0.3

	Cadmium	1.0	0.3

	Chromium (Total) 	5.0	1.0

	Copper	2.0	0.3

	Cyanide	1.0 	0.2

	Iron	10.0	2.0

	Lead	2.0	0.2

	Nickel	3.0	0.5

	Phenols or Cresols	1.0	0.3

	Zinc	4.0	1.0

E. Any material which exerts or causes:

1. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids such as, but not limited to, fuller’s earth, lime slurries or lime residue;

2. Unusual concentrations of dissolved solids such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride, calcium chloride or sodium sulfate;

3. Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye, wastes or vegetable tanning solutions; or

4. Unusual biochemical oxygen demand;

F. Any water or wastes which the director of public works determines will, by itself or with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases; or develop color of undesirable intensity; or form suspended solids in objectionable concentration; or create any other condition deleterious to structures or treatment processes;

G. Waters or wastes containing substances in such concentrations that they are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of any other agency having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. (Ord. 2014-04 § 1; Ord. 84 § 2, 1969)


13.20.030 Industrial waste – Restrictions.

A. It is unlawful to discharge or permit the discharge of industrial wastes into a public sewer under city control or into a sewer discharging into the city sewer system unless prior approval of the director of public works is obtained, if such industrial wastes have any of the following characteristics:

1. A five-day, 20-degree Celsius biochemical oxygen demand of more than 300 milligrams per liter or an immediate oxygen demand of more than 100 milligrams per liter;

2. A suspended solids content of more than 350 milligrams per liter;

3. A chloride demand of more than 20 milligrams per liter;

4. A maximum instantaneous rate of flow exceeding 10 percent of the capacity of the available lateral or appropriate trunk sewer;

5. Characteristics or constituents exceeding the maximums fixed in LCMC 13.20.020.

B. If any industrial wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to a public sewer, which wastes contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (A) of this section or exceed the maximums set forth in LCMC 13.20.020, and which in the judgment of the director of public works may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or create malodors, the director of public works may:

1. Reject the waste; or

2. Require preliminary treatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewer; and to this end may:

a. Require reduction of the five-day 20-degree Celsius biochemical oxygen demand to less than 300 milligrams per liter and the immediate biochemical oxygen demand to less than 100 milligrams per liter, and/or

b. Require reduction of the suspended solids content to less than 350 milligrams per liter, and/or

c. Require regulation of the quantities and/or rates of discharge; or

3. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes, if the commercial or industrial occupancy requests such arrangement in lieu of preliminary treatment or to reduce the extent of preliminary treatment, and the director of public works finds that city treatment after discharge is feasible.

C. Any person aggrieved by a determination or decision of the director of public works under subsection (B) of this section may appeal therefrom by filing a notice of appeal in writing with the common council within 10 days after such decision or determination. (Ord. 84 § 3, 1969)


13.20.040 Preliminary treatment facilities.

A. Plans, specifications and other information relating to construction or installation of preliminary treatment facilities required by the director of public works under this chapter shall be submitted to the director of public works and to the Environmental Quality Commission, as required by the laws of the state. No construction or installation thereof shall commence until written approval of such plans and specifications by the director of public works and the Environmental Quality Commission is obtained. No person, by virtue of such approval, shall be relieved of compliance with other laws of the city and of the state of Oregon relating to construction and to permits. Every facility for the preliminary treatment or handling of industrial wastes shall be constructed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, and shall be installed and maintained at the expense of the occupant of the property discharging the industrial wastes.

B. When the occupant of any property is required by the director of public works to install facilities for the preliminary treatment of industrial wastes, he shall comply with such requirement within 30 days from the date of notice of such requirement. The director of public works may extend such time for reasonable cause. If a preliminary treatment facility is not completed and placed in operation within said 30 days or its extension by the director of public works, he may shut off any water service to such occupant, and sewer service to the premises may be summarily terminated.

C. Every facility for preliminary treatment or handling of industrial wastes shall be subject to inspection by the director of public works, who shall determine whether or not such facility is being maintained in effective operation.

D. Notwithstanding installation and operation of a preliminary treatment facility, no person shall discharge or permit the discharge into a public sewer under city control of any waste prohibited under the provisions of this chapter.

E. If the director of public works finds that the occupant of property who controls a preliminary treatment facility fails to maintain such facility in effective operation, he may shut off water service to the occupancy; or if there is not such city water service, then sewer service to the occupancy may be summarily discontinued until the facility is put back into effective operation.

F. Any person constructing a preliminary treatment facility, as required by the director of public works, shall also install at his own expense and maintain a sampling manhole for checking and investigating the discharge from the preliminary treatment facility to the public sewer. Such sampling manhole shall be placed in a location designated by the director of public works and in accordance with specifications approved by the director of public works. (Ord. 84 § 4, 1969)


13.20.050 Acceptance of extra strength industrial waste.

When the director of public works determines that industrial wastes from particular property require preliminary treatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewer, and the commercial or industrial occupancy requests the director of public works to accept the industrial wastes on the basis of payment to the city of the extra strength industrial wastes charges in lieu of preliminary treatment or to reduce the extent of preliminary treatment, and the director of public works also finds that the characteristics of the industrial wastes exceeding the limitations set forth in LCMC 13.20.030 would not have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters and will not create a hazard to life or create malodors, then the director of public works may permit acceptance of the industrial wastes upon application of the occupant of the commercial or industrial occupancy and payment of the charges set forth in LCMC 13.20.070 through 13.20.100 to cover city costs in connection with such wastes. Acceptance of such industrial wastes shall in no way relieve the occupant of the requirements of this chapter. The director of public works may require the occupant to reduce the biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) or the suspended solids concentration, or both, to acceptable levels for the imposition of the extra strength industrial wastes charges. The director of public works may require the commercial or industrial occupancy to install at its expense a sampling manhole in the location designated by the director of public works and according to specifications approved by the director of public works. (Ord. 84 § 5(1), 1969)


13.20.060 Extra strength industrial waste – Basis for charge – Measurement.

A. Extra strength industrial wastes charges shall be made for five-day, 20-degree Celsius BOD in excess of 300 milligrams per liter and suspended solids in excess of 350 milligrams per liter. If the entire water supply causing industrial waste is separated from the water supply for domestic sewage or waters not discharged to a sewer, the industrial waste charge shall be based upon the metered volume of water used for the commercial or industrial occupancy separated from the domestic sewage and nonwastewater. If the industrial waste is not separately supplied or separately metered, then the industrial waste charge shall be based upon either the metered volume of water used from public and/or private water supplies or the measured volume of total sewage, with appropriate allowances for the volume of domestic sewage at permissible limits of strength and allowance for other waters not discharged to the sewer. The domestic sewage allowance shall be based on 1,000 cubic feet per month for each nine employees using the sanitary facilities. All measurement methods shall first be approved by the director of public works before any consideration of extra strength industrial waste charges. The methods of determining sewage strength are set forth in subsection (B) of this section; rates of charge are set forth in LCMC 13.20.070 through 13.20.100.

B. Sewage samples are to be taken for five days by authorized representatives of the director of public works. The samples taken will be either grab samples or composite samples. A grab sample consists of a portion of sewage all taken at one time and from one spot. Composite samples are a series of equal volume samples mixed together, taken so as to represent the average strength conditions in the sewer. Base charges shall apply as specified in LCMC 13.20.070, as determined on the basis of the analyses of the strongest sample obtained each day and such analyses averaged for a minimum of five days. Composite charges shall apply as specified under LCMC 13.20.080, as determined on the basis of the analyses of each day’s composite sample averaged for a minimum of five days. The analyses of such samples, for the exclusive purposes of determining the charges under LCMC 13.20.070 and 13.20.080, are assumed to be the analyses of all industrial wastes discharged by the property for a period not to exceed 18 months from the date of sampling, if the wastes include any domestic sewage. In that event, the volume will be assumed equal to all water consumption exclusive of domestic allowances prescribed in LCMC 13.20.020, measured through both city and private supply meters or measured through a sewage meter approved by the director of public works. The city’s charge shall be billed to the occupant each month. (Ord. 84 § 5(2)(a), 1969)


13.20.070 Extra strength charges – Base rate.

Base rates for industrial wastes originating inside the city are established at $0.004 per pound of BOD, and $0.003 per pound of suspended solids, in excess of the levels fixed therefor in LCMC 13.20.060(A); base rates for industrial wastes originating outside the city shall be twice said amounts per pound. Except for seasonal industries, the rate is to be based on the five-day average strength of each day’s strongest grab sample, as outlined in LCMC 13.20.060(B). This rate is established for sewer users with occasional ordinance violations where the strength of the composite sample would result in a lesser rate than specified in this section. The maximum base charge shall not exceed $0.05 per 100 cubic feet inside the city or $0.10 per 100 cubic feet outside the city. (Ord. 84 § 5(2)(b), 1969)


13.20.080 Extra strength charges – Composite strength rate (city sampling equipment).

A. Composite strength rates for industrial wastes originating inside the city are established at $0.01 per pound of BOD, and $0.008 per pound of suspended solids, in excess of the levels fixed therefor in LCMC 13.20.060(A); composite strength rates for industrial wastes originating outside the city shall be twice said amounts per pound. Except for seasonal industries, the rate is to be based on the five-day average strength of the composite samples, as outlined in LCMC 13.20.060(B). Samples are to be taken not less than one sample each two-hour period of operations per sampling day. This rate is to cover sewer users with daily ordinance violations where the five-day average strength based on composite sampling would result in a violation of the levels fixed therefor in LCMC 13.20.060(A). This charge replaces the charge arrived at under LCMC 13.20.070, when in excess of the base charge in said LCMC 13.20.070.

B. Example Calculation.

	10,000 cubic feet of water	BOD of 1,300 mg/l

SS of 650 mg/l

	chargeable BOD = 1,300 – 300 	1,000 mg/l

	chargeable SS = 650 – 350	 300 mg/l

	10,000 cu. ft. at 62.4 lb./cu. ft. 

= 624,000 lbs. water	 

	624,000 x	1,000	= 624 lbs. BOD

	1,000,000

	624,000 x	300	= 187.2 lbs. SS

	1,000,000

	Extra strength charge	= 624 (.01) + 187.2 (0.008)

	 	= $6.24 + $1.50

	 	= $7.74

(Ord. 84 § 5(2)(c), 1969)


13.20.090 Extra strength charges – Average strength rate (occupant’s equipment).

In the event that the occupant chooses to install and maintain his own sampling equipment, as approved by the director of public works, the extra strength charges are established for industrial wastes originating inside the city at the rate of $0.007 per pound of BOD, and $0.005 per pound of suspended solids, in excess of the levels fixed therefor in LCMC 13.20.060(A); the average extra strength charges for industrial wastes originating outside the city shall be twice said amounts per pound. This rate is to be based on the composite samples taken by proportional sampling equipment approved by the director of public works. The analysis of samples from the equipment is assumed to be the analysis of all wastewater discharged by the property during the sampling period if the industrial wastes include domestic sewage. This charge replaces the charge under LCMC 13.20.080 and is effective when in excess of the base charge in LCMC 13.20.070.

The occupant shall pay all costs of design, purchase, installation, maintenance and replacement of sampling equipment approved by the director of public works. The city will analyze the samples taken by the occupant’s sampling equipment, and therefore has the right to enter the area where the sampling equipment is installed at all times to permit testing and sampling of the sewage. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section, as determined by the director of public works, shall cause the occupant to be charged at the rate as specified in LCMC 13.20.080 and not less than the rate specified in LCMC 13.20.070. (Ord. 84 § 5(2)(d), 1969)


13.20.100 Special extra strength charges.

When the director of public works determines that a characteristic of industrial wastes other than BOD or suspended solids, or both, exceeding the levels fixed in LCMC 13.20.030 is present but will not have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes or receiving waters, and will not create a hazard to life or create malodors, and that such characteristic can feasibly be handled or treated by the city after acceptance into the city sewer system, he may fix a special rate of charge in lieu of, or reducing the extent of, preliminary treatment. Such special charge shall be fixed at a level to cover city costs and expenses. (Ord. 84 § 5(3), 1969)


13.20.110 Extra strength charges – Billing.

A. Billing and Payment. Extra strength industrial waste charges shall be billed monthly by the city recorder. The amount of the charge will be determined by the director of public works at the end of each month and will be submitted to the city recorder after sufficient time has been given for the laboratory analysis of all sewage samples. If such charges are not paid within 90 days from and after the date of billing by the city recorder, such nonpayment shall be cause for summary termination of water services by the director of public works, and termination of sewer services if the property is not served with water by the city.

B. Minimal Charges – Suspension. Where the total charges applicable under this chapter will result in an average monthly bill of $5.00 or less, the account will be suspended until such time as significant changes are found in the quantity and/or strength of the sewage to bring about a higher charge. This, however, does not waive the owner’s responsibility to comply with all the provisions of this chapter.

C. Adjustments. The director of public works may check sewage strength as outlined in this chapter and adjust charges where applicable at any time in accordance with the most recent analysis. (Ord. 84 § 5(4) – (6), 1969)


13.20.120 Resampling requests – Fees.

Requests for the city to resample wastes under LCMC 13.20.070 and 13.20.080 shall be submitted in writing and accompanied by full payment for the resampling fee. The fee for five days of sampling is $125.00. The fee to seasonal industries for one day’s resampling is $40.00. (Ord. 84 § 5(7), 1969)


13.20.130 Industrial wastes – Limitation or termination of acceptance.

Notwithstanding prior acceptance into the city sewer system of industrial wastes under this chapter, if the director of public works finds that industrial wastes from a particular commercial or industrial occupancy or a class of wastes from similar commercial or industrial occupancies constitute a nuisance or may create a hazard to city facilities or sewage treatment processes or receiving waters, then the director of public works may limit the characteristics or volume of the industrial wastes accepted under this chapter, or may terminate such acceptance. Notice of such limitation or termination shall be given in writing to the occupant of the property involved, and shall specify the date when such limitation or termination is to be effective. It is unlawful for any person to discharge or permit the discharge of industrial wastes in violation of such notice. (Ord. 84 § 5(8), 1969)


13.20.140 Industrial wastes – Sampling procedures.

Sampling procedures and methods conducted by or under the director of public works shall be made in accordance with methods established by good engineering practice. Sampling shall be conducted at a sampling manhole or other locations adjudged by the director of public works to be suitable points from which samples would be representative, either singly or with other samples, of the industrial waste to be sampled. Samples shall be analyzed at an approved laboratory as designated by the director of public works. The director of public works may require the commercial or industrial occupancy to install at its own expense such meters and appurtenances as he finds necessary to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the industrial waste. (Ord. 84 § 6, 1969)


13.20.141 Grease traps – Purpose.

The purpose of these grease trap regulations is to establish requirements that will assist in attaining compliance with LCMC 13.20.010(B), which prohibits discharge into the sewer system of any solid or viscous substance capable of obstructing sewage flow or interfering with the operation of the sewage works or treatment facilities; LCMC 13.20.020(C), which prohibits discharge into the sewer system of any water or waste that contains in excess of 100 milligrams per liter, or a lesser amount as fixed by the director of public works for a particular establishment, of fat waste, oil, or grease or any substance which may solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures above 32 degrees Fahrenheit; LCMC 13.20.020(G), which prohibits discharge into the sewer system of any water or waste that the director of public works determines will form suspended solids in objectionable concentration or create any other condition deleterious to sewer system structures or treatment processes; and LCMC 13.20.020(H), which prohibits discharge into the sewer system of any water or waste containing substances in such concentrations that they are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of any other agency having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters, such as the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality’s requirements as set out in the city’s wastewater treatment plant National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit. (Ord. 2004-02 § 1)


13.20.142 Grease traps – Definitions.

As used in these grease trap regulations, except where the context indicates otherwise, words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

“Automatic package unit” means a device, typically of less than 100-gallon capacity, designed to automatically separate and remove grease from wastewater from an individual fixture such as a sink or drain and to automatically clean itself of accumulated removed material at least once every 24 hours.

“Cooking” means preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for consumption food, using one or more of the following activities: any method of frying, baking, grilling, barbecuing, sauteing, rotisserie cooking, broiling, boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, poaching, infrared heating, searing, or any other activity that produces a hot, non-drink food product in or on a receptacle that requires washing.

“Department” means the department of public works.

“Director” means the person to whom the city manager delegates the authority to carry out the functions of the director of public works as set out in the municipal code and any person to whom that person or the city manager delegates the authority to carry out the functions of the director under these grease trap regulations.

“Fixture” means each sink, drain, or other device or piece of equipment from which grease can be introduced into the sewer system.

“Food service establishment” means a facility discharging kitchen or food preparation wastewater into the sewer system, but excluding:

1. Individual dwelling units;

2. Private living quarters;

3. Bed and breakfast accommodations in owner-occupied residences where no more than 50 percent of the entire structure and no more than four bedrooms are used as part of the bed and breakfast accommodation;

4. Facilities that do not discharge a significant amount of grease, as determined by the director, into the sewer system; and

5. Non-cooking food service establishments.

“Grease” means any substance that:

1. Is of a type commonly recognized as fat, oil, grease, or wax, whether animal-based, petroleum-based, or synthetic-based; is a petroleum product, by-product, or distillate; or is a petroleum-like lubricant; and

2. That typically becomes solid or viscous at temperatures of 32 degrees Fahrenheit (zero degrees Celsius) or higher.

“Grease interceptor” means a device that is of at least 750 gallon capacity to serve one or more fixtures and that is remotely located, normally outdoors or underground, designed to intercept and retain grease from wastes and to permit normal sewage or liquid wastes to discharge into the sewer system.

“Grease trap” means a device designed to retain grease from one to a maximum of four fixtures, such as an automatic package unit or a grease interceptor.

“Grease trap regulations” means LCMC 13.20.141 through 13.20.149.

“Non-cooking food service establishment” means a facility primarily engaged in preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for consumption precooked food that does not include any form of cooking, such as an establishment that prepares and serves cold dairy and frozen food, but excluding facilities secondarily engaged in the preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for consumption food that includes cooking and that discharge a significant amount of grease, as determined by the director, into the sewer system.

“Outdoor storage containers” means containers outside of the food service establishment that are used for storing grease and oil.

“Person” means a natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or other legal entity.

“Responsible person” means:

1. An owner, lessee, contract purchaser, or other person with the right of possession or control of property on or within which a food service establishment is located; or

2. An owner, lessee, contract purchaser, or other person with the right of possession or control of a food service establishment.

“Sewer system” means the city’s sewer system or a sewer discharging into the city’s sewer system. (Ord. 2014-04 § 2; Ord. 2004-02 § 1)


13.20.143 Grease traps – New or altered food service establishments.

A food service establishment shall have all grease traps needed to prevent the introduction from its fixtures of grease into the sewer system if:

A. It is a food service establishment for which a building permit for its initial construction is issued on or after February 9, 2004. The grease trap or traps shall be installed as part of the construction under the permit and prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy under the permit; or

B. It is an existing food service establishment for which a building permit or permits is or are issued in any 12-month period beginning on or after February 9, 2004, where the director determines that the estimated cost of construction authorized by the permit or permits will exceed 50 percent of the fair market value of the existing establishment. If the current property tax assessment records of Lincoln County separately state the fair market value of the existing food service establishment, then that value shall be considered to be the fair market value for purposes of this subsection. In all other cases, the director shall determine the fair market value by any reasonable method. The grease trap or traps shall be installed not later than as part of the construction under the permit that will result in the estimated cost of construction exceeding 50 percent of the fair market value of the existing establishment and prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy under the permit. (Ord. 2004-02 § 1)


13.20.144 Grease traps – Existing food service establishments.

A food service establishment, if it is not otherwise required to have a grease trap or traps under LCMC 13.20.143, shall have all grease traps needed to prevent the introduction from its fixtures of grease into the sewer system, not later than December 31, 2006. If it does not have all required grease traps by June 30, 2004, however, it thereafter shall be subject to the food service establishment surcharge established by LCMC 13.20.148 until such time as it has all required grease traps. For purposes of this section only, floor drains shall not be considered fixtures. (Ord. 2004-02 § 1)


13.20.145 Grease traps – Design, installation, operation, and maintenance.

A. Design. Grease traps required by these grease trap regulations shall be of an approved type under and shall comply with the provisions of Sections 1014.0 and 1015.0 of the Oregon State Plumbing Specialty Code and any other applicable provisions of law and shall be adequate to prevent the introduction of grease from the food service establishment into the sewer system. In addition, each grease trap shall:

1. Contain a sampling box at the outlet end for viewing and sampling of the effluent wastewater discharged into the sewer system;

2. Contain a basket or other intercepting device to prevent passage into the drainage system of solids one-fourth inch or larger in size, which device shall be removable for cleaning purposes; and

3. If an automated package unit, be located as near to the fixture as possible.

B. Installation. Grease traps required by these grease trap regulations shall be installed in accord with the provisions of Sections 1014.0 and 1015.0 of the Oregon State Plumbing Specialty Code and any other applicable provisions of law and in a manner adequate to prevent the introduction of grease from the food service establishment into the sewer system. In addition, prior to installation, a food service establishment shall provide to the department of public works the following information for each grease trap to be installed:

1. Plumbing drawings;

2. Grease trap supplier, type, size, dimensions (length x width x depth) in inches for each compartment, and flow control device description;

3. Each fixture’s contribution to the grease trap in gallons per minute;

4. Drain pipe diameter;

5. Name of the engineering firm or supplier that sized the grease trap;

6. Calculations done to determine the grease trap’s adequacy to prevent the introduction of grease from the fixtures discharging to it into the sewer system; and

7. Any other information reasonably requested by the director related to the adequacy of the grease trap to prevent the introduction of grease from the fixtures discharging to it into the sewer system.

C. Operation. Grease traps required by these grease trap regulations shall be operated in accord with the provisions of Sections 1014.0 and 1015.0 of the Oregon State Plumbing Specialty Code and any other applicable provision of law and in a manner that prevents the introduction of grease from the food service establishment into the sewer system. In addition:

1. No wastewater or waste pumped from a grease trap shall be reintroduced back into the grease trap or into the sewer system;

2. Wastewater or waste from a food waste disposal unit shall not be discharged into a grease trap;

3. Each food service establishment shall have written procedures for employee handling of sources of grease within the establishment, posted at a prominent employee area within the establishment.

D. Maintenance. Grease traps required by these grease trap regulations shall be maintained in accord with the provisions of Sections 1014.0 and 1015.0 of the Oregon State Plumbing Specialty Code and any other applicable provisions of law and in a manner that prevents the introduction of grease from the food service establishment into the sewer system. As part of its maintenance activities, each food service establishment shall:

1. Have a written plan to prevent fats, oils and grease (FOG) from entering the sewer system. The city has established a list of Best Management Practices for Food Service Establishment Facilities; the list is available from the city’s public works department. Food service establishments shall base their written plan on the city’s best management practices list.

2. Train kitchen staff and other employees on grease traps maintenance and cleaning activities. Training is to be documented and shall occur no less than twice per year.

3. Clean each grease trap on a regular basis that will ensure proper and efficient operation, but not less than once within every three months. Cleaning shall consist of removal of the grease from the grease trap, including from the grease trap and the sludge pocket, and inspection of the empty grease trap for defects and obstructions that would prevent proper functioning. No enzymes, grease solvents, emulsifiers, catalysts, detergents, soaps, dispersants, or other substances shall be used in grease trap cleaning or maintenance.

4. If grease traps are found to be more than 25 percent full during cleaning, the frequency of cleaning is required to be increased.

5. Use strainers in sink drains to catch food scraps and other solid matter. Empty strainer contents into trash receptacles.

6. Keep written records of grease trap maintenance and cleaning, and employee training, activities. The food service establishment shall retain the written records for a period for three years. Written records of grease trap maintenance and cleaning shall be kept on the grease trap/interceptor maintenance log form, which is available from the city’s public works department. Written records regarding employee training shall include, at a minimum:

a. The date of each training;

b. A list of employees that attended the training session;

c. What topics were covered during the training;

d. A copy of training materials presented at the training session.

7. Following receipt of written notice from the director and by such time as required by the notice, have samples of the establishment’s grease trap discharges analyzed by a qualified laboratory for grease content, at the expense of the establishment, and provide a copy of written results of the analysis to the department.

E. Outdoor Storage Containers. Outdoor storage containers are required to be covered and to be located as far as practically possible from any storm drain catch basin. In the event of a spill, absorbent pads or other non-free-flowing material must be used to clean up the material expelled. (Ord. 2014-04 § 3; Ord. 2004-02 § 1)


13.20.146 Grease traps – Inspection and monitoring.

A. Inspection. The director shall have the right of access to a food service establishment’s grease traps and related fixtures, facilities, and records at any time during the establishment’s normal business hours, with or without advance notice to the establishment, for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and records examination to determine whether the grease traps are preventing the introduction of grease into the sewer system. The persons responsible shall allow the director ready access at all such times to the establishment’s grease traps and related fixtures, facilities, and records and shall provide to the director copies of the records, if requested. The director shall make a written record of each inspection and shall provide a copy of the record to the food service establishment.

B. Monitoring. The director shall have the right to install at a food service establishment such devices as the director deems necessary or appropriate to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring, or metering to determine whether the establishment’s grease traps are preventing the introduction of grease into the sewer system. The director shall give the food service establishment reasonable advance written notice before installing any such device. (Ord. 2004-02 § 1)


13.20.147 Grease traps – Notice of noncompliance – Response – Compliance.

A. Notice of Noncompliance. If the director determines that a food service establishment’s grease traps are not preventing the introduction of grease into the sewer system, the director shall give the persons responsible written notice thereof, giving them a deadline not to exceed 10 business days by which to take actions that will assure that the establishment’s grease traps will prevent the introduction of grease into the sewer system, directing them to provide to the department a written list of actions they will take to assure that the establishment’s grease traps will prevent the introduction of grease into the sewer system by the specified deadline and a schedule for the actions, and giving them a deadline by which to provide the list and schedule. The director has the right to require a noncomplying food service establishment to implement any of the items listed in the Best Management Practices for Food Service Establishment Facilities document, including, but not limited to, requiring an establishment to use a three-sink dishwashing system.

B. Response to Notice of Noncompliance – Compliance Actions. The list and schedule required by the director under subsection (A) of this section shall be provided to the department not later than the deadline given by the director. In addition, after the list and schedule have been provided to the department, the actions on the list shall be completed in accord with the schedule. Failure to submit any documentation or items required by the director, or failure to comply with any terms of the notice of noncompliance, shall be considered a Class B violation. (Ord. 2015-10 § 6; Ord. 2014-04 § 4; Ord. 2004-02 § 1)


13.20.148 Grease traps – Surcharge.

The food service establishment surcharge shall be a percentage of the base fee and commodity charge provided for by LCMC 13.12.060, as specified by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2004-02 § 1)


13.20.149 Grease traps – Responsible persons – Remedies for violations.

A. Responsible Persons. In relation to any food service establishment as to which person is a responsible person, a violation of any provision of these grease trap regulations or of LCMC 13.20.151 in relation to that establishment shall be considered a violation by that person.

B. Falsification of Written Maintenance and Training Records. Any person who has falsified any aspect of a food establishment’s written records in regard to grease trap maintenance, cleaning and employee training activities has committed a violation.

C. General Remedies. Violation of any provision of these grease trap regulations or of LCMC 13.20.151 shall be subject to LCMC 13.20.160.

D. Additional Remedies. In addition to, and not in place of, any penalties and remedies provided for by LCMC 13.20.160 or any other provision of the municipal code, the city may remedy a violation of any provision of these grease trap regulations or of LCMC 13.20.151 by any one or combination of the following, as determined appropriate by the director:

1. The food service establishment in violation shall become subject to the food service establishment surcharge established by LCMC 13.20.148 until such time as the establishment has eliminated the violation;

2. The persons responsible in relation to the food service establishment in violation shall become liable to reimburse the city for all expenses it incurs in order to mitigate the impact on the sewer system of the violation;

3. The city, following 30 days’ advance written notice to the food service establishment in violation and to the owner of the property, shall discontinue water service or sewer service, or both of them, to the establishment and to any other facilities served by the same water or sewer account. (Ord. 2014-04 § 5; Ord. 2004-02 § 1)


13.20.150 Enforcement authority.

The building official of the city shall assist the director of public works to the end that this chapter shall be effective and operable. (Ord. 84 § 7, 1969)


13.20.151 Food waste disposal units in food service establishments.

No food service establishment, as defined in LCMC 13.20.142, shall use a food waste disposal unit that discharges into the sewer system. (Ord. 2004-02 § 1)


13.20.160 Violation – Penalty – Alternative remedies.

A. Violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a Class B violation and shall be dealt with according to the procedures established in Chapter 1.16 LCMC.

B. Any violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance and the city may, as an alternate to other remedies that are legally available for enforcing this chapter, institute injunctive, abatement or other appropriate proceedings to prevent, enjoin temporarily or permanently, abate or remove the unlawful condition prohibited under this chapter. (Ord. 2015-10 § 6; Ord. 2014-04 § 6; Ord. 84 §§ 9, 10, 1969)


Chapter 13.30 SEPTAGE DISPOSAL

Sections:

13.30.010    Definitions.

13.30.020    Disposal of waste prohibited.

13.30.030    Permit to dispose septage required.

13.30.040    Fee for septage disposal established.

13.30.050    Delegation of authority to implement regulations for receipt and disposal of septage.

13.30.060    Regular sampling required.

13.30.070    Records required.

13.30.080    Authority of supervisor and employees.

13.30.090    Appeal and hearing procedures.

13.30.100    Separability.

13.30.110    Violation – Penalty.


13.30.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter the following words and phrases will have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

“City” is the city of Lincoln City.

“Person” is as defined in LCMC 1.04.020.

“Public sanitary sewer” means any sanitary sewer constructed by the city or dedicated to the city.

“Septage” is septic material from residential and commercial (nonindustrial) septic systems and portable toilet waste collected within Lincoln County north of latitude 44.81 degrees north (Depot Bay) and within Tillamook County south of latitude 45.28 degrees (Beaver).

“Septage acceptance plant (SAP)” is the city’s receiving station for disposal of septage.

“Sewer system” means all of the mains, pumping facilities, treating and disposing facilities included in the wastewater treatment facilities of the city.

“STEP system” is a septic tank effluent pumping system, meaning a gravity septic tank system installed on public or private property.

“Supervisor” means the Lincoln City wastewater treatment plant supervisor.

“Suspended solids” are solids that either float in sewage or are in suspension in sewage, which are removable by a laboratory filtration device.

“Wastewater treatment plant (WWTP)” is the facility owned by the city used for receiving and treating sewage waste. (Ord. 2005-06 § 1)


13.30.020 Disposal of waste prohibited.

A. No person shall dispose of septage into the SAP at the WWTP if any part of the septage is prohibited by Chapter 13.20 LCMC or does not conform to regulations implemented pursuant to this chapter or other applicable law.

B. No person shall dispose of septage into or on private or public property in the city except as authorized by this chapter. Under no circumstances shall a person dispose of septage into or on any area of the WWTP with the exception of the SAP.

C. No person shall dispose of septage unless specifically authorized to do so by the supervisor under this chapter or any implementing regulation.

D. The supervisor shall decline to accept any septage which, without pretreatment, will be harmful to the structure, process or operation of the SAP or the WWTP, or detrimental to the quality of the effluent, or add unacceptable volume to the WWTP.

E. The supervisor shall not accept septage for disposal to the SAP with excessive BOD or excessive suspended solids in excess of normal septage. However, septage with excessive BOD or excessive suspended solids may be accepted if the person can show that the waste will not damage the WWTP facilities or impair the operation of the wastewater treatment process, and the measured volume and composition of waste will be discharged at a time when the supervisor can be present. (Ord. 2005-06 § 1)


13.30.030 Permit to dispose septage required.

No person shall discharge any septage into the SAP without first obtaining a septage discharge permit. Permits shall be issued by the city after approval of an application for permit based on a determination that the applicant has met all of the following:

A. The requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances and resolutions of the city;

B. The requirements of administrative regulations adopted to implement this chapter and other city laws, including but not limited to acknowledgment of receipt of regulations and completion of training in the use of the SAP, proof of automobile and liability insurance in the amounts required by the city, and proof of any licenses or conditions required by the city, Oregon Department of Environmental Quality or Environmental Protection Agency for collecting, transporting, and disposing of septage;

C. The payment of any license fee or cleaning and damage deposit, as established by resolution of city council;

D. The requirements of any applicable licensing regulation of the city, including but not limited to an occupation tax under LCMC 5.04.040;

E. The requirements of any other law, whether currently in effect or hereinafter adopted, applicable to the delivery and disposal of septage to the SAP at the Lincoln City WWTP. (Ord. 2005-06 § 1)


13.30.040 Fee for septage disposal established.

A. By resolution of the city council, the city may adopt a schedule of fees to recover its actual costs in implementing this chapter and accepting and treating septage. The fee shall be based on calculating treatment costs plus capital costs on a yearly basis, using volumes and numbers from the prior year, in the following methodology:

Cost to treat gallon of septage or (B/T = C) x (S)

+ Capital cost recovery of gallon septage treated or (SAP / G = SG)

Total cost for handling septage

	Where	“B” is annual budget for WWTP

“T” is total pounds TSS and septage received

“C” is cost of treatment per lb. TSS and septage

“S” is lbs. septage received

“SAP” is capital construction costs of the SAP

“G” is gallons septage received per year

“SG” is capital cost per gallon of septage

The methodology shall be used to calculate the charge per gallon for septage deposited at the SAP to current treatment standards required by the Department of Environmental Quality or the city’s National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit (NPDES permit). Upon information, the city may also include other costs incurred by the city to provide for septage disposal and treatment, including any capital costs and costs of maintenance, repair, and operation of the SAP that are not otherwise assessed or charged.

B. Any fee adopted pursuant to this chapter may be revised on an annual basis as necessary, after the city council has approved the budget. (Ord. 2005-06 § 1)


13.30.050 Delegation of authority to implement regulations for receipt and disposal of septage.

The supervisor shall be responsible for administering the standards for persons to dispose of, and for the city to receive, septage in the city’s septage acceptance facility. These rules may implement any of the following standards:

A. Providing for application for a septage discharge permit;

B. Providing for a form of application, including such information as name, address, responsible party or employer, contact information including emergency communication contact, telephone number;

C. Requiring persons to acknowledge receipt of city regulations, to keep certain delivery and disposal records, and to adhere to city rules or other law applicable to disposal of septage;

D. Providing for mandatory training of any persons disposing of septage, including training in use of the SAP;

E. Providing for issuance of a permit or renewal of a permit upon satisfactory completion of application, payment of any fee adopted by the city, completion of training, and fulfillment of any other prerequisite to use of the SAP, including licensing and insurance requirements;

F. Providing for users to complete a form sufficient to track all loads delivered and deposited into the SAP and requiring persons to submit such forms;

G. Requiring a person to install and use any devices required to measure the volume and composition of septage to be discharged;

H. Requiring sampling or measurement of septage and payment for same;

I. Allowing for the supervisor or the supervisor’s designee to inspect, observe, measure, sample or test any septage proposed for disposal in compliance with the provisions of this chapter;

J. Implementing standards for prohibited materials, including material from grease traps or interceptors, landfills, garbage transfer sites, industrial sites, other wastewater treatment plants, STEP systems outside the city urban growth boundary, and any other material prohibited by the city or other agency with jurisdiction over treatment and discharge of pollutants at the WWTP;

K. Establishing hours of operation of the SAP, including regular hours, special hours during which a surcharge for disposal may apply to offset costs, and any other limitations on the SAP necessary to meet operational needs or budget requirements; and

L. Any other provision necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter or other implementing regulation. (Ord. 2005-06 § 1)


13.30.060 Regular sampling required.

If there are any changes in the amount or characteristics of septage presented for disposal by a person to the SAP during the year, potentially causing any significant changes in the flow rate, BOD or suspended solids or any other characteristics of the city’s wastewater, the person shall report such changes to the city prior to disposal of septage. It is the person’s responsibility to make such tests from time to time as are necessary to comply with the terms of this section. (Ord. 2005-06 § 1)


13.30.070 Records required.

In addition to any tracking forms required for each disposal of septage, a person disposing of septage in the city shall maintain a log book noting the date, time, and volume and composition of septage brought per entry to the SAP for purposes of disposing septage. The log book shall be made available for inspection by the supervisor upon request at any time. Such log book shall not be considered a record kept or maintained by or on behalf of the city during the course of city business, unless otherwise required by the Oregon Public Records Law. (Ord. 2005-06 § 1)


13.30.080 Authority of supervisor and employees.

A. All of the powers granted under this chapter to the supervisor may be exercised by any employee duly authorized by the supervisor to exercise those powers; provided, that any hearing provided for herein shall be held by the supervisor, the city manager, or city council.

B. The supervisor shall be permitted access to any part of a vehicle containing septage and presented for disposal, where access is necessary for the purpose of inspecting, observing, measuring, sampling or testing to determine compliance with the provision of this chapter.

C. Refusal to allow the supervisor access to the vehicle under subsection (B) of this section shall constitute prima facie evidence of failure to comply with this chapter.

D. If the supervisor finds a person is in violation of any provision of this chapter or its implementing resolutions or regulations, the supervisor shall notify the person in writing stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time for corrections to be made. In the absence of unusual circumstances, 10 days shall be considered a reasonable time. The person receiving the notice shall report to the supervisor within 10 days, in writing, stating what action has been taken and is being taken to correct the conditions constituting the violation. If the person does not correct the violation within the time required, or within any extension of time granted by the supervisor, the supervisor may take any or all of the following actions:

1. Temporarily suspend or permanently revoke a permit to dispose of septage.

2. Prohibit access to the SAP or the WWTP.

3. Require separate pretreatment of septage or other action to end the violation.

4. Require the person to pay a surcharge equal to the cost to the city of accommodating, treating, and disposing of any prohibited material or unlawful use.

5. Take any action provided by law to enforce this chapter or applicable law.

E. The supervisor is specifically authorized to close the SAP on a scheduled or unscheduled basis and refuse entry to any person whenever, in the supervisor’s discretion, conditions require such closure. To the extent possible, the supervisor or the supervisor’s designee shall make efforts to inform persons of anticipated closure. (Ord. 2005-06 § 1)


13.30.090 Appeal and hearing procedures.

A. Request for Hearing. Any person aggrieved by any order of the supervisor under this chapter, including denial of an application for permit, may obtain review of the decision upon filing a written request with the supervisor. The written request must be filed within the time for correcting the violation, or within any extension of time granted by the supervisor. Any such written request will temporarily suspend any permit suspension or revocation until after the hearing; provided, however, upon notice of request for hearing, the supervisor will set a date for hearing as soon as possible but no more than 14 days after receiving notice. At the hearing, the petitioner may present evidence to establish compliance with the relevant requirements of the chapter or regulation. After the hearing, the supervisor may continue the original order in effect, modify the order or withdraw the order, depending on the facts shown at the hearing.

B. Appeal to City Manager. Any person aggrieved by any order of the supervisor may appeal the order to the city manager. The form of appeal shall be a letter addressed to the city manager stating the nature of the decision of the supervisor, stating the reasons for the appeal, and explaining why the person believes that the decision of the supervisor should be modified or overturned. The appeal must be filed within five days after the person is notified of the supervisor’s decision. In the event of an appeal, the supervisor’s order shall be suspended until the appeal to the city manager is concluded and a decision rendered.

C. Hearing. The city manager shall schedule the matter for administrative hearing as soon as possible after receiving notice of appeal but no later than 14 days after receiving notice of appeal. The appeal shall be heard informally, with opportunity for the person aggrieved by the supervisor’s order to present evidence and argument. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city manager shall affirm the supervisor’s decision and deny the appeal, or accept the appeal and direct the supervisor accordingly, or effect any resolution including terms of settlement or agreement.

D. City Council. There shall be no further appeal of decision, except that the city manager may refer an appeal of the supervisor’s decision to the city council, who may schedule the appeal for hearing or decline to hear the appeal. If the city council declines to hear the appeal, the city manager shall hear the appeal as a final appeal. If the city council schedules a hearing, the city council shall hear the matter under the procedures set forth in this section.

E. Notices. Any notices required under this chapter may be delivered by first class mail in the U.S. Postal Service or via facsimile. Electronic transmission of notice by wireless device or Internet service will not be considered adequate notice unless the intended recipient confirms receipt and acceptance of any communication. (Ord. 2005-06 § 1)


13.30.100 Separability.

The provisions of this chapter are separable, and the invalidity of any part of this chapter shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the chapter. (Ord. 2005-06 § 1)


13.30.110 Violation – Penalty.

A. A violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class B violation, an offense punishable by payment of a fine of not more than $1,000, with each separate offense constituting a separate violation.

B. Any violation of this chapter may be additionally enforced as provided in LCMC 13.20.160(B) and other applicable provisions of the municipal code. (Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 2005-06 § 1)


Title 14 (Reserved)


Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:

15.04    Adoption and Enforcement of Construction and Construction-Related Codes

15.06    Demolition

15.08    Building Numbering

15.12    Moving Buildings

15.16    Flood Damage Prevention


Chapter 15.04 ADOPTION AND ENFORCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION AND CONSTRUCTION-RELATED CODES

Sections:

15.04.010    Construction codes adopted.

15.04.020    Construction-related codes adopted.

15.04.030    Violations – Penalties – Remedies.

15.04.040    Building official – Authority to impose administrative civil penalty.

15.04.050    Appeal procedures.

15.04.060    Unpaid penalties.


15.04.010 Construction codes adopted.

The city of Lincoln City adopts, administers, and enforces the Oregon State Building Code, including all specialty codes, as promulgated by the Director of the Oregon Department of Consumer and Business Services pursuant to ORS Chapter 455, except that the plumbing specialty code and the electrical specialty code are administered and enforced by Lincoln County. (Ord. 2010-01 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.04.020 Construction-related codes adopted.

A. The city of Lincoln City adopts, administers, and enforces the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, by the International Conference of Building Officials (UCADB), a copy of which is on file and available for reference with the city building official. UCADB, Chapter 4, Section 403, Section 1.3 is not an available remedial option for a building declared to be dangerous under this code, except that any repair order (Section 1.1) or demolition order (Section 1.2) of the building official may require a premises to be secured and maintained against entry during the period when repair is authorized or prior to scheduled demolition. All references in the UCADB to the “Building Code” shall mean the applicable Oregon State Building Code in effect, including all currently enforced specialty codes or, when the context requires, the applicable predecessor code.

B. The city of Lincoln City adopts, administers, and enforces the Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition, by the International Conference of Building Officials, a copy of which is on file and available for reference with the city building official.

C. The city of Lincoln City adopts, administers, and enforces the Uniform Sign Code, 1997 Edition, by the International Conference of Building Officials, Whittier, California, a copy of which is on file and available for reference with the city building official. (Ord. 2014-17 § 1; Ord. 2010-01 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.04.030 Violations – Penalties – Remedies.

A. No person, firm, corporation or other entity however organized shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain a building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of this code or the codes adopted pursuant to LCMC 15.04.010 and 15.04.020.

B. A person who commits a violation established in subsection (A) of this section shall be subject to an administrative civil penalty not to exceed $1,000 and shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter.

C. Each day that a violation of a provision of subsection (A) of this section exists constitutes a separate violation.

D. In addition to imposing a monetary penalty, the city may determine a condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of subsection (A) of this section is a public nuisance and may be abated as provided by law, including abatement under Chapter 8.12 LCMC.

E. The penalties and remedies provided in this section are not exclusive and are in addition to other penalties and remedies available to the city by law. (Ord. 2010-01 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.04.040 Building official – Authority to impose administrative civil penalty.

A. Upon a determination by the building official that any person, firm, corporation or other entity however organized has violated a provision of this chapter or a rule adopted thereunder, the building official may issue a notice of civil violation and impose upon the violator and/or any other responsible person an administrative civil penalty as provided by subsections (A) to (K) of this section. For purposes of this subsection, a “responsible person” includes the violator, and if the violator is not the owner of the building or property at which the violation occurs, may include the owner.

B. Prior to issuing an order to correct a violation under this section, the building official may pursue reasonable attempts to secure voluntary correction.

C. Prior to issuing a notice of civil violation and imposing an administrative civil penalty under this section, the building official shall issue an order to correct a violation to one or more of the responsible persons. Except where the building official determines that the violation poses an immediate threat to health, safety, environment, or public welfare, the time provided for correction shall be not less than five calendar days.

D. Following the date or time by which the correction must be completed as required by an order to correct a violation, the building official shall determine whether such correction has been satisfactorily completed. If the required correction has not been completed by the date or time specified in the order, the building official may issue a notice of civil violation and impose an administrative civil penalty to each responsible person to whom an order to correct was issued.

E. Notwithstanding subsections (B) and (C) of this section, the building official may issue a notice of civil violation and impose an administrative civil penalty without having issued an order to correct violation or made attempts to secure voluntary correction where the building official determines that the violation was knowing or intentional, or a repeat of a similar violation.

F. In imposing an administrative civil penalty authorized by this section, the building official shall consider:

1. The person’s past history in taking all feasible steps or procedures necessary or appropriate to correct the violation;

2. Any prior violations of statutes, rules, orders, and permits;

3. The gravity and magnitude of the violation;

4. Whether the violation was repeated or continuous;

5. Whether the cause of the violation was an unavoidable accident, negligence, or an intentional act;

6. The violator’s cooperativeness and efforts to correct the violation; and

7. Any relevant rule of the building official.

G. A notice of a civil violation that imposes an administrative civil penalty under this section shall be served by personal service, or sent by registered or certified mail and by first class mail. A notice served by mail shall be deemed received three days after the date mailed if to an address within this state, and seven days after the date mailed if to an address outside this state. Every notice shall include:

1. Reference to the particular code provision, ordinance number, or rule involved;

2. A short and plain statement of the matters asserted or charged;

3. A statement of the amount of the penalty or penalties imposed;

4. The date on which the order to correct was issued and time by which correction was to be made, or if the penalty is imposed pursuant to subsection (E) of this section, a short and plain statement of the basis for concluding that the violation was knowing, intentional, or repeated; and

5. A statement of the party’s right to appeal the civil penalty to the building board of appeals, or if the building board of appeals lacks sufficient members to constitute a quorum, to the city manager or the city manager’s designee; a description of the process the party may use to appeal the civil penalty; and the deadline by which such an appeal must be filed.

H. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity however organized that is issued a notice of civil penalty may appeal the penalty to the building board of appeals, or if the building board of appeals lacks sufficient members to constitute a quorum, the city manager or the city manager’s designee.

I. A civil penalty imposed under this section shall become final upon expiration of the time for filing an appeal, unless the responsible person appeals the penalty to the building board of appeals, or if the building board of appeals lacks sufficient members to constitute a quorum, to the city manager or the city manager’s designee pursuant to, and within the time limits established by, LCMC 15.04.050.

J. Each day the violator fails to remedy the code violation shall constitute a separate violation.

K. The civil administrative penalty authorized by this section shall be in addition to:

1. Assessments or fees for any costs incurred by the city in remediation, cleanup, or abatement; and 

2. Any other actions authorized by law; provided, that the city may not issue a citation to municipal court for a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-01 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.04.050 Appeal procedures.

A. A person, firm, corporation or other entity, however organized, and aggrieved by an administrative action of the building official taken pursuant to any section of this code that authorizes an appeal under this section may, within 15 days after the date of notice of the action, appeal in writing to the building official. The written appeal shall be accompanied by a $100.00 appeal fee payable to the city of Lincoln City and shall include:

1. The name and address of the appellant;

2. The nature of the determination being appealed;

3. The reason the determination is incorrect; and

4. What the correct determination of the appeal should be.

If a person, firm, corporation or other entity however organized appeals a civil penalty to the building board of appeals, or, if the building board of appeals lacks sufficient members to constitute a quorum, to the city manager or the city manager’s designee, the penalty shall become final, if at all, upon issuance of a decision of the building board of appeals, or if the building board of appeals lacks sufficient members to constitute a quorum, the city manager or the city manager’s designee affirming the imposition of the administrative civil penalty.

B. If a notice of revocation of a license or permit is the subject of the appeal, the revocation does not take effect until final determination of the appeal. Notwithstanding this subsection, an emergency suspension shall take effect upon issuance of, or such other time stated in, the notice of suspension.

C. Unless the appellant and the city agree to a longer period, an appeal shall be heard by the building board of appeals, or, if the building board of appeals lacks sufficient members to constitute a quorum, the city manager or the city manager’s designee, within 30 days of the receipt of the notice of intent to appeal. At least 10 days prior to the hearing, the city shall mail notice of the time and location of the hearing to the appellant.

D. The building board of appeals, or, if the building board of appeals lacks sufficient members to constitute a quorum, the city manager or the city manager’s designee, shall hear and determine the appeal on the basis of the appellant’s written statement and any additional evidence the building board of appeals, or, if the building board of appeals lacks sufficient members to constitute a quorum, the city manager or the city manager’s designee, deems appropriate. At the hearing, the appellant may present testimony and oral argument personally or by counsel. The burden of proof shall be on the building official. The rules of evidence as used by courts of law do not apply.

E. The building board of appeals, or, if the building board of appeals lacks sufficient members to constitute a quorum, the city manager or the city manager’s designee, shall issue a written decision within 10 days of the hearing date. The written decision of the building board of appeals, or, if the building board of appeals lacks sufficient members to constitute a quorum, the city manager or the city manager’s designee, is the final decision of the city.

F. Other than as provided in this subsection, the appeal fee is not refundable. The building board of appeals, or, if the building board of appeals lacks sufficient members to constitute a quorum, the city manager or the city manager’s designee, may make a determination on the motion of the appellant that the appeal fee shall be refunded to the appellant upon a finding by the building board of appeals, or, if the building board of appeals lacks sufficient members to constitute a quorum, the city manager or the city manager’s designee, that the appeal was not frivolous.

G. Failure to pay a penalty imposed under this chapter within 10 days after the penalty becomes final as provided in subsection (A) of this section shall constitute a violation of this code. Each day the penalty is not paid shall constitute a separate violation. The city is authorized to collect the penalty by any administrative or judicial action or proceeding authorized by LCMC 15.04.060, other provisions of this code, or state statutes. (Ord. 2010-01 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.04.060 Unpaid penalties.

A. Failure to pay an administrative penalty imposed pursuant to this code within 10 days after the penalty becomes final shall constitute a violation of this code. Each day the penalty is not paid shall constitute a separate violation. The city is authorized to collect the penalty by any administrative or judicial action or proceeding authorized by subsection (B) of this section, other provisions of this code, or state statutes.

B. If an administrative civil penalty is imposed on a responsible person because of a violation of any provision of this code resulting from prohibited use or activity on real property, and the penalty remains unpaid 30 days after such penalty becomes final, the city shall assess the property the full amount of the unpaid fine and shall enter such an assessment as a lien in the real property records of the Lincoln County clerk. At the time such an assessment is made, the city shall notify the responsible person that the penalty has been assessed against the real property upon which the violation occurred and has been entered in the real property records of the Lincoln County clerk. The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as all city liens. Interest shall commence from the date of entry of the lien in the lien docket.

C. In addition to enforcement mechanisms authorized elsewhere in this code, failure to pay an administrative civil penalty imposed pursuant to this code shall be grounds for withholding issuance of requested permits or licenses, issuance of a stop work order, if applicable, or revocation or suspension of any issued permits or certificates of occupancy. (Ord. 2010-01 § 1 (Exh. A))


Chapter 15.06 DEMOLITION

Sections:

15.06.010    Definitions.

15.06.020    Permit required.

15.06.030    Proof of delivery required.

15.06.040    Removal of waste subject to regulation.

15.06.050    Violation established.


15.06.010 Definitions.

“Demolish” means to raze, remove, destroy, or dismantle all or a part of a structure. 

“Demolition” means any act or process that may cause partial or total razing, removal, destruction or dismantling of a structure.

“Minor demolition” means demolition that will generate a total of not more than three cubic yards of solid waste. (Ord. 2010-09 § 1(A))


15.06.020 Permit required. 

Before any person may demolish any structure or part of a structure, such person must obtain a permit from the department of planning and community development. In addition to such other information as the director of the department of planning and community development may require, the permit applicant must provide an estimate of the amount of solid waste that will be generated by the demolition and the name and address of the site or the operator of the site to which the solid waste generated by the demolition will be taken for disposal. The disposal site must be among those approved and permitted by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality or other governmental agency having jurisdiction. No permit is needed for minor demolition. The city council may establish by resolution a fee for a demolition permit. (Ord. 2010-09 § 1(B))


15.06.030 Proof of delivery required. 

The permit holder shall submit to the city proof of delivery to a disposal site approved and permitted by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality or other governmental agency having jurisdiction. Proof of delivery may consist of a city form provided with the permit, accompanied by receipts from the disposal site(s), or a statement sworn to upon oath or affirmation before an Oregon notary public attesting to the amount of solid waste disposed of, the date of disposal, and the name and address of the disposal site or the operator of the site. The proof of delivery shall be submitted to the city within 90 days of receiving a demolition permit, or per a schedule approved by the director of the department of planning and community development. (Ord. 2010-09 § 1(C))


15.06.040 Removal of waste subject to regulation.

Removal, transport, and disposal of solid waste, including demolition materials, by a person other than the generator or producer of the waste is subject to regulation under the exclusive solid waste franchise provisions of Ordinance No. 2006-11 and Chapter 8.16 LCMC. (Ord. 2010-09 § 1(D))


15.06.050 Violation established. 

The following are offenses against the city, categorized as Class B violations, and may be enforced by the city manager or any other designated officer or employee of the city who has been given enforcement authority in regards to such violations: 

A. Demolition without a permit;

B. Demolition in noncompliance with any permit condition;

C. Failure to provide proof of delivery. (Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 2010-09 § 1(E))


Chapter 15.08 BUILDING NUMBERING

Sections:

15.08.010    Definitions.

15.08.020    Uniform numbering system established.

15.08.030    Odd and even numbers.

15.08.040    Number assignment.

15.08.050    Placement and size of numbers.

15.08.060    Charge for city installation.

15.08.070    Violation – Penalty.


15.08.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter:

“Person” means and includes persons, firms, partnerships and corporations.

“Structure” means houses, stores and other buildings except minor sheds and outbuildings. (Ord. 10 § 1, 1965)


15.08.020 Uniform numbering system established.

There is established a uniform system of numbering of all structures situated within the corporate limits of the city on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or which may thereafter be erected within said corporate limits. The numbering system adopted by this chapter is the grid system of building numbering as shown on the map on file in the office of the city recorder of the city. (Ord. 10 § 2, 1965)


15.08.030 Odd and even numbers.

A. North-South. For streets running in a northerly and southerly direction, even numbers shall be assigned to the east side of the street and odd numbers shall be assigned to the west side of the street.

B. East-West. For streets running in an easterly and westerly direction, even numbers shall be assigned to the south side of the street and odd numbers shall be assigned to the north side of the street. (Ord. 10 § 3, 1965)


15.08.040 Number assignment.

Building numbers shall be assigned by the recorder in accordance with the grid system as shown on said map on file in the City Hall of the city. (Ord. 10 § 4, 1965)


15.08.050 Placement and size of numbers.

All numbers shall be placed on the front of each structure, as near the main entrance as possible, in such manner as to be easily seen and read from the street upon which the structure is situated. All numbers shall be not less than two and one-half inches in height for the number proper, and shall be distinctly legible. For the purpose of securing uniformity of numbers, the building numbers shall be in the style and construction as prescribed by the council. (Ord. 10 § 5, 1965)


15.08.060 Charge for city installation.

A. In order to accomplish the purpose of this chapter, the city supervisor or his agents shall install the numbers of the structures as provided in this chapter, and shall make a charge therefor of $2.50, which sum shall be billed to the owner or occupant of such structure by adding the same to the next water service billing.

B. Such billing shall constitute legal notice to the resident and the owner of the property, and if not paid within 30 days after notice, the same shall become a lien against the real property upon which the structure is located and may be foreclosed in the manner as provided by law. (Ord. 10 § 6, 1965)


15.08.070 Violation – Penalty.

A. It is unlawful for the resident or owner to refuse to permit the installation of such numbers on the structure occupied or owned by him.

B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than $100.00.

C. Each refusal shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as set forth in this section. (Ord. 82-22 § 9; Ord. 10 § 7, 1965)


Chapter 15.12 MOVING BUILDINGS

Sections:

15.12.010    Permit – When required.

15.12.015    Permit exemption.

15.12.020    Permit – Application.

15.12.030    Permit – Fees.

15.12.040    Construction and use requirements.

15.12.050    Inspection.

15.12.060    Utility installations along route.

15.12.070    Performance bond.

15.12.080    Permit – Issuance.

15.12.090    Permit – Conditions.

15.12.100    Liability.

15.12.110    Equipment requirements.

15.12.120    Continuity of move.

15.12.130    Litter.

15.12.140    Movement on state highways.

15.12.150    Permit – Revocation.

15.12.160    Violation – Penalty – Alternative remedies.


15.12.010 Permit – When required.

A building that exceeds eight feet in width or, as loaded for moving, extends upward more than 13.5 feet from the ground, may be moved across or along a public thoroughfare of the city only in accordance with a permit applied for and issued in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 78-40 § 1)


15.12.015 Permit exemption.

A moving permit is not required under this chapter if the transporter or owner has obtained a trip permit for moving a manufactured structure pursuant to ORS Chapter 446 from the Lincoln County assessor or the Oregon Department of Consumer and Business Services and the structure will not be placed in the city limits. (Ord. 2013-13 § 1)


15.12.020 Permit – Application.

An application for a permit so to move a building may be submitted to the building official and shall state the following information:

A. The name and address of the owner of the building or structure;

B. The location of the building before moving;

C. The location where the building is proposed to be set or reestablished;

D. The type, age, width, length and height of the building;

E. The use or purpose for which the building was designed;

F. The use or occupancy to be made of the building at its new location;

G. The name and address of the person, firm or corporation engaged to move the building;

H. The means or manner the building is to be moved and type of equipment to be used therefor;

I. The route over and along which the building is to be moved;

J. The date and time when such moving is to commence, and the time that will be required to move the building;

K. Such other information as the building official may deem necessary.

NOTE: Information specified in subsections (E) and (F) of this section need not be supplied for a building to be moved outside the city. (Ord. 78-40 § 2)


15.12.030 Permit – Fees.

A mandatory processing fee shall be submitted with the application for a permit. The fee shall be periodically established by resolution of the city council, except that the initial fee shall be $250.00. Fees set by resolution shall be designed to recover the actual cost of processing the application. (Ord. 2013-13 § 2; Ord. 78-40 § 3)


15.12.040 Construction and use requirements.

A. Requirements.

1. The use for which the building was designed and intended shall be in keeping with the zone or district into which the building is moved.

2. The building shall meet all the requirements of the city, and of State Building, Fire, Electrical and Sanitation Codes.

3. The expected usable life of the building after moving shall be not more than 50 percent expended.

4. The building or structure shall be in keeping with and not detrimental to the character and welfare of the area into which it is moved.

B. Plans and Specifications. To ensure that the structure to be moved will meet the requirements of the State Building Code, plans and specifications shall be filed with the building department before a moving permit is issued. Plans shall show the reconstruction and remodeling and include the plumbing and wiring necessary to meet the requirements of the State Plumbing and Electrical Codes. (Ord. 78-40 § 4)


15.12.050 Inspection.

After receiving the application, the building inspector shall inspect the building, the new site proposed for it, and the route proposed for moving it. (Ord. 78-40 § 5)


15.12.060 Utility installations along route.

The permit shall not be issued unless the applicant therefor submits statements from the owners of the electric wires and poles and other utility installations along the route on which the building is to be moved:

A. That the moving will not interfere with or endanger the installations; or

B. That the applicant has made arrangements to the satisfaction of the owners for protecting the installations, paying for whatever damage the moving causes them, and reimbursing the owners for whatever removal and reinstallation of the installations the moving necessitates. (Ord. 78-40 § 6)


15.12.070 Performance bond.

A. The permit shall not be issued until the applicant furnishes the city a performance bond executed by the applicant and a surety company authorized to do business in this state and approved as to form and amount by the city attorney. The amount of the bond shall not be less than $7,500. The bond shall guarantee that the applicant will:

1. Conform to all requirements imposed by the city relating to the moving of the building; and

2. Promptly repair and make good to the satisfaction of the city any damage to pavement, curbs, sidewalks, hydrants, sewers, water lines, traffic control devices, streets, alleys, or any other public or private property done or caused by the applicant, the applicant’s agents or employees in moving a building; and

3. Within six months after the permit is granted, if the relocated building will be relocated within the city limits, the relocated building is required to be ready for occupancy and use in accordance with the building and zoning regulation of the city in effect at the time the permit is issued.

B. Notwithstanding the requirement for a performance bond, an alternate form of financial security (e.g., letter of credit) may be substituted for the performance bond if the alternate security instrument is approved by the city finance director and city attorney. (Ord. 2013-13 § 3; Ord. 78-40 § 7)


15.12.080 Permit – Issuance.

The building official shall issue such permit applied for if:

A. The application therefor complies with the requirements of this chapter;

B. The moving can be accomplished without damage to property or, in case of such damage, it is consented to by the owner of the property or is to be paid for to his satisfaction;

C. The building at its new site will conform to the land use requirements of the city; and

D. The building at its new site is not detrimental to the attractiveness and welfare of the neighborhood in which the site is situated. (Ord. 78-40 § 8)


15.12.090 Permit – Conditions.

The permit shall specify:

A. The route for moving the building;

B. The time within which the moving is to be completed; and

C. Whatever additional conditions the building official deems necessary to minimize the obstruction of traffic, protect property and protect the public safety. (Ord. 78-40 § 9)


15.12.100 Liability.

The permit shall not constitute an authorization for damaging property. The permit shall constitute no defense against whatever liability the permittee incurs for personal injury or property damage caused by the moving. (Ord. 78-40 § 10)


15.12.110 Equipment requirements.

Equipment used to move buildings along or across the public thoroughfare of the city shall be equipped with pneumatic tires, which shall be the only part of the equipment to come in contact with the surfaces of the thoroughfares, except planking as required by the building official. The building official may require the permittee to proceed on planking of whatever dimensions the inspector specifies, at whatever places he deems planking necessary to prevent damage to a thoroughfare or other property damage. (Ord. 78-40 § 11)


15.12.120 Continuity of move.

Once a building has been moved into a public thoroughfare pursuant to a permit authorized by this chapter, the party moving the building shall continue with the moving project without interruption until it is completed, except as the permit for the moving or the building official specifically allows to the contrary. (Ord. 78-40 § 12)


15.12.130 Litter.

A party moving a building pursuant to a permit authorized by this chapter shall promptly remove from public thoroughfare and private property all litter produced by the moving. (Ord. 78-40 § 13)


15.12.140 Movement on state highways.

The building official may waive any and all of the requirements of this chapter regarding buildings to be moved through the city upon a state highway from and to points outside the city limits, if:

A. Such movement will be made pursuant to a permit issued by the appropriate state agency;

B. Notice of such proposed movement and a copy of the permit is submitted to the building official prior to the movement; and

C. The building official is satisfied that adequate precautions have been taken to protect the public safety and welfare. (Ord. 78-40 § 14)


15.12.150 Permit – Revocation.

A permit or license issued pursuant to this chapter may be summarily revoked in the event that the permittee or licensee violates any term of the permit or of this chapter. (Ord. 78-40 § 15)


15.12.160 Violation – Penalty – Alternative remedies.

A. A violation of any provision or requirement of this chapter, including but not limited to the failure of the owner or building mover to obtain a permit, or the violation of any permit term, condition or requirement, is unlawful and an offense against the city and shall be enforced as a Class B violation under Chapter 1.16 LCMC.

B. Notwithstanding the above, any violation of a provision or requirement of this chapter, including permit terms, conditions and requirements, which causes damage to public or private property shall be a Class B violation and shall also require full restitution for all damages caused by the violation.

C. Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate offense. 

D. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the criminal prosecution of violators who cause damage to public or private property, nor shall any provision of this chapter restrict the city from pursuing any other available alternative legal remedy. (Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 2013-13 § 4; Ord. 82-22 § 5; Ord. 78-40 § 16)




Chapter 15.16 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION

Sections:

Article I. Purpose, Applicability, Authority, Findings

15.16.110    Purpose.

15.16.115    Applicability.

15.16.120    Statutory authorization.

15.16.125    Findings of fact.

15.16.130    Methods of reducing flood losses.

Article II. Definitions

15.16.200    Definitions.

Article III. General Provisions

15.16.310    Lands to which this chapter applies and basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.

15.16.311    Coordination with specialty codes adopted by the State of Oregon Building Codes Division.

15.16.315    Compliance with chapter required.

15.16.316    Penalties for noncompliance.

15.16.318    Alternative remedy.

15.16.320    Abrogation and greater restrictions.

15.16.325    Interpretation.

15.16.330    Warning and disclaimer of liability.

15.16.335    Severability.

Article IV. Administration

15.16.410    Establishment of development permit for flood hazard zones.

15.16.415    Designation of local floodplain administrator.

15.16.420    Local floodplain administrator – Duties generally.

15.16.425    Permit review.

15.16.430    Use of other base flood data.

15.16.435    Information to be obtained and maintained.

15.16.440    Requirement to notify other entities and submit new technical data.

15.16.441    Substantial improvements and substantial damage assessments and determinations.

15.16.445    Interpretation of FIRM boundaries.

15.16.450    Appeal board.

15.16.455    Conditions for variances.

Article V. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction

15.16.510    Generally.

15.16.511    Alteration of watercourses.

15.16.515    Anchoring.

15.16.516    Placement of fill in the special flood hazard area.

15.16.520    Construction materials and methods.

15.16.525    Utilities.

15.16.526    Tanks.

15.16.530    Subdivision proposals and other proposed developments.

15.16.531    Structures located in multiple or partial flood zones.

15.16.535    Review of building permits.

15.16.540    Specific standards.

15.16.541    Flood openings.

15.16.542    Garages.

15.16.543    Appurtenant (accessory) structures.

15.16.545    Residential construction.

15.16.550    Nonresidential construction.

15.16.555    Manufactured dwellings.

15.16.560    Recreational vehicles.

15.16.565    Critical facilities.

15.16.570    Below-grade crawlspaces.

Article VI. Regulations by Location

15.16.610    Before the regulatory floodway.

15.16.615    Floodways.

15.16.620    Standards for shallow flooding areas (AO zones).

15.16.625    Coastal high hazard areas.

Article I. Purpose, Applicability, Authority, Findings


15.16.110 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

A. Protect human life and health;

B. Minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control projects;

C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard, so as to minimize blight areas caused by flooding;

G. Notify potential buyers that the property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

H. Notify those who occupy areas of special flood hazard that they assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.115 Applicability.

This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.120 Statutory authorization.

The legislature of the state has, in ORS 197.175, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.125 Findings of fact.

A. The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards, which increase flood heights and velocities and, when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other areas. Uses that are inadequately flood-proofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.130 Methods of reducing flood losses.

In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:

A. Restricting or prohibiting development which is dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or that results in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;

B. Requiring that development vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and

E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))

Article II. Definitions


15.16.200 Definitions.

Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

“Appeal” means a request for a review of interpretation of any provision of this chapter, or a request for a variance.

“Area of shallow flooding” means a designated Zone AO, AH, AR/AO or AR/AH or VO on a community’s flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

“Area of special flood hazard” means the land in the floodplain within a community, subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) as Zone A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, V, VO, V1-30, VE. “Special flood hazard area” is synonymous in meaning with the phrase “area of special flood hazard.”

“Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

“Base flood elevation (BFE)” means the elevation to which floodwater is anticipated to rise during the base flood.

“Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

“Below-grade crawlspace” means an enclosed area below the base flood elevation in which the interior grade is not more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade, and the height, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation, does not exceed four feet at any point.

“Breakaway wall” means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.

“Coastal high hazard area” means an area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources.

“Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment and materials.

“Flood or flooding” means:

1. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.

b. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.

c. Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in subsection (1)(b) of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.

2. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in subsection (1)(a) of this definition.

“Flood elevation study” means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.

“Flood insurance rate map” (“FIRM”) means the official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM).

Flood Insurance Study. See “Flood elevation study” for this definition.

“Flood-proofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate risk of flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents.

“Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as “regulatory floodway.”

“Freeboard” is a term used by FEMA’s National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) to describe a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above the one percent annual chance flood level. A structure built with one foot of freeboard would have its lowest floor one foot or more above the base flood elevation (BFE). Adding freeboard will reduce NFIP insurance premiums.

“Functionally dependent use” means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

“Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

“Historic structure” means any structure that is:

1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

3. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or

4. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:

a. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or

b. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

“Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter found at LCMC 15.16.550.

“Manufactured dwelling” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured dwelling” does not include a “recreational vehicle” and is synonymous with “manufactured home.”

“Manufactured dwelling park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured dwelling lots for rent or sale.

“Mean sea level” means for the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s flood insurance rate map are referenced.

“New construction” means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation, including Ordinance 2009-17, or Ordinance 2019-25, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

“Permanent foundation” refers to a natural or manufactured support system to which a structure is anchored or attached. A permanent foundation is capable of resisting flood forces and may include posts, pilings, poured concrete or reinforced block walls, properly compacted fill or other systems of comparable flood resistivity and strength.

“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

1. Built on a single chassis;

2. Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck or sport utility vehicle; and

4. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

Special Flood Hazard. See “Area of special flood hazard” for this definition.

“Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of pilings, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured dwelling on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

“Structure” means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured dwelling.

“Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed 49 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

“Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure taking place in a five year consecutive period of time, the cost of which equals or exceeds 49 percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

2. Any alteration of a “historic structure”; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”

“Variance” means, for floodplain management purposes, a grant of relief by the city of Lincoln City from the terms of a floodplain management regulation.

“Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))

Article III. General Provisions


15.16.310 Lands to which this chapter applies and basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.

This chapter shall apply to all the areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city of Lincoln City. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administrator in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Lincoln County, Oregon and Incorporated Areas,” dated October 18, 2019, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMS), are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The flood insurance study and FIRM panels are on file at the planning and community development department and with the city recorder at City Hall. The best available information for flood hazard area identification, as outlined in LCMC 15.16.430, shall be the basis for regulation until a new FIRM is issued that incorporates the data utilized under LCMC 15.16.430. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.311 Coordination with specialty codes adopted by the State of Oregon Building Codes Division.

Pursuant to the requirement established in ORS 455 that the city of Lincoln City administers and enforces the State of Oregon Specialty Codes, the city of Lincoln City does hereby acknowledge that the Oregon Specialty Codes contain certain provisions that apply to the design and construction of buildings and structures located in special flood hazard areas (SFHA). Therefore, this chapter is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Oregon Specialty Codes. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1)


15.16.315 Compliance with chapter required.

All development within areas of special flood hazard is subject to the terms of this chapter and required to comply with its provisions and all other applicable regulations. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.316 Penalties for noncompliance.

A. Violations.

1. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered and no development shall occur without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations and maps. Violations of any provisions of this chapter, or the incorporated provisions herein, by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a Class A violation. Each day that the violation of this title exists is deemed to be a separate offense.

2. Any person, firm, association or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, who violates any provision of this chapter, including any order adopted implementing this chapter, shall be punished under the provisions of Chapter 1.16 LCMC. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city of Lincoln City from taking such other lawful action, including as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1)


15.16.318 Alternative remedy.

A. In case a building or other structure is, or is proposed to be, located, constructed, maintained, repaired or used; or land is, or is proposed to be, used in violation of this chapter, the building or land thus in violation shall constitute a nuisance. The city may, as an alternative to other remedies that are legally available for enforcing this title, institute a civil suit for an injunction, abatement or other appropriate proceedings to prevent, enjoin temporarily or permanently, abate or remove the unlawful location, construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or use.

B. If the city initiates and prevails in an action under subsection (A) of this section, the city shall be entitled to an assessment of its costs as provided in LCMC 8.12.170 relating to nuisances. Such assessment will then become a lien against the property as provided in LCMC 8.12.170. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1)


15.16.320 Abrogation and greater restrictions.

This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.325 Interpretation.

In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

A. Considered as minimum requirements;

B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.330 Warning and disclaimer of liability.

The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administrator, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.335 Severability.

This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))

Article IV. Administration


15.16.410 Establishment of development permit for flood hazard zones.

A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area horizontally within the area of special flood hazard established in LCMC 15.16.310. The development permit shall be required for all structures, including mobile dwellings, as defined in LCMC 15.16.200, and for all other development, including fill and other activities, also as defined in LCMC 15.16.200. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the planning and community development director or designee. Information required to be submitted by the applicant may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures; fill; storage of materials; and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required:

A. In riverine flood zones, the proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and substantially improved structures;

B. In coastal flood zones (V zones), the proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the bottom of the lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and columns) of all structures, and whether such structures contain a basement;

C. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any nonresidential structure will be flood-proofed;

D. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect licensed in the state of Oregon that the flood-proofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the flood-proofing criteria in LCMC 15.16.550;

E. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;

F. Substantial improvement calculations for any improvement, addition, reconstruction, renovation, or rehabilitation of an existing structure. This may require the applicant to submit verifiable cost estimates to determine value of the improvements or repairs if no other accurate method of determining the value exists;

G. The amount and location of any fill or excavation activities proposed; and

H. Base flood elevation data for subdivision proposals or other development when required in LCMC 15.16.530. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.415 Designation of local floodplain administrator.

The planning and community development director is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. The floodplain administrator may delegate authority to implement these provisions. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.420 Local floodplain administrator – Duties generally.

The duties of the local floodplain administrator, or their designee, shall include, but not be limited to, those set forth in LCMC 15.16.425 through 15.16.445. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.425 Permit review.

The local floodplain administrator shall review all development permits to determine:

A. That the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;

B. That all other required permits have been obtained and approved from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required;

C. Whether the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, the local floodplain administrator shall ensure that the provisions of LCMC 15.16.615, Floodways, are met;

D. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in an area where base flood elevation (BFE) data is available either through the flood insurance study (FIS) or from another authoritative source. If BFE data is not available then ensure compliance with the provisions of LCMC 15.16.430;

E. Provide to building official the base flood elevation (BFE) plus freeboard applicable to any building requiring a development permit;

F. Review all development permit applications to determine if the proposed development qualifies as a substantial improvement as defined in LCMC 15.16.200;

G. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development activity is a watercourse alteration. If a watercourse alteration is proposed, ensure compliance with the provisions in LCMC 15.16.510; and

H. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development activity includes the placement of fill or excavation. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.430 Use of other base flood data.

When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with LCMC 15.16.310, the local floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer Article V of this chapter through LCMC 15.16.625. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.435 Information to be obtained and maintained.

The local floodplain administrator is responsible for obtaining and maintaining the following information for public inspection:

A. Obtain, record, and maintain the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basements) and all attendant utilities of all new or substantially improved structures where base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided through the flood insurance study (FIS), flood insurance rate map (FIRM), or obtained in accordance with LCMC 15.16.430;

B. Obtain and record the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the natural grade of the building site for a structure prior to the start of construction and the placement of any fill and ensure that the requirements of LCMC 15.16.425, 15.16.516, 15.16.615, and 15.16.625(G) are adhered to;

C. Upon placement of the lowest floor of a structure (including basement) but prior to further vertical construction, obtain an elevation certificate (EC), prepared and sealed by a professional licensed surveyor or engineer, certifying the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement), attendant utilities in place, and the location and height of all flood openings;

D. Obtain an as-built elevation certificate (EC) recording the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement), all attendant utilities, and the location and height of all flood openings, prior to the final inspection;

E. Maintain all elevation certificates (EC) submitted to the city;

F. Obtain, record, and maintain the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure and all attendant utilities were flood-proofed for all new or substantially improved flood-proofed structures where base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided through the FIS, FIRM, or obtained in accordance with LCMC 15.16.430;

G. Maintain all flood-proofing certificates required under this chapter;

H. Record and maintain all variance actions, including justification for their issuance;

I. Obtain and maintain all hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed as required under LCMC 15.16.615;

J. Record and maintain all substantial improvement and substantial damage calculations and determinations as required under LCMC 15.16.441;

K. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.440 Requirement to notify other entities and submit new technical data.

A. Alteration of Watercourses. The local floodplain administrator shall: notify adjacent communities and the Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development, and other appropriate state and federal agencies, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration. This notification shall be provided by the applicant to the Federal Insurance Administration as a letter of map revision (LOMR), along with either:

1. A proposed maintenance plan to assure the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse is maintained; or

2. Certification by a registered professional engineer that the project has been designed to retain its flood carrying capacity without periodic maintenance.

The applicant shall be required to submit a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) when required under this section.

B. Community Boundary Alterations. The floodplain administrator shall notify the Federal Insurance Administrator in writing whenever the boundaries of the community have been modified by annexation or the community has otherwise assumed authority or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. To ensure that all flood hazard boundary maps (FHBM) and flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) accurately represent the community’s boundaries, include within such notification a copy of a map of the community suitable for reproduction, clearly delineating the new corporate limits or new area for which the community has assumed or relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority.

C. Requirement to Submit New Technical Data. A community’s base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information becomes available, a community shall notify the Federal Insurance Administrator of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data in accordance with Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Section 65.3. The community may require the applicant to submit such data and review fees required for compliance with this section through the applicable FEMA letter of map change (LOMC) process.

The floodplain administrator shall require a conditional letter of map revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for:

1. Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood elevation; and

2. Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation by more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations but no floodway.

An applicant shall notify FEMA within six months of project completion when an applicant has obtained a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) from FEMA. This notification to FEMA shall be provided as a letter of map revision (LOMR). (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.441 Substantial improvements and substantial damage assessments and determinations.

Conduct substantial improvement (SI) (as defined in LCMC 15.16.200) reviews for all structural development proposal applications and maintain record of SI calculations within permit files in accordance with LCMC 15.16.435. Conduct substantial damage (SD) (as defined in LCMC 15.16.200) assessments when structures are damaged due to a natural hazard event or other causes. Make SD determinations whenever structures horizontally within the special flood hazard area (as established in LCMC 15.16.310) are damaged to the extent that the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 49 percent of market value of the structure before the damage occurred. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1)


15.16.445 Interpretation of FIRM boundaries.

The local floodplain administrator shall make interpretations, where needed, as to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall have a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation, as provided in LCMC 15.16.450. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.450 Appeal board.

A. The city planning commission, as established by the city, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.

B. The city planning commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the local floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.

C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the city planning commission, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision as provided by law.

D. In passing upon such applications, the city planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:

1. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

2. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

3. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

5. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

6. The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

8. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

9. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and

11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and bridges.

E. Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (D) of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the city planning commission may deny or approve applications for appeals or grant variances, attaching such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. In addition to conditions attached to approval of a specific application, conditions in LCMC 15.16.455 apply.

F. The local floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.455 Conditions for variances.

The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Flood insurance premium rates are determined by federal statute according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance.

A. Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the items set forth in LCMC 15.16.450(D) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

B. Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

D. Variances shall only be issued upon:

1. A showing of good and sufficient cause;

2. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;

3. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances.

E. Variances as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program are based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, or economic or financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such, variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare.

F. Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of flood-proofing than watertight or dry flood-proofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low damage potential, complies with all other variance criteria except subsection (A) of this section, and complies with the standards set forth in LCMC 15.16.515, Anchoring; 15.16.520, Construction materials and methods; 15.16.525, Utilities; 15.16.542, Garages; and 15.16.543, Appurtenant (accessory) structures.

G. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance and that such construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. Such notification and a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, shall be maintained in accordance with LCMC 15.16.435.

H. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use; provided, that the criteria of subsections (B) through (G) of this section are met, and the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))

Article V. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction


15.16.510 Generally.

In all areas of special flood hazards, the standards set forth in this article are required. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.511 Alteration of watercourses.

Require that the flood carry capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. Require that maintenance of the flood carrying capacity is provided for within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse to ensure that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished. Require compliance with LCMC 15.16.435 and 15.16.440. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1)


15.16.515 Anchoring.

A. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.

B. All manufactured dwellings must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (reference FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for additional techniques). (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.516 Placement of fill in the special flood hazard area.

All fill placed at or within any special flood hazard area boundary shall be balanced with at least an equal amount of soil material removal from the same parcel and within the active flood area. The placement of fill in a coastal high hazard area is prohibited. The placement of fill must also meet the following standards:

A. Fill placed within the regulatory floodway shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

B. The fill is necessary for an approved use on the property.

C. The fill is the minimum amount necessary to achieve an approved use on the property.

D. No feasible alternative upland locations exist on the property.

E. The fill does not impede or alter drainage or the flow of floodwaters.

F. Be designed and compacted to prevent erosion or scour. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1)


15.16.520 Construction materials and methods.

A. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

B. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.525 Utilities.

A. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.

B. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters.

C. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding consistent with the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.

D. Electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, plumbing, duct systems, and other equipment and service facilities shall be elevated a minimum of two feet above the base flood level or shall be designed and installed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components and to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of flooding. In addition, electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, plumbing, duct systems, and other equipment and service facilities shall:

1. If replaced as part of a substantial improvement shall meet all the requirements of this section.

2. Not be mounted on or penetrate through breakaway walls. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.526 Tanks.

A. Underground tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement under conditions of the base flood.

B. Above-ground tanks shall be installed at a minimum of two feet above the base flood level or shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement under conditions of the base flood.

C. In coastal flood zones (V Zones) when elevated on platforms, the platforms shall be cantilevered from or knee braced to the building or shall be supported on foundations that conform to the requirements of the State of Oregon Specialty Codes. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1)


15.16.530 Subdivision proposals and other proposed developments.

All new subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured dwelling parks and subdivisions) shall:

A. Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

B. Have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and so constructed as to minimize flood damage.

C. Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.

D. For subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured dwelling parks and subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall include within such proposals, base flood elevation data. If base flood elevation data is not currently available from another authoritative source, the applicant shall be responsible for generating it. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.531 Structures located in multiple or partial flood zones.

In compliance with the State of Oregon Specialty Codes:

A. When a structure is located in multiple flood zones on the community’s flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) the provisions for the more restrictive flood zone shall apply.

B. When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard area (SFHA), the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and substantial improvements. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1)


15.16.535 Review of building permits.

Where elevation data is not available either through the flood insurance study or from another authoritative source (LCMC 15.16.430), the city shall review applications for building permits to ensure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate at least two feet above grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.540 Specific standards.

The provisions set forth in LCMC 15.16.541 through 15.16.570 are required in all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in LCMC 15.16.310, basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard (Zones A1-30, AH, and AE), or 15.16.430, use of other flood data (in A and V Zones). (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.541 Flood openings.

Enclosed areas below the base flood elevation, including crawlspaces, shall:

A. Be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters;

B. Be used solely for parking, storage, or building access;

C. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed all of the following minimum criteria:

1. A minimum of two openings;

2. The total net area of non-engineered openings shall be not less than one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area, where the enclosed area is measured on the exterior of the enclosure walls;

3. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade;

4. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they shall allow the automatic flow of floodwater into and out of the enclosed areas and shall be accounted for in the determination of the net open area; and

5. All additional higher standards for flood openings in the State of Oregon Specialty Codes shall be complied with when applicable. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1)


15.16.542 Garages.

A. Attached garages may be constructed with the garage floor slab below the base flood elevation (BFE) in riverine flood zones, if the following requirements are met:

1. The floors are at or above grade on not less than one side;

2. The garage is used solely for parking, building access, and/or storage;

3. The garage is constructed with flood openings in compliance with LCMC 15.16.541 to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater;

4. The portions of the garage constructed below two feet above the BFE are constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;

5. The garage is constructed in compliance with the standards in this section; and

6. The garage is constructed with electrical, and other service facilities located and installed so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of the base flood.

7. If located within a floodway the proposed garage must comply with the requirements of LCMC 15.16.615.

B. Detached garages must be constructed in compliance with the standards for appurtenant structures in LCMC 15.16.543 or nonresidential structures in LCMC 15.16.550 depending on the square footage of the proposed detached garage. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1)


15.16.543 Appurtenant (accessory) structures.

Relief from elevation or flood-proofing requirements for residential and nonresidential structures located outside of the floodway or coastal high hazard areas may be granted for accessory structures that meet the following requirements:

A. Accessory structures must only be used for parking, access, and/or storage and shall not be used for human habitation;

B. In compliance with State of Oregon Specialty Codes, accessory structures on properties that are zoned residential are limited in size to one story and less than 200 square feet, or 400 square feet if the property is greater than two acres in area and the proposed accessory structure will be located a minimum of 20 feet from all property lines. Accessory structures on properties that are zoned as nonresidential are limited in size to 120 square feet;

C. The portions of accessory structures located below two feet above the base flood elevation must be built using flood-resistant materials;

D. Accessory structures must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the base flood;

E. Accessory structures must be designed and constructed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls and comply with the requirements for flood openings in LCMC 15.16.541;

F. Accessory structures must be located and constructed to have low damage potential;

G. Accessory structures must not be used to store toxic material, oil, or gasoline, or any priority persistent pollutant identified by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality unless confined in a tank installed in compliance with LCMC 15.16.526; and

H. Accessory structures must be constructed with electrical, mechanical, and other service facilities located and installed so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of the base flood. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1)


15.16.545 Residential construction.

A. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of two feet above the base flood elevation.

B. Enclosed areas below the lowest floor shall comply with the flood opening requirements in LCMC 15.16.541. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.550 Nonresidential construction.

New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of two feet above the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:

A. Be flood-proofed so that below two feet above the base flood elevation, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

B. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;

C. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this section based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the floodplain administrator as set forth in LCMC 15.16.410;

D. Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not flood-proofed, must meet the same standards for enclosed areas below the lowest floor as described in LCMC 15.16.545(B), Residential construction; and

E. Applicants flood-proofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot below the flood-proofed level (e.g., a building constructed to the base flood level will be rated as one foot below that level). (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.555 Manufactured dwellings.

All manufactured dwellings to be placed or substantially improved shall:

A. Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the bottom of the longitudinal chassis frame beam of the manufactured dwelling is a minimum of two feet above the base flood elevation and securely anchored to an adequately anchored system in accordance with the provisions of LCMC 15.16.515(B).

B. Be constructed with flood openings that comply with LCMC 15.16.541.

C. Have electrical crossover connections a minimum of 24 inches above the base flood elevation.

D. Manufactured dwellings placed or substantially within designated floodways are regulated by LCMC 15.16.615. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.560 Recreational vehicles.

Recreational vehicles placed on sites are required to either:

A. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;

B. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, with no permanently attached additions; or

C. Meet the elevation, anchoring and all other requirements for manufactured dwellings in LCMC 15.16.555, Manufactured dwellings. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.565 Critical facilities.

Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) (i.e., 100-year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA, if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated a minimum of three feet above BFE or to the height of the 500-year flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the critical facility also should be protected to the height utilized above. Flood-proofing and sealing must ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.570 Below-grade crawlspaces.

Below-grade crawlspaces are allowed subject to the following standards as found in FEMA Technical Bulletin 11-01, “Crawlspace Construction for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas.” Note: FEMA will add an additional charge to the basic flood insurance policy premium for a below-grade crawlspace.

A. The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Hydrostatic loads and the effects of buoyancy usually can be addressed through the required flood openings stated in subsection (B) of this section. Because of hydrodynamic loads, crawlspace construction is not allowed in areas with flood velocities greater than five feet per second unless the design is reviewed by a qualified design professional, such as a registered architect or professional engineer. Other types of foundations are recommended for these areas.

B. The crawlspace is an enclosed area below the base flood elevation (BFE) and, as such, must have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. The bottom of each flood vent opening can be no more than one foot above the lowest adjacent exterior grade.

C. Portions of the building below the BFE must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. This includes not only the foundation walls of the crawlspace used to elevate the building, but also any joists, insulation, or other materials that extend below the BFE. The recommended construction practice is to elevate the bottom of joists and all insulation at or above BFE.

D. Any building utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated at or above BFE or designed so that floodwaters cannot enter or accumulate within the system components during flood conditions. Ductwork, in particular, must either be placed at or above the BFE or sealed from floodwaters.

E. The interior grade of a crawlspace below the BFE must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade.

F. The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall, must not exceed four feet at any point. The height limitation is the maximum allowable unsupported wall height according to the engineering analyses and building code requirements for flood hazard areas.

G. An adequate drainage system must be in place to remove floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable time after a flood event. The type of drainage system will vary because of the site gradient and other drainage characteristics, such as soil types. Possible options include natural drainage through porous, well-drained soils and drainage systems such as perforated pipes, drainage tiles or gravel or crushed stone drainage by gravity or mechanical means.

H. The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed five feet per second for any crawlspace. For velocities in excess of five feet per second, other foundation types should be used. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))

Article VI. Regulations by Location


15.16.610 Before the regulatory floodway.

In areas where a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.615 Floodways.

Floodways designated in LCMC 15.16.310 are located within areas of special flood hazard. Since a floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply to floodways:

A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development within the regulatory floodway unless certification by a registered professional civil engineer is provided demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

B. If the certification required by subsection (A) of this section is provided, then all new construction, substantial improvements, and other developments shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions set out in the following sections: Article V of this chapter, Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction, through LCMC 15.16.625, Coastal high hazard areas (V zones).

C. New installation of manufactured dwellings in floodways is prohibited. Manufactured dwellings may only be located in floodways according to one of the following conditions:

1. If the manufactured dwelling already exists in the floodway, the placement was permitted at the time of the original installation, and the continued use is not a threat to life, health, property, or the general welfare of the public; or

2. A new manufactured dwelling is replacing an existing manufactured dwelling whose original placement was permitted at the time of installation, the replacement home will not be a threat to life, health, property, or the general welfare of the public, and it meets the following criteria:

a. As required by 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 60.3(d)(3), it must be demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the manufactured dwelling and any accessory buildings, accessory structures, or any property improvements (encroachments) shall not divert water in a manner that causes erosion or damage to other properties and shall meet the requirements of this section;

b. The replacement manufactured dwelling and any accessory buildings or accessory structures (encroachments) shall comply with all other standards of LCMC 15.16.543, and all other applicable standards of Article V of this chapter;

c. The location of a replacement manufactured dwelling is allowed by the local planning department’s ordinances; and

d. Any other requirements deemed necessary by the authority having jurisdiction. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.620 Standards for shallow flooding areas (AO zones).

Shallow flooding areas appear on FIRMs as AO zones with depth designations. The base flood depths in these zones range from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, or where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is usually characterized as sheet flow. In these areas, the following provisions apply:

A. New construction and substantial improvements of residential structures and manufactured dwellings within AO zones shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of two feet above the depth number specified on the FIRM (three feet if no depth number is specified), as measured from the highest grade adjacent to the building site.

B. New construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures within AO zones shall either:

1. Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of two feet or more above the depth number specified on the FIRM (at least three feet if no depth number is specified), as measured from the highest grade adjacent to the building site; or

2. Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely flood-proofed to or above the depth number specified on the FIRM (at least three feet if no depth number is specified), so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. If this method is used, compliance shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as in LCMC 15.16.550.

C. Adequate drainage paths shall be required around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.

D. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within AO Zones on the community’s FIRM shall either:

1. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and

2. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

3. Meet the elevation requirements of subsection (B)(1) of this section, and the anchoring and other requirements for manufactured dwellings of LCMC 15.16.555.

E. New and substantially improved appurtenant (accessory) structures must comply with the standards in LCMC 15.16.543.

F. Enclosed areas beneath elevated structures shall comply with the requirements in LCMC 15.16.541. (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))


15.16.625 Coastal high hazard areas.

Coastal high hazard areas designated as V1-30, VE and/or V, established in LCMC 15.16.310, have special flood hazards associated with high-velocity waters from tidal surges and, therefore, in addition to meeting all applicable provisions of this chapter and the State of Oregon Specialty Codes, the following provisions shall apply in addition to the standards in LCMC 15.16.430, 15.16.511, 15.16.515, 15.16.520, 15.16.525, 15.16.526, 15.16.530, 15.16.531, and 15.16.535.

A. All new construction and substantial improvements in zones VE and V shall be elevated on pilings and foundations such that:

1. The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor, excluding the pilings or columns, is elevated a minimum of two feet above the base flood level; and

2. The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values used shall be those specified by the State of Oregon Specialty Codes.

B. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review the structural design, specifications and plans for the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section.

C. Obtain the elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor, excluding pilings and columns, of all new and substantially improved structures; and whether or not such structures contain a basement. The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all such information.

D. All new construction shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide.

E. All new construction and substantial improvements shall have the space below the lowest floor either free of obstruction or constructed with non-supporting breakaway walls, open wood latticework, or insect screening intended to collapse under wind and water loads without causing collapse, displacement or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. For the purpose of this section, a breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20 pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which exceed a design safe loading resistance of 20 pounds per square foot, either by design or when so required by local or state codes, may be permitted only if a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that the designs proposed meet the following conditions:

1. Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and

2. Walls intended to break away under flood loads shall have flood openings that meet or exceed the criteria for flood openings in LCMC 15.16.541; and

3. If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall be less than 300 square feet and usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage. The applicant must sign a non-conversion agreement stating such space shall not be used for human habitation. This agreement must be recorded with the county assessor’s office prior to issuance of a building permit.

F. The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and nonstructural). Maximum water loading values to be used in this determination shall be those associated with the base flood. Maximum wind loading values shall be those specified by the State of Oregon Specialty Codes.

G. The use of fill for structural support of buildings is prohibited.

H. Manmade alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential flood damage is prohibited.

I. All structures, including but not limited to residential structures, nonresidential structures, appurtenant structures, and attached garages, shall comply with all the requirements of this section. Flood-proofing of nonresidential structures is prohibited.

J. For construction of new essential structures and new special occupancy structures, refer to ORS 455.446 and 455.447, which state that they may not be constructed in the tsunami inundation zone, which includes V, A, and potentially other flood zones. If an exception is granted, the coastal high hazard area construction standards in LCMC 15.16.625 shall apply to the building of these new structures in the tsunami inundation zone.

K. Manufactured Dwellings. All manufactured dwellings to be placed or substantially improved within coastal high hazard areas (Zones V and VE) shall meet the following requirements:

1. Comply with all of the standards within this section;

2. The bottom of the longitudinal chassis frame beam shall be elevated to a minimum of two feet above the base flood elevation (BFE); and

3. Electrical crossover connections shall be a minimum of 24 inches (two feet) above the BFE.

L. Recreational Vehicles. Recreational Vehicles within coastal high hazard areas (Zones V and VE) shall either:

1. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and

2. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

3. Meet the permit requirements of LCMC 15.16.410 and the requirements for manufactured dwellings in this section.

M. Tanks shall meet the requirements of LCMC 15.16.526(C). (Ord. 2019-25 § 1; Ord. 2009-17 § 1 (Exh. A))

 


Title 16 SUBDIVISIONS

Chapters:

16.04    General Provisions

16.08    Procedure

16.12    Design Standards

16.16    Improvements

16.20    Administration and Enforcement


Chapter 16.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

16.04.010    Title.

16.04.020    Purpose.

16.04.030    Authority.

16.04.040    Definitions.


16.04.010 Title.

The regulations set forth in this title shall be referred to as the “city of Lincoln City subdivision ordinance.” (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 1.010(1))


16.04.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this title is to:

A. Encourage well planned subdivision development so that good, livable neighborhoods with all needed amenities and community facilities may be created;

B. Encourage development in harmony with the natural environment;

C. Safeguard both interests of the public and the property owner;

D. Improve land records and boundary monumentation;

E. Ensure equitable processing of subdivision plats and secure to the extent possible the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan for the city. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 1.010(2))


16.04.030 Authority.

Oregon cities and counties are required by law to control the subdivision of land within their jurisdiction by virtue of ORS 92.010 through 93.160. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 1.010(3))


16.04.040 Definitions.

As used in this title, unless it is apparent from the context that different meanings are intended, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

“Bikeway” means a right-of-way for bicycle traffic.

“Block length” means the distance measured along all that part of one side of a street which is between two intersecting or intercepting streets, or between an intersecting or intercepting street and a watercourse, body of water or undivided acreage.

“Bond or certified check” means a financial commitment by the partitioner or subdivider and executed by an Oregon licensed surety company, in an amount equal to the full cost of construction and improvements as required by LCMC 16.08.300, and conditioned upon the faithful performance thereof.

“Boundary survey,” pursuant to ORS 209.250, Section 1, as amended, means and includes a map made in sizes of eight and one-half inches by 13 inches or multiples thereof, and which is a permanent type of reproducible tracing. Maps shall show the following:

1. Location of survey by one-fourth section and donation land claim, township and range;

2. The date of survey;

3. Scale of drawing and north point;

4. Basis of bearings, if available;

5. Initial point of survey, giving ties to corner or corners of record;

6. All bearings or measured angles and distances separately indicated from those of record;

7. All monuments set and their relation to older monuments found. A detailed description of monuments found and set shall be included, and all monuments set shall be separately indicated from those found.

“Building line” means a line on a plat that coincides with the side of a building and behind which all structures must be located.

“Commission” means the city planning commission.

“Dedicated open space” means an open space comprising open land area, generally improved or developed to city standards, demonstrated on the comprehensive plan and/or approved by the planning commission and city council and dedicated through deeding or platting for public use, enjoyment and ownership. Improved pedestrian, bicycle and/or equestrian ways may be required.

“Development comprehensive plan” means any plan, including amendments adopted by the city, to regulate growth and improvements.

“Easement” means a grant of the right to use a strip of land for specific purposes.

“Equestrian way” means a right-of-way for equestrian traffic.

“Lot” means a unit of land that is created by a subdivision of land.

1. “Corner lot” means a lot two or more connecting sides of which abut street(s) other than alleys.

2. “Reversed corner lot” means a corner lot the side street line of which is substantially a continuation of the front line of the first lot to its rear.

3. “Through lot” means a lot having frontage on two parallel, or approximately parallel, streets other than alleys.

“Owner” means an individual, association, partnership or corporation having legal or equitable title to land sought to be divided, other than legal title held for purpose of security only.

“Parcel” means a unit of land that is created by a partitioning of land.

“Partition” means either an act of partitioning land, or an area or tract of land partitioned as defined in this section.

“Partition land” means to divide an area or tract of land into two or three parcels within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under single ownership at the beginning of such year. “Partition land” does not include:

1. Division of land resulting from the creation of cemetery lots;

2. The sale of a lot in a recorded subdivision, even though the lot may have been acquired prior to the sale with other contiguous lots or property by a single owner;

3. Any adjustment of a lot or parcel line by the relocation of a common boundary where an additional parcel or lot is not created and where the existing parcel or lot reduced in size by the adjustment is not in conflict with any applicable law or ordinance, including but not limited to provisions pertaining to minimum area, frontage, average depth and width and required setbacks.

“Partitioner” means an owner commencing proceedings under this title to effect a partition of land by himself or his lawful agent.

“Pedestrian way” means a right-of-way for pedestrian traffic.

“Plat” means and includes a final map, diagram, drawing, replat or other writing containing all description, locations, specifications, dedications, provisions and information concerning a subdivision or partition plat.

“Property line adjustment” means any adjustment of a lot or parcel line by the relocation of a common boundary that does not create an additional parcel or lot.

“Replat” means the act of platting a portion or all of the lots, parcels and easements in a recorded subdivision or partition plat to achieve a reconfiguration, or to increase or decrease the number of lots. A replat shall not serve to vacate any public right-of-way.

“Replat, minor” means a replat that involves five or fewer lots or any number of lots or parcels totally contained within a city block in the original configuration and that does not involve any public street rights-of-way. A minor replat shall not serve to vacate any public right-of-way.

“Right-of-way” means the area between boundary lines of a street or other easement.

“Road” or “street” means a public or private way that is created to provide ingress or egress (vehicular and pedestrian traffic) to one or more lots, parcels, areas or tracts of land, including the placement of utilities, excluding a private way that is created to provide ingress or egress to such land in conjunction with the use of such land for forestry, mining or agricultural purposes. A “road” or “street” includes the land between right-of-way lines, whether improved or unimproved.

1. “Alley” means a narrow street through the interior of a block, primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on another street.

2. “Collector street” means a street supplementary to the major street system, and a means of intercommunication between this system and small areas; used to some extent for through traffic and for access to abutting properties.

3. “Cul-de-sac” or “dead-end street” means a short street having one end open to traffic; the other end terminated by a vehicle turnaround.

4. “Half-street” means a portion of the width of a street, usually along the edge of a subdivision, where the remaining portion of the street could be provided in another subdivision.

5. “Major street” means a street which is used primarily for through traffic, or which by its location will likely be needed for such use in the normal growth of the community.

6. “Marginal access street” means a minor street, parallel and adjacent to a major street, providing access to abutting properties, but protected from through traffic.

7. “Minor street” means a street intended exclusively for access to abutting properties.

8. “Private road” means a road or driveway under private ownership, the intent of which is to provide access to one or more lots or parcels and which travels through or alongside a separate ownership or potential separate ownership.

9. “Reserve strip” means a separated tract, designated by tract letter or number, intended to prohibit unrestricted vehicular or pedestrian movements from public streets and roads to or across private property. Reserve strips shall be placed in the control of the city.

“Roadway” means the portion of a street right-of-way developed for vehicular traffic.

“Sidewalk” means a pedestrian walkway with permanent surfacing to city standards.

“Subdivide land” means to divide an area or tract of land into four or more lots within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under single ownership at the beginning of such year.

“Subdivider” means an owner commencing proceedings under this title to effect a subdivision of land by himself or through his lawful agent.

“Subdivision” means either an act of subdividing land or an area or tract of land subdivided as defined in this section.

“Tentative plan” or “tentative map” means a preliminary drawing or diagram concerning a partition or subdivision.

“Undedicated open space” means an open space comprising open land area, generally unimproved or undeveloped to an acceptable standard. Ownership and maintenance shall remain with a responsible organization with powers to cause and ability to finance maintenance. Improved pedestrian, bicycle and/or equestrian ways may be required through undedicated open space. These ways may then become dedicated through deeding or platting, as required by the planning commission and city council. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 1.020)


Chapter 16.08 PROCEDURE

Sections:

Article I. General Requirements

16.08.010    Purpose.

16.08.020    Lot sale or transfer – Approval required.

16.08.030    Compliance required.

16.08.040    Permission to enter.

16.08.050    Approval authority.

16.08.060    Preapplication meeting.

16.08.070    Processing fees.

16.08.080    Engineering plan review and inspection.

Article II. Partition and Minor Replat

16.08.090    Inspection and processing fee.

16.08.100    Review and approval procedure.

16.08.110    Required data.

16.08.120    Disposition of approved tentative plans.

16.08.130    Large parcels may require subdivision procedure.

16.08.140    Approval conditions.

16.08.150    Final plat – Filing – Time limit.

Article III. Property Line Adjustment

16.08.160    Applicability.

16.08.170    City approval required.

16.08.180    Decision process.

16.08.190    Conveyance and security.

16.08.200    Responsibility.

Article IV. Subdivision

16.08.210    Inspection and processing fee.

16.08.220    Tentative plan – Submission.

16.08.230    Tentative plan – Preliminary review.

16.08.240    Tentative plan – Approval.

16.08.250    Tentative plan – Required data.

16.08.260    Final plat – Time limit. 

16.08.270    Final plat – Preparation. 

16.08.280    Final plat – Submission. 

16.08.290    Final plat – Review. 

16.08.300    Final plat – Approval. 

16.08.310    Final plat – Filing – Time limit. 

Article I. General Requirements


16.08.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to establish or define the procedural requirements for review of tentative plans for subdivision, partitions, and property line adjustments and the person or agency charged with their administration. Further, it is the purpose of this chapter to define in part the subdivider’s responsibility. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.010(1))


16.08.020 Lot sale or transfer – Approval required.

The sale or transfer of lots is prohibited by this title and ORS Chapters 92 and 93, as amended, until approval is obtained. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.010(2))


16.08.030 Compliance required.

A lot or parcel may be used, subdivided, partitioned or adjusted, and a structure or part of a structure constructed, reconstructed, altered, occupied or used only in accordance with this title, LCMC Title 17, and any other applicable ordinances or standards of the city. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.010(3))


16.08.040 Permission to enter.

The city may conduct such investigations as it deems necessary to verify information supplied as a requirement of these regulations. The owner of the land being subdivided, partitioned or adjusted shall grant the city permission to enter upon his land for these purposes. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.010(4))


16.08.050 Approval authority.

Subdivision plats shall be approved by the planning commission in accordance with these regulations. A subdivision with land area greater than two acres or 10 lots shall be processed as a planned unit development pursuant to LCMC 17.52.210. All partition plats and property line adjustment maps shall be approved by the city staff in accordance with these regulations. The city council delegates its authority to the planning commission, and to the city staff, respectively, to approve or disapprove the subdivision, partition of land and property line adjustments, except for appeals. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.010(5)(a))


16.08.060 Preapplication meeting.

The applicant should meet with the city staff prior to submitting the required tentative plan for a subdivision, partition or property line adjustment. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss applicable state and local requirements and the criteria herein, to familiarize the applicant with the goals and objectives of the city comprehensive plan, and to discuss the proposal in relation to such concerns. The applicant may provide a sketch plan of the proposal for review and discussion. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.010(5))


16.08.070 Processing fees.

A. Processing fees shall be established by city council resolution. 

B. All fees paid are nonrefundable. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 80-9 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.010(6))


16.08.080 Engineering plan review and inspection.

Whenever the city determines that engineering plan review and inspection service are necessary, the applicant shall be responsible for paying for the actual cost of such services, and said charges shall be payable prior to final approval of the subdivision plat by the city engineer and surveyor. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 80-9 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.010(6))

Article II. Partition and Minor Replat


16.08.090 Inspection and processing fee.

A filing fee established by city council resolution shall be paid at the time of submitting the tentative plan. All fees paid are nonrefundable. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.020(1). Formerly 16.08.100)


16.08.100 Review and approval procedure.

A. When a proposed partition contains three or fewer parcels, the city staff may approve the partition when all of the following conditions are met:

1. All parcels front on an existing road or street as required by LCMC 17.52.030.

2. No parcels have been previously partitioned from said tract during the last calendar year, calculated from the date of application.

3. All parcels conform to the provisions of the city comprehensive plan and LCMC Title 17.

B. An application for approval, together with required fees and four copies of the proposed tentative plan of partition, shall be submitted to the department of community development. 

C. Upon receipt of the application for minor replat or partition, the planning and community development director shall review the application and determine whether the proposed minor replat or partition appears to comply with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable city ordinances, and thereupon shall provide a notice of decision pursuant to LCMC 17.76.020. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.020(2). Formerly 16.08.110)


16.08.110 Required data.

Minor replats and partitions shall be submitted to the community development department for processing by filing four copies of the boundary survey. The survey shall contain the following additional information:

A. Name and address of the owner or owners of record;

B. For land adjacent to and within the parcel to be partitioned, show locations, names and existing widths of all streets and easements of way; location, width and purpose of all other existing or proposed easements; and location and size of sewer and water lines, drainage ways and power poles;

C. Outline and location of existing buildings to remain in place within the proposed partitioning and directly adjacent;

D. Appropriate identification clearly stating the plan as a minor replat or partition. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.020(3)(a). Formerly 16.08.120)


16.08.120 Disposition of approved tentative plans.

When a tentative plan has been approved, all copies shall be marked with the date and conditions, if any, of approval. A copy shall be returned to the applicant, one copy shall be filed with the county surveyor by the applicant, one copy shall be retained in the planning and community development department files, and one copy shall be retained in the engineering department files. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.020(3)(b). Formerly 16.08.130)


16.08.130 Large parcels may require subdivision procedure.

If the parcel of land to be partitioned exceeds five acres and is being partitioned into more than two parcels within a year, any one of which is less than one acre, full compliance with all requirements for subdivision may be required if the city staff should determine, in its judgment, that the entire parcel being partitioned is in the process of being divided into small parcels. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.020(3)(c). Formerly 16.08.140)


16.08.140 Approval conditions.

Approval may be conditioned upon extension or assurance of public improvements as described in LCMC 16.16.010 through 16.16.100. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.020(3)(d). Formerly 16.08.150)


16.08.150 Final plat – Filing – Time limit.

Within two years of the tentative plan approval, the applicant shall submit to the city a final plat for the minor replat or partition that is consistent with the tentative plan and state law. A signature block for the community development director, the Lincoln County surveyor and the Lincoln County tax assessor shall be on the final plat. The community development director shall approve the final plat if it is consistent with the tentative plan and all conditions have been satisfied, including the provision and acceptance of any required public improvements. After the final plat has been approved by all city and county officials and recorded, one reproducible full-size copy shall be returned to the city within 30 days of recording. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1)

Article III. Property Line Adjustment


16.08.160 Applicability.

This procedure may be utilized, as an alternative to partition or replatting procedures, under the following circumstances: 

A. The size, shape or configuration of two existing units (lots or parcels) of land, each of which is a legal lot or parcel, is to be modified by the relocation of a common boundary between the parcels; and 

B. An additional unit of land is not created; and 

C. Adjustment of the property line shall not cause or increase any nonconformity with any applicable zoning or other requirement of the city of Lincoln City to a greater extent than prior to the adjustment. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.030(1))


16.08.170 City approval required.

Any person desiring to carry out a property line adjustment shall submit to the planning and community development director an application, together with such fee as established by city council resolution. The property line adjustment application shall be upon such form as shall be approved by the planning and community development director, and shall include at least the following information: 

A. A legal description (by lot and block or by metes and bounds) of the units of land as they exist prior to the proposed property line adjustment, and as they would exist after the adjustment.

B. A map (a tax map, survey, or equivalent) depicting the configuration of the units of land prior to and after the proposed adjustment. This information may be depicted on the same map. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.030(2)(a))


16.08.180 Decision process.

Upon receipt of the application for property line adjustment and the required fee, the planning and community development director shall review the application and determine whether or not the proposed adjustment appears to comply with the provisions of this title and other applicable city ordinances, and thereupon shall provide a notice of decision pursuant to LCMC 17.76.020. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.030(3)(a))


16.08.190 Conveyance and security.

Following such approval, the property line adjustment may be carried out in the following manner. 

A. The owners of the property involved in the property line adjustment shall prepare and record a conveyance or conveyances in accordance with ORS 92.190(4), attaching a copy of the notice of city approval. 

B. The parties shall obtain a survey of the adjusted property line, monuments shall be placed, and the survey shall be filed with the county surveyor, as required by ORS 92.060(7). (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.030(2)(b))


16.08.200 Responsibility.

The property line adjustment shall be effective upon compliance with the terms, provisions and requirements of this title. The city of Lincoln City does not hereby assume any responsibility to verify or ascertain the ownership of any property or the accuracy of any map, survey or legal description or other information or material submitted to it in connection with this procedure. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.030(2)(c))

Article IV. Subdivision


16.08.210 Inspection and processing fee.

A subdivision inspection and processing fee shall be submitted as established by city council resolution. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.040(1). Formerly 16.08.230)


16.08.220 Tentative plan – Submission.

The subdivider shall file 15 prints of the tentative plan with the department of community development; the tentative plan will be scheduled for planning commission review at a public hearing after the application is deemed complete and notice is provided. The public hearing shall be in accordance with LCMC 16.20.050. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.040(2)(a). Formerly 16.08.240)


16.08.230 Tentative plan – Preliminary review.

A. Within 10 days after being submitted by the subdivider, the department of community development shall furnish one print to the State Highway Department (when development is adjacent to a state highway and access to the highway is desired by the subdivider), and one print each to cable TV, power, gas and telephone companies. These agencies will be given at least 10 days to review the plan, suggest revisions and return the plans to the department of community development.

B. The department of community development and the department of public works, in reviewing the tentative plan, shall consider and provide information to the planning commission on the following:

1. Location in the adjoining streets or property of existing sewers and water mains, culverts and drain pipes, electrical conduits, or lines, proposed to be used on the property to be subdivided, and invert elevations of sewers at points of proposed connections and any other pertinent information;

2. Planning and zoning on and adjacent to the tract, if any;

3. Conformance to other applicable city ordinances. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.040(2)(b). Formerly 16.08.250)


16.08.240 Tentative plan – Approval.

A. The planning commission will review the plan and the reports of the agencies listed above and shall give tentative approval of the plan in its preliminary form, as submitted, or as it may be modified. If disapproved, the planning commission shall express its disapproval and its reasons therefor in writing. The applicant may appeal such decisions to the city council in accordance with LCMC 16.20.020.

B. Approval of the tentative plan shall indicate the planning commission’s approval of the final plat, provided there is no change in the plan of subdivisions, as shown on the tentative plan, and there is full compliance with all requirements imposed by the planning commission as conditions of tentative plan approval.

C. The action of the planning commission shall be noted on four copies of the tentative plan, including reference to any attached documents describing any conditions. Following adoption of a final order, one copy shall be returned to the subdivider, one copy sent to the engineer or surveyor, one copy sent to the city engineer, and the other copy retained in the planning department files. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.040(2)(c). Formerly 16.08.260)


16.08.250 Tentative plan – Required data.

A. Preparation. The subdivider shall prepare a tentative plan, together with improvement plans and other supplementary material, as may be required, to indicate the general program and objectives of the project. To assure knowledge of existing conditions, and to obtain compliance with existing city development plans, the subdivider may confer with the department of community development and department of public works prior to preparation of the tentative plan.

B. Scope. The tentative plan need not be a finished drawing, but it should show all pertinent information to scale, in order that the planning commission may properly review the proposed development.

C. Partial Development. Where the area to be subdivided contains only part of the tract owned or controlled by the subdivider, the planning commission may require a sketch of a tentative layout for streets and parcels in the unsubdivided portion.

D. Information Required. The tentative plan shall include the following information:

1. Detailed Map. The tentative plan shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet up to 10 acres; for areas over 10 acres, one inch equals 100 feet up to 100 acres; and for areas over 100 acres, one inch equals 200 feet or an appropriate scale approved by the department of community development;

2. General Information. The following information shall be shown on the tentative plan:

a. Proposed name of the subdivision. The name must not duplicate nor resemble the name of another subdivision in the county and shall be approved by the planning commission and county surveyor pursuant to ORS 92.090(1);

b. Date, north point and scale of drawing;

c. Appropriate identification clearly stating the drawing as a tentative plan;

d. Location of the subdivision by section, township and range, and a legal description sufficient to define the location and boundaries of the proposed tract, and the tract designation or other description according to the real estate records of the county assessor;

e. A vicinity sketch map at a scale of one inch equals 400 feet showing adjacent property boundaries and land uses;

3. Existing Conditions. The following existing conditions shall be shown on the tentative plan:

a. Location, widths and names of all existing or platted streets or other public ways within or adjacent to the tract; and other important features, such as section lines and corners, city boundary lines and monuments;

b. Contour lines having the following minimum intervals:

i. Two-foot contour intervals for ground slopes less than 10 percent;

ii. Five-foot contour intervals for ground slopes 10 percent or greater;

iii. Contours shall be related to the city or other datum approved by the city engineer and/or surveyor;

c. Location of at least one temporary bench mark within the plat boundaries or the source of the contour line data shown (source and accuracy subject to city engineer and/or surveyor’s approval);

d. Location and direction of all watercourses;

e. Natural features, such as rock outcroppings, marshes, wooded areas and isolated preservable trees;

f. Existing uses of the property, including location of all existing structures to remain on the property after subdividing;

4. Proposed Plan of Land Subdivision. The following information shall be included on the tentative plan:

a. Proposed Streets – Location, Widths, Approximate Radii of Curves. The relationship of all streets to any projected streets, as shown on any development plan adopted by the planning commission or, if there is no complete plan, as suggested by the department of community development. Street names will be determined and assigned by the city;

b. Easements. Location on the site or abutting property showing the width and purpose of all existing and proposed easements;

c. Lots. Approximate dimensions of all lots, minimum lot size, proposed lot and block numbers;

d. Proposed Land Uses. Sites, if any, allocated for:

i. Multiple-family dwellings;

ii. Shopping centers;

iii. Churches;

iv. Industry;

v. Parks, schools, playgrounds;

vi. Public or semipublic buildings;

vii. Open space;

5. Area Coverage. Area coverage of existing and proposed structures, lots, streets or other changes anticipated;

6. Explanatory Information. Any of the following information which may be required by the planning commission, and which may not be shown practicably on the tentative plan, may be submitted in separate statements accompanying the tentative plan:

a. Proposed deed restrictions in outline form;

b. Approximate existing centerline profiles showing the finished grades of all streets, as approved by the city engineer, included in the proposed subdivision;

c. Typical cross sections of proposed streets, showing widths of roadways, curbs, location and width of sidewalks and the location and size of utility mains;

d. Approximate plan and profiles of proposed sanitary sewers, storm drains and water distribution system, showing pipe sizes and the location of valves and fire hydrants, all to conform to city standards;

e. A general description of property intended to be dedicated to the city or public, other than street rights-of-way, including proposed dedication restrictions. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.040(3). Formerly 16.08.270)


16.08.260 Final plat – Time limit.

A. Limit. The official final plat must be prepared and submitted within two years following the approval given on the tentative plan by the planning commission, and it shall incorporate the recommendations and conditions made by the commission.

B. Resubmittal After Expiration. If the owner or subdivider wishes to proceed with the subdivision of his land after the expiration of the two-year period following approval of the tentative plan by the planning commission, he must resubmit his tentative plan to the planning commission and make any revisions considered necessary to meet changed conditions. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.040(4)(a). Formerly 16.08.280)


16.08.270 Final plat – Preparation.

A. Form. The final plat or map shall be submitted in the form required by these regulations and state laws, including ORS 92.050 through 92.120, as amended, for plats of record.

B. Required Information. In addition to that specified by state law, the following information shall be shown on the final plat:

1. Date, north point and scale of drawing;

2. Legal description of tract boundaries;

3. Name of the owner or owners, subdivider, engineer or surveyor;

4. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets and lot lines with dimensions, bearing and radii, arcs, points of curvature and tangent bearings. All bearings and angles shall be shown to the nearest one second and all dimensions to the nearest 0.01 foot. If circular curves are proposed in the plat or map, the following data must be shown in tabulation form: curve radius, central angles, arc length and length and bearing of long chord. All information shown on the face of the plat shall be mathematically correct within 0.01 foot;

5. Dimensions and purpose of all easements;

6. Any building setback lines, if more restrictive than LCMC Title 17;

7. Location and purpose for which sites, other than single-family residential lots, are dedicated or reserved;

8. Easements and any other areas for public use dedicated without any reservation or restriction whatever;

9. A copy of any deed restrictions written on the face of the plat or prepared to record with the plat with reference on the face of the plat. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.040(4)(b). Formerly 16.08.290)


16.08.280 Final plat – Submission.

A. The subdivider shall file five prints of the final plat and any supplementary information with the director of community development. The director of community development shall promptly submit the plat to the city engineer and surveyor.

B. The minimum supplementary information to be supplied with the final plat shall be as follows:

1. Two prints of a control survey of the parcel to be subdivided. The survey shall indicate the perimeter bearings and distances and sufficient control data to justify the conclusions reached in setting the perimeter;

2. A copy of any deed restrictions proposed, certified by the subdivider that they are intended to be recorded;

3. A bond, certified check or other method of financing as approved by the city manager, to guarantee installation of improvements, if they are not installed;

4. In addition to the above, two sets of grading and/or surface drainage plans may be required, if need is determined at or before tentative plan approval. The plans shall indicate the course and method of disposal of all lot, existing surface and subsurface drainage, roof drainage and final contour lines proposed. The scale and contour interval of the plans shall be approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.040(4)(c)(i). Formerly 16.08.300)


16.08.290 Final plat – Review.

A. Within 30 days after receipt of the required submission, the director of community development and city engineer shall examine it and the supplementary information to determine that the subdivision, as shown, is substantially the same as it appeared on the approved tentative plan and as required by this title, and that the plat, as prepared, is technically correct, or determine any deficiencies and notify the subdivider or his agent of their findings.

B. After the final plat prints have been reviewed and found correct, the subdivider shall submit the plat for signature. Prior to approval of the final plat, the city engineer shall verify that either:

1. All improvements have been installed in accordance with the requirements of this title and with the action of the planning commission giving conditional approval of the tentative plan; or

2. A bond or certified check has been posted, which is available to the city and in sufficient amount to assure such completion of all required improvements as per this title. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.040(4)(c)(ii). Formerly 16.08.310)


16.08.300 Final plat – Approval.

A. Approval of the final plat shall be indicated by the signature of the chairman of the planning commission, the planning and community development director, and the city engineer. 

B. If the city engineer and the planning and community development director determine that the final plat is in full conformance with the approved tentative plan and other regulations, they shall so advise the chairman of the planning commission. The chairman of the planning commission, planning and community development director and the city engineer may then sign the plat without further action by the planning commission. 

C. The approval of the final plat shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance for maintenance by the public of any street or other easement of way shown on the plat at the time of recording with the county.

D. After the final plat has been approved by all city and county officials and recorded, one reproducible full-size copy of all data (plat face, dedications, certificates, approvals and one copy of recorded restrictive and protective covenants) shall be returned to the city within 30 days of recording. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.040(4)(c)(iii) – (vi). Formerly 16.08.320)


16.08.310 Final plat – Filing – Time limit.

Approval of the final plat by the city as provided by this title shall be conditioned on its prompt recording. The subdivider shall, without delay, submit the final plat to the county assessor and the county governing body for signature as required by ORS 92.100, as amended. Approval of the final plat may be declared null and void if the plat or map is not submitted to the county for recording within 60 days after the date of the last required city approving signature has been obtained. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 2.040(4)(d). Formerly 16.08.330)


Chapter 16.12 DESIGN STANDARDS

Sections:

16.12.010    Design standards and principles of acceptability.

16.12.020    Streets – General requirements.

16.12.030    Streets – Right-of-way and roadway widths.

16.12.040    Streets – Reserve strips.

16.12.050    Streets – Alignment.

16.12.060    Streets – Future expansion.

16.12.070    Streets – Intersection angles.

16.12.080    Existing streets.

16.12.090    Half-streets.

16.12.100    Culs-de-sac.

16.12.110    Street names.

16.12.120    Streets – Grades and curves.

16.12.130    Streets – Planting easements.

16.12.140    Marginal access streets.

16.12.150    Alleys.

16.12.160    Blocks – General requirements.

16.12.170    Block sizes.

16.12.180    Easements – Utility lines.

16.12.190    Easements – Watercourses.

16.12.200    Easements – Pedestrian and bicycle access ways.

16.12.210    Lots – General requirements.

16.12.220    Minimum lot sizes.

16.12.230    Through lots.

16.12.240    Lot side lines.

16.12.250    Lots – Resubdivision.

16.12.260    Lots – Residential building setback lines.

16.12.270    Public open spaces.


16.12.010 Design standards and principles of acceptability.

Subdivisions and partitions shall be in conformity with the comprehensive plan, LCMC Title 17 and other applicable ordinances of the city. Subdivisions and partitions shall conform with the requirements of state laws and the Land Conservation and Development Commission’s statewide goals, until such time as the city’s comprehensive plan has been approved by the Land Conservation and Development Commission. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(1))


16.12.020 Streets – General requirements.

The location, width and grade of streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and their appropriate relation to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets. Where location is not shown in a development plan, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either:

A. Provide for continuation of appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or

B. Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the planning commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impractical. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(2)(a))


16.12.030 Streets – Right-of-way and roadway widths.

Unless otherwise approved by the planning commission, the width of streets and roadways in feet shall be as shown in the cross sections in the city’s 2015 Transportation System Plan, Volume 1, Standards section, starting on page 45, and Public Works/Engineering Standards.

	Type of Street	Optimal Driving Zone Width

(typically white line to white line, including total of motor vehicle driving lane width – in feet)	Optimum Street Width

(typically curb to curb, including motor vehicle driving lanes, parking lanes, bike lanes – in feet)	Optimum Right-of-Way

(property line to property line, including space for sidewalks and possibly utilities – in feet)

	High Use Minor Arterial	36	52	77

	Medium Use Minor Arterial	36	48	69

	Low Use Minor Arterial	36	48	61

	High Use Collector	22	38 – 54	63 – 79

	Medium Use Collector	22	34 – 50	55 – 71

	Low Use Collector	22	34 – 50	47 – 63

	High Use Local	20	20 – 34	45 – 59

	Medium Use Local	20	20 – 34	41 – 55

	Low Use Local	20	20 – 34	33 – 47

(Ord. 2016-21 § 6; Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(2)(b))


16.12.040 Streets – Reserve strips.

Reserve strips or street plugs controlling access to streets will not be approved unless such strips are necessary for protection of the public welfare or of substantial property rights or both, and in no case unless the control and disposal of the land composing such strips is placed definitely within the jurisdiction of the city under conditions approved by the planning commission. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(2)(c))


16.12.050 Streets – Alignment.

All streets, other than minor streets or culs-de-sac, shall, so far as practical, be in alignment with existing streets by continuations of the centerlines thereof. In no case shall the staggering of streets make “T” intersections so designed that a dangerous jog is produced. Jogs of less than 100 feet on such streets, measured along the centerline of the intersected street, must be adjusted by curves or diagonals so that the alignment across the street is continuous. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(2)(d))


16.12.060 Streets – Future expansion.

A. Where a subdivision or partition adjoins undeveloped property, streets which, in the findings of the planning commission, should be continued in the event of the subdivision or partitioning of the undeveloped property will be required to be provided through the boundary lines of the tract.

B. Reserve strips and street plugs may be required to preserve the objectives of street extensions. Reserve strips and street plugs shall be deeded to the city or county, as directed, prior to final plat or map approval.

C. If, in the opinion of the city engineer, a traffic, pedestrian or safety hazard temporarily exists by the construction of a dead-end street, he may direct that a barricade of adequate design be installed as one of the required improvement items for the subdivision or partition. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(2)(e))


16.12.070 Streets – Intersection angles.

Streets shall intersect one another at an angle as near to a right angle as practical, and no intersections of streets at angles of less than 75 degrees will be approved unless necessitated by topographical conditions. When intersections of other than 90 degrees are unavoidable, the right-of-way lines along the acute angle shall have a corner radius of 23 feet. All right-of-way lines at intersections with streets shall have a corner radius of 13 feet, except as otherwise directed. Right-of-way lines at cul-de-sac entrances shall have a minimum radius of 20 feet. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(2)(f))


16.12.080 Existing streets.

Whenever existing streets adjacent to or within a tract are of inadequate width, additional right-of-way shall be provided at the time of subdivision or partitioning. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(2)(g))


16.12.090 Half-streets.

Half-streets, while generally not acceptable, may be approved where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision or partition, when in conformity with other requirements of this title; and when the planning commission finds it will be practical to require dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract. Reserve strips and street plugs may be required to preserve the objectives of half streets. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(2)(h))


16.12.100 Culs-de-sac.

A. A cul-de-sac shall be as short as possible and shall, in no event, be more than 600 feet long, nor serve more than 18 single-family dwellings.

B. All culs-de-sac shall terminate with an approved turnaround. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(2)(i))


16.12.110 Street names.

A. No street name shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the name of existing streets, except for extensions of existing streets.

B. Street names and numbers shall conform to the established pattern in the city and the surrounding area and shall be subject to approval of the planning commission. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(2)(j))


16.12.120 Streets – Grades and curves.

A. Grades shall not exceed six percent on major streets, 10 percent on collector streets, or 12 percent on any other street, without approval of the department of public works.

B. In flat areas, finished street grades shall have a minimum slope of one-half percent.

C. Centerline radii of curves shall not be less than 300 feet on major streets, 200 feet on collector streets, or 100 feet on other streets. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(2)(k))


16.12.130 Streets – Planting easements.

Where approval of streets less than 60 feet in width is granted, additional easements for street trees, shrubs, sidewalks and utilities may be required. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(2)(l))


16.12.140 Marginal access streets.

Where a subdivision or partition abuts or contains an existing or proposed major street, the planning commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage lots with suitable depth, screen planting contained in nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(2)(m))


16.12.150 Alleys.

A. Location. Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts unless other permanent provisions for access to off-street parking and loading facilities are made as approved by the planning commission.

B. Intersection. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided. The corners of necessary alley intersections shall have a radius of not less than 12 feet. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(2)(n))


16.12.160 Blocks – General requirements.

The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be designed with due regard to providing adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated, needs for convenient access circulation, control and safety of street traffic, and limitations and opportunities of topography. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(3)(a))


16.12.170 Block sizes.

Block sizes shall conform to the access spacing standards in the table below, unless topographical or other existing or planned conditions justify a variation. Where a variation is necessary, the city engineer and the planning director will determine the spacing.

Street and Access Spacing Standards 

	 	Principal Arterial	Minor Arterial	Collector	Local/Shared

	Maximum Block Size

(public street to public street)	See Oregon Highway Plan	530 feet	530 feet	530 feet

	Minimum Block Size

(public street to public street)	265 feet	265 feet	265 feet

	Minimum Driveway Spacing

(Public street to driveway and driveway to driveway)	265 feet	130 feet	None

(Ord. 2016-21 § 7; Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(3)(b))


16.12.180 Easements – Utility lines.

Easements for electric lines or other public utilities are required. Easements for utilities shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width and centered on all rear and side lot lines, unless specifically waived by the planning commission. Front lot line utility easements up to six feet in width behind the property lines may be required if the need can be demonstrated. No permanent structures will be allowed within such easements. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(4)(a))


16.12.190 Easements – Watercourses.

Where a subdivision or partition is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of the watercourse, and such further width as will be adequate for the purpose. Streets or parkways parallel to major watercourses may be required. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(4)(b))


16.12.200 Easements – Pedestrian and bicycle access ways.

A. Developers shall make the following pedestrian and bicycle connections (illustrated in Figure 16.12.200A):

1. From the head of a cul-de-sac to the nearest street;

2. Between streets on either side of a block more than 750 feet in length, with at least one access way for every 530 feet in block length;

3. From or between existing or approved pedestrian and bicycle access ways; and

4. Other connections as determined necessary by the planning commission.

Figure 16.12.200A
[IMAGE]


B. The access way shall be in a public right-of-way or a public access easement on private property. The access way may be within a utility easement with the written permission of the utility provider.

C. A pedestrian and bicycle access way shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width. The access way shall have an eight-foot-wide path of concrete, asphalt, brick/masonry pavers, or other city-approved durable surfaces meeting ADA requirements. The remaining width shall be of living or nonliving pervious landscape materials that meet the approval of the planning director.

D. Where constrained by steep slopes, environmentally sensitive areas, historic or culturally significant areas, or existing development, the planning commission may modify the requirement for an access way. (Ord. 2016-21 § 8; Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(4)(c))


16.12.210 Lots – General requirements.

The lot size, width, shape and orientation shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(5)(a))


16.12.220 Minimum lot sizes.

A. The lot sizes, in addition to conformance with LCMC Title 17, shall be not less than as given in the following table:

	 	Minimum Size in Feet

	Type of Lot	Width	Average Depth

	Corner lot	60	80

	Interior lot	50	70

	Through lot with planting screen	50	120

B. In the case of irregular lots, the widths measured at a building line must be not less than 70 feet.

C. Where property is zoned and planned for business or industrial use, other widths and areas may be permitted at the discretion of the planning commission. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street loading and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(5)(b))


16.12.230 Through lots.

A. Through lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from major traffic arteries or adjacent nonresidential activities or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.

B. A planting screen easement of at least 10 feet in width and across which there shall be no right of access may be required along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(5)(c))


16.12.240 Lot side lines.

The side lines of lots shall run at right angles to the street upon which the lots face. On curved streets they shall be radial to the curve. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(5)(d))


16.12.250 Lots – Resubdivision.

A. In subdividing or partitioning tracts into large lots which at some future time are likely to be subdivided or partitioned, that resubdivision or partitioning shall take place without violating the requirements of these regulations and without interfering with the orderly development of streets.

B. Restriction of building locations in relationship to future street right-of-way shall be made a matter of record if the planning commission considers it necessary. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(5)(e))


16.12.260 Lots – Residential building setback lines.

If special building setback lines are to be established in the subdivision or partition, they should be shown on the subdivision or partition plan or included in the deed restriction. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(5)(f))


16.12.270 Public open spaces.

A. Due consideration shall be given by the subdivider or partitioner to the allocation of suitable areas for schools, parks and playgrounds to be dedicated for public use as per the city comprehensive plan.

B. Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public use shown in a tentative plan is located in whole or in part in a subdivision or partition, the planning commission may request the dedication or reservation of such area within the subdivision or partition in those cases in which the planning commission deems such requirements to be reasonable with the approval of the city council. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 3.010(6))


Chapter 16.16 IMPROVEMENTS

Sections:

16.16.010    Required improvements.

16.16.020    Streets.

16.16.030    Surface drainage and storm sewer system.

16.16.040    Sanitary sewers.

16.16.050    Water system.

16.16.060    Sidewalks.

16.16.070    Street name signs.

16.16.080    Street light poles.

16.16.090    Curb cuts and driveways.

16.16.100    Street trees.

16.16.110    Monumentation.

16.16.120    Creation of streets and ways.


16.16.010 Required improvements.

A. The following improvements shall be installed at the expense of the subdivider or partitioner in accordance with the city requirements:

1. Streets, including drainage adequate to serve the property and streets;

2. Sanitary sewers and services;

3. Water distribution lines and services;

4. Sidewalks in any pedestrian ways;

5. Street name signs and street light poles;

6. Lot, street and perimeter monumentation;

7. Underground power lines;

8. Underground telephone lines;

9. Bicycle, equestrian or special “ways”;

10. Underground cable TV lines.

B. All improvements shall be constructed to the subdivision or partition boundary.

C. Where dedicated or undedicated open space is proposed or provided, it shall be the subdivider’s or partitioner’s responsibility to provide, if required, standard public improvements to and through the open space. Other public improvements installed at the option of the subdivider or partitioner shall conform to city requirements. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 4.010(1))


16.16.020 Streets.

A. The developer shall be responsible for improving all streets, including alleys, within the subdivision or partition, and streets adjacent, but only partially within the subdivision or partition, and streets adjacent to a subdivision or partition, whether included or excluded from the subdivision or partition.

B. Construction of all streets and alleys shall be to city section standards for permanent street and alley construction, pursuant to requirements set forth in the city transportation system plan and public works/engineering standards.

C. In any area, if the city requires a subdivider or partitioner to install a street with pavement width greater than 40 feet to provide a major traffic route, the city will pay that portion of the cost in excess of the cost of a 40-foot street. If the ultimate development exceeds a potential of 100 lots or living units and any one of the streets is a collector or major, the developer shall pay the entire cost of such street width as determined by the department of community development and public works to be necessary to adequately serve anticipated traffic loading.

D. Prior to city approval of the final subdivision plat or partition map, all perimeter and back lot line monumentation shall be installed and the installation of the front line and street centerline monumentation (along and within street right-of-way) guaranteed. Any monuments destroyed during improvement installation shall be replaced after street construction. As an alternate to the above, all monumentation can be installed prior to the approval, with the stipulation that any removed prior to building permit issuance or improvement acceptance by the city shall be replaced at the subdivider’s or partitioner’s expense. (Ord. 2016-21 § 9; Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 4.010(2))


16.16.030 Surface drainage and storm sewer system.

A. Drainage facilities shall be provided within the subdivision or partition and are to connect the subdivision or partition drainage to drainageways or storm sewers outside the subdivision or partition.

B. Capacity, grade and materials shall be by a design approved by the city engineer. Design of drainage within the subdivision or partition shall take into account the location, capacity and grade necessary to maintain unrestricted flow from areas that after development will drain through the subdivision or partition and to allow extension of the system to serve such area. Connection or eventual discharge to a storm drain system or drainageway that is not capable of receiving the applicable design storm discharge shall be prohibited. In addition to normal drainage design and construction, provisions shall be taken to handle any drainage from preexisting subsurface drain tile. It shall be the design engineer’s duty to investigate the location of drain tile and its relation to public improvements and building construction. The roof and site drainage from each lot shall be discharged to either curb face outlets (if minor quantity), to a public storm drain or to a natural acceptable drainage way if adjacent to the lot. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 4.010(3))


16.16.040 Sanitary sewers.

A. Sanitary sewers shall be required to be installed to serve a subdivision or partition and connect the subdivision or partition to existing mains if service is available. In the event that this is not possible, appeal may be made to the city council.

B. Capacity, grade and materials shall be by a design approved by the city engineer. Design shall take into account the location, capacity and grade to allow for desirable extension beyond the subdivision or partition. The city will not expect the subdivider or partitioner to pay the extra cost of required oversize sewer mains necessary to provide for extension beyond the subdivision or partition.

C. If required sewer facilities will, without further sewer construction, directly serve property outside the subdivision or partition, the following arrangements will be made to equitably distribute the cost:

1. If the area outside the subdivision or partition to be directly served by the sewer line has reached a state of development to justify sewer installation at the time, the planning commission may recommend to the city council construction as an assessment project, with such arrangement with the subdivider or partitioner as is desirable to assure financing his share of the construction.

2. If the installation is not made as an assessment project, the city may enter into an agreement with the subdivider or partitioner setting forth methods of reimbursement for the proportionate share of the cost for each connection made to the sewer by property owners outside of the subdivision or partition for a period of 10 years from the time of installation of the sewers. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 4.010(4))


16.16.050 Water system.

A. Waterlines and fire hydrants serving the subdivision or partition and connecting the subdivision or partition to city mains shall be installed.

B. Materials, size and location of water mains, valves and hydrants shall be in accordance with the city standards and the design approved by the city engineer. Design shall take into account provisions for extension beyond the subdivision or partition and to adequately grid the city system. The city will not expect the subdivider or partitioner to pay for the extra cost of the oversize mains not necessary to serve the subdivision or partition.

C. If required water mains will directly serve property outside the subdivision or partition, the city may enter into an agreement with the subdivider or partitioner setting forth methods of reimbursement for the proportionate share of the cost for each connection made to the water mains by property owners outside the subdivision or partition for a period of 10 years from the time of installation of the main. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 4.010(5))


16.16.060 Sidewalks.

A. The developer shall install sidewalks on streets within and adjoining the subdivision or partition, as indicated by the standards section of the city’s 2015 Transportation System Plan, Volume 1, and install pedestrian access ways in accordance with LCMC 16.12.200.

B. All sidewalks constructed within the subdivision or partition shall be to city standards, as set forth in the standards section of the city’s 2015 Transportation System Plan, Volume 1, and Public Works/Engineering Standards, and at grades the city engineer has established or approved. The property owner shall keep a minimum of five feet of the sidewalk width clear of both permanent and temporary obstructions (e.g., utility poles, sandwich signs). (Ord. 2016-21 § 10; Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 4.010(6))


16.16.070 Street name signs.

Street name signs shall be installed at all intersections according to city standards or a deposit made with the city in an amount equal to cost of the installation. Installation shall be made by the city. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 4.010(7))


16.16.080 Street light poles.

A deposit in the amount of the actual or estimated pole installation cost is required. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 4.010(8))


16.16.090 Curb cuts and driveways.

Curb cuts and driveway installations are not required of the subdivider or partitioner, but if installed shall be according to city standards. Curb face outlets for rain drains shall also be provided. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 4.010(9)(a))


16.16.100 Street trees.

Street tree planting is not required by the subdivider, but if planted, shall be according to city requirements and of a species compatible with the width of planting strip and utilities contained therein. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 4.010(9)(b))


16.16.110 Monumentation.

In addition to meeting the requirements as set forth in Oregon Revised Statutes relative to required lot, street and perimeter monumentation, the following shall be required:

A. An accuracy ratio of subdivision plat or partition map boundary line closure of one in 10,000 as found in the field. Lot dimensions as found in the field shall be within 0.10 feet of record distance.

B. Two primary perimeter monuments (one of which can be the initial point) having the same physical characteristics as the initial point are required. The monuments are to be on a common line visible, if possible, one to the other at time of approval and preferably at angle points in the perimeter. They shall be points as far apart as practicable. The position for the initial point and other primary perimeter monuments shall be selected with due consideration to possible damage during construction.

C. Street centerline monumentation shall consist of a two-inch diameter brass cap set in a concrete base within and separate from a standard monument box with cover (standard city details applicable) at locations specified by the city engineer (generally at intersections with centerline of arterial or collector streets and within streets proposed to be greatly extended into adjacent future subdivisions or partitions). All other street centerline points (intersection, points of tangent intersections, cul-de-sac centerlines, cul-de-sac offset points) shall be monumented with a five-eighths-inch-diameter steel rod 30 inches long and set visible at the finish surface of the street. The above monumentation will be required at point of curvature and point of tangency of the curve. All centerline monuments are to be accurately placed after street construction is complete. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 5.010)


16.16.120 Creation of streets and ways.

A. The planning commission may approve creation of a street to be established by deed without full compliance with these regulations, provided such conditions as are necessary to preserve the objectives of the standards of this title are accepted, and provided either of the following conditions exists:

1. The establishment of such street is initiated by the city and is declared essential for the purpose of general traffic circulation, and the partitioning of land is an incidental effect rather than the primary objective of the creation;

2. The tract out of which the street is to be dedicated is an isolated ownership of one acre or less.

B. The improvement of all streets shall be in conformance with requirements for subdivision or partition (right-of-way width, improvements, etc.).

C. Creation of Ways. The planning commission may approve an easement of way to be established by deed without full compliance with these regulations, provided such an easement is the only reasonable method by which a portion of a lot large enough to warrant partitioning into two parcels may be provided with access. If the existing lot is large enough so that two or more parcels not having frontage on an existing street may be created, an easement of way will not be acceptable and a street must be dedicated, unless as provided by planning commission determination. Approval of the creation of way does not imply approval of the method of partitioning. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 6.010)


Chapter 16.20 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

16.20.010    Enforcement authority.

16.20.020    Appeals – Subdivision.

16.20.030    Appeals – Partition, minor replat, and property line adjustment.

16.20.040    Subdivision modification.

16.20.050    Hearing – Notice.

16.20.060    Hearing – Recess.

16.20.070    Amendment of title provisions – Initiation.

16.20.080    Amendment of title provisions – Procedure.

16.20.090    Amendment of title provisions – Record.

16.20.100    Amendment of title provisions – Petition filing – Fee.

16.20.110    Violation – Penalty. 


16.20.010 Enforcement authority.

The city manager or his designated representative shall have the power and duty to enforce the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 7.010)


16.20.020 Appeals – Subdivision.

A. General. A decision of the planning commission concerning a subdivision may be appealed to the city council by a party to the hearing by filing an appeal within 10 calendar days of the mailing of the final order. Appeals shall be conducted pursuant to procedures established in LCMC 17.76.040. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 7.020)


16.20.030 Appeals – Partition, minor replat, and property line adjustment.

Any party aggrieved by an administrative decision concerning a minor replat, partition or property line adjustment may appeal to the planning commission, as provided in LCMC 17.76.040(A). An appeal shall be filed within 12 calendar days of the mailed notice of decision. Appeals shall be conducted pursuant to procedures established in LCMC 17.76.040. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 7.030)


16.20.040 Subdivision modification.

A. The standards and requirements of these regulations may be modified by the planning commission in the case of a plan and program for a complete community, planned unit development, neighborhood unit, condominium, dwelling group, large-scale shopping center or large industrial area development which, in the opinion of the planning commission, provides adequate public spaces and improvement for the circulation, recreation, light and public services needs of the development tract and its relation to adjacent areas, and which also provides such covenants or other legal provisions as will assure conformity to and achievement of the plan.

B. Conditions. In granting modifications, the planning commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so modified. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 7.040)


16.20.050 Hearing – Notice.

A. When the planning commission is required to hold a public hearing, notice of hearing shall be given in the following manner:

1. Each notice of a hearing of a proposed subdivision shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.

2. At least 20 days prior to the date of the hearing, notices shall be mailed to all owners of property within 500 feet, excluding streets, of the exterior boundary of the property for which the application is made.

3. The city must require that a sign be posted on the property not less than 10 days prior to the date of the hearing, displaying notice of the commission’s pending public hearing. The design and location of the sign to be posted on the property is to be determined by the city manager or his designated representative.

B. For the purposes of this section, the names and addresses of the owners as shown on the records of the county assessor may be used. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 7.050)


16.20.060 Hearing – Recess.

The planning commission may recess a hearing in order to obtain additional information or to serve further notice upon other property owners or persons it decides may be interested in the proposal being considered. Upon recessing, the time and date when the hearing is to resume shall be announced. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 7.060)


16.20.070 Amendment of title provisions – Initiation.

An amendment, supplement or change in the text of this title may be initiated by:

A. A motion of the city council;

B. An official proposal by the planning commission;

C. A petition of any property owner or resident of the city to either the planning commission or the city council. The petition shall be effective to initiate a change only if adopted as its own by a majority vote of the body to which it is directed;

D. Referral to Planning Commission. All requests for amendments, supplement or change in this title shall, whether initiated with the city council or otherwise, first be referred to the planning commission. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 7.070)


16.20.080 Amendment of title provisions – Procedure.

This title may be amended by following the procedure prescribed in this section.

A. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment after publishing notice of the hearing once a week for two successive weeks prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation published in the area in which land to be subject to such amendment is situated. The notice shall contain the time, place and purpose of the hearing and a description of the land to be subject to the amendment.

B. Prior to the expiration of 60 days after the date of such hearing, the planning commission may transmit its recommendation regarding the proposed amendment to the city council. If the planning commission recommendation has not been received by the city council prior to the expiration of such 60-day period, the city council may consider the amendment without recommendation of the planning commission thereon.

C. Prior to the adoption of such amendment, the city council shall hold a hearing thereon after giving notice of the hearing in the same manner provided in subsection (A) of this section.

D. A copy of any amendment adopted by the city council shall be filed with the county clerk. Such amendments shall not be effective until so filed. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 7.080)


16.20.090 Amendment of title provisions – Record.

The city shall maintain a record of amendments to the text of this title in a form convenient for the use of the public. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 7.090)


16.20.100 Amendment of title provisions – Petition filing – Fee.

A. Petitions for amendment, supplement or change to this title shall be filed with the city manager or his designee.

B. At the time of filing such petition, the petitioner shall pay to the city manager or his designee a fee to cover expenses incidental to the investigation of such petition and the cost of publishing notice of public hearing. (Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 78-32 § 7.100)


16.20.110 Violation – Penalty. 

Any person, firm, association or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, who violates any provision of this title or any order adopted pursuant to this title shall be punished under the provisions of Chapter 1.16 LCMC. Any such violation is a Class B violation. Each day that the violation of this title exists is deemed to be a separate offense. (Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 2011-01 § 1; Ord. 82-22 § 10; Ord. 78-32 § 8.010)


Title 17 ZONING

Chapters:

17.04    General Provisions

17.08    Definitions

17.12    Zoning Districts Established

17.16    Single-Family Residential (R-1) Zone

17.17    Single-Family Residential, Roads End (R-1-RE) Zone

17.18    Vacation Rental (VR) Zone

17.20    Multiple-Family Residential (R-M) Zone

17.24    Professional Campus (PC) Zone

17.28    Recreation-Commercial (RC) Zone

17.32    General Commercial (GC) Zone

17.34    Nelscott Plan (NP) District

17.36    Planned Industrial (PI) Zone

17.40    Recreation-Residential (R-R) Zone

17.42    Park (P) Zone

17.43    Open Space (OS) Zone

17.44    Marine Waterway (M-W) Zone

17.45    Taft Village Core (TVC) Zone

17.46    Natural Resource Overlay (NR) Zone

17.47    Natural Hazards, Beaches and Dunes

17.48    Aesthetic, Historic and Archaeological Sites

17.50    Oceanlake Plan (OP) District

17.52    Supplementary Regulations and Exceptions

17.56    Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations

17.60    Conditional Uses

17.64    Nonconforming Situations

17.68    Variances

17.72    Sign Regulations

17.74    Commercial Design Standards

17.76    Administrative Provisions

17.80    Provisions Applying to Special Uses

17.84    Remedies

17.88    Amendments

17.90    Compensation Claims

17.94    Waivers of Regulations

17.96    Statutory Development Agreements


Chapter 17.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

17.04.010    Title.

17.04.020    Purpose, policy and construction.

17.04.030    Compliance.


17.04.010 Title.

This title shall be known and may be cited as the “zoning ordinance of Lincoln City, Oregon,” and shall be referred to herein as “this title.” (Ord. 84-2 § 1.010)


17.04.020 Purpose, policy and construction.

A. This title has been designed in accordance with the goals, policies and statements of intent of the adopted comprehensive plan for the city of Lincoln City and its environs. It is the general purpose of this title, therefore, to provide one of the principal means for the implementation of the comprehensive plan of Lincoln City.

B. In adopting the ordinance codified in this title, the city council is responding to the growth and development of Lincoln City and its attendant problems, and is anticipating that as future growth and urbanization continues, sensitive control will be required in order to preserve and enhance the amenities necessary to maintain and improve the prosperity and appearance of the community.

C. This title is designed to classify, designate and regulate the location and use of buildings, structures, agricultural, residential, commercial, industrial and other uses in appropriate places and, for said purposes, to divide the city into districts of such number, shape and area as be deemed best suited to carry out these regulations and provide for their enforcement; to encourage the most appropriate use of lands; to conserve and preserve natural resources; to conserve and stabilize the value of property; to provide adequate open space for light and air and prevention of fires; to prevent undue concentrations of population; to lessen congestion of streets; to facilitate adequate provisions for community utilities such as transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare.

D. To further implement the comprehensive plan of Lincoln City, the ordinance codified in this title is adopted for the following special purposes:

1. To promote coordinated, sound development, taking into consideration the city’s natural environment, amenities, view and the appearance of its buildings and open spaces;

2. To achieve a balanced and efficient land use pattern, to protect and enhance real property values, to promote safe and uncongested traffic movement and to avoid uses and development which might be detrimental to the stability and livability of the city;

3. To encourage innovations in residential development and renewal so that the demand for housing may be met by a greater variety in the type and design of dwellings and by the conservation and more efficient and attractive use of open space;

4. To safeguard and enhance the appearance of the city through the advancement of effective land use, architectural design and site planning, which reflect improvements in the technology of urban development.

E. This title shall be construed most favorably to provide all the necessary authority to carry out the above purposes and policies. (Ord. 84-2 § 1.020)


17.04.030 Compliance.

Except as provided in Chapter 17.64 LCMC, no building or other structure shall be constructed, improved, altered, enlarged or moved, nor shall any use or occupancy of premises within the city be changed, nor shall any condition of or upon real property be caused or maintained, after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, except in conformity with conditions prescribed for each of the several zones established hereunder.

It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, establish, move into, alter, enlarge, use, or cause to be used, any building, structure, improvement or use of premises located in any zone described in this title contrary to the provisions of this title. Where this title imposes greater restrictions than those imposed or required by other rules or regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this title shall control. (Ord. 84-2 § 1.030)


Chapter 17.08 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

17.08.010    Definitions.


17.08.010 Definitions.

“Access” means the way or means by which pedestrians and vehicles enter and leave property.

“Access way” means a pedestrian and/or bicycle connection between two rights-of-way, or to achieve other connectivity needs as determined by the planning commission. An access way conforms to city standards and is in either an off-street public right-of-way or a public access easement on private property.

“Accessory dwelling unit” means a dwelling unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons that include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation and that is created within, attached to, or detached from a single-family dwelling, attached single-family dwelling, or manufactured home. The accessory dwelling unit is auxiliary to and smaller than the single-family dwelling, attached single-family dwelling, or manufactured home.

“Accessory structure” or “accessory use” means a structure or use incidental and subordinate to the main use of property and located on the same lot as the main use, including any required off-street parking within 200 feet (measured in a straight line) of the building or use it is intended to serve.

“Alley” means a minor way which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.

“Alteration” means a change in construction or a change of occupancy. Where the term “alteration” is applied to a change of construction, it is intended to apply to any change, addition, or modification in construction. When the term is used in connection with a change of occupancy, it is intended to apply to changes of occupancy from one trade or use to another or from one division of trade or use to another.

Alteration, Structural. “Structural alteration” means a change or repair which would tend to prolong the life of the supporting members of a building or structure, such as alteration of bearing walls, foundation, columns, beams, or girders. In addition, any change in the external dimensions of the building shall be considered a structural alteration.

“Apartment” means any multifamily dwelling in which a dwelling unit is or dwelling units are rented, leased, let or hired out.

“Assisted living facility” means a facility which provides or coordinates a range of elderly or disabled person health care and daily living assistance services, available on a 24-hour basis in a residential setting comprised of one-family or single-family dwellings, duplex or two-family dwellings and multifamily dwellings or any combination thereof; provided, that at least one resident of each dwelling shall be an elderly or disabled person.

“Attached single-family housing development” means a development consisting of two or more structures comprised of attached single-family dwellings.

“Automobile service station” means an establishment where fuels, oils and accessories for motor vehicles are dispensed for sale at retail only, and where motor vehicle repair work and related service are secondary.

“Baby-sitting home” means a home occupation in which care is provided to no more than two children (under 15 years old) at one time during a part of the 24-hour day, with or without compensation. This does not include the home of the child.

“Basement” means a portion of a building, not deemed a story, which has more than one-half of its height (but not more than six feet) measured from finished floor to finished ceiling above the average grade of the adjoining ground.

“Boarding, lodging or rooming house” means a building or portion thereof, other than a hotel, where meals and/or lodging are provided for compensation for five or more persons that are not temporary occupants.

“Boat house” means a facility attached to a floating device for the purpose of sheltering a boat or boats and generally enclosed on the sides and top, but which does not include a dwelling unit.

“Breakwater” means a structure to protect a harbor or beach from the force of waves.

“Building,” including accessory buildings, means a structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of any persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.

“Building coverage” means the percentage of the total lot or parcel covered by the footprint of all buildings, accessory buildings of greater than 200 square feet, decks, balconies, porches, and stairs. Uncovered decks, porches and stairs that are 30 inches or less from the ground shall not be included in the determination of building coverage.
[IMAGE]


“Building height” means the vertical distance from the average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of the building to the highest point of the roof, exclusive of chimneys. (The City Charter of Lincoln City, Oregon, Section 5a(b), January 19, 1971.)

“Building line” means a horizontal line that coincides with the front side of the main building.

“Bulkhead” means a structure to retain earth or fill material which is located adjacent and parallel to the shoreline.

“Carnival” means an enterprise offering amusement and entertainment through the use of rides and exhibitions.

“Cellar” means a room or a group of rooms, usually under a building, which has more than one-half of its height measured from finished floor to finished ceiling below the average grade of the adjoining ground.

“City” means the city of Lincoln City, Oregon.

“Cold frame” means an unheated, outdoor structure consisting of a wooden or concrete frame and a top of glass or clear plastic, not more than 24 inches high, used for protecting seedlings and plants from the cold.

“Commercial building” means a building with more than 50 percent of its ground floor space used for commercial activities. Commercial buildings include, but are not limited to, stores, restaurants, hotels, motels, boarding, lodging or rooming houses, galleries, offices, mixed use buildings, fabrication shops, service stations, warehouses, and government buildings.

“Conditional use” means a use which is not permitted outright within the zoning district; but a permit for such use may be granted after a public hearing with the approval of the planning commission upon a finding that the use is provided for in this title and meets specified conditions.

“Condominium” means a form of ownership in which separate areas in a residential, commercial, or industrial building may be owned by individual owners. The individual owners may also jointly own an undivided interest in common areas such as recreation areas, parking areas, land or other facilities.

“Convenience service retail uses” means establishments designed and intended to serve the daily or frequent trade or service needs of the surrounding population. Such establishments include grocery stores, variety stores, drug stores, coin-operated laundries, dry cleaning establishments, beauty and barber shops, and medical-dental and other professional offices. Specifically excluded are automobile service stations and drive-in restaurants.

“Court” means an open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building and bounded on two or more sides by such building.

“Day care center” means a land use in which care is provided to six or more children at any one time and/or by two or more unrelated persons during a part of the 24-hour day. Such day care centers shall have and maintain certification of approval from the Children’s Services Division as defined and stated in ORS Chapter 148, Child Welfare Services.

“Day care home” means a home occupation in which care is provided to no more than five children at any one time during a part of the 24-hour day, with or without compensation. The care is only to be provided by the residents of the dwelling unit in which the care is administered.

“Department” means the planning and community development department of Lincoln City.

“Development” has two definitions: 

1. A piece of land that contains buildings, structures, and other modifications to the natural environment; or

2. The alteration of the natural environment through:

a. The construction or exterior alteration of any building or structure, whether above or below ground or water, and any grading, filling, dredging, draining, channelizing, cutting, topping, or excavation associated with such construction or modification.

b. The placing of permanent or temporary obstructions that interfere with the normal public use of the waters and lands subject to this code.

c. The division of land into two or more parcels, and the adjustment of property lines between parcels.

“Director” means the planning and community development director of Lincoln City and any person designated by the director to act in the director’s place.

“Dock” means a floating moorage facility constructed perpendicular or parallel to the shoreline.

“Domestic fowl” means mature female chickens (i.e., hens), but not roosters.

“Dormitory” means a room for sleeping purposes for more than four persons, which is rented.

“Drive-in restaurant” means a structure or portion thereof primarily so developed that its principal retail or service character is to provide short-order fast foods to patrons while in motor vehicles or while at a counter.

Dwelling, Attached Single-Family. “Attached single-family dwelling” means a dwelling which is located on that unit’s individual lot, which is used as an independent dwelling unit, and which is attached to one or more dwelling units by common vertical walls.

Dwelling, Duplex or Two-Family. “Duplex or two-family dwelling” means a detached building designed and used as two independent dwelling units.

Dwelling, Multifamily. “Multifamily dwelling” means a building or portion thereof designed as three or more independent dwelling units, with each dwelling unit used as a dwelling unit for more than 30 days, but not including an attached single-family dwelling or a group of attached single-family dwellings.

Dwelling, One-Family or Single-Family. “One-family or single-family dwelling” means a detached building designed and used as one dwelling unit.

“Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms designed exclusively and used for occupancy by one family for living purposes and having only one cooking facility.

“Eco-roof,” also called a “green roof,” is a lightweight vegetated roof system consisting of waterproofing material, growing medium, and specially selected plants.

“Elderly housing” means housing in which at least 85 percent of the individual housing units in the elderly housing complex are either studio or one- or two-bedroom units, and which is:

1. Provided under any state or federal program that is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons as defined by the state or federal program; or

2. Is intended for and solely occupied by persons 62 years of age or older; or

3. Is intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit and has significant facilities and services specifically designed to meet the physical or social needs of older persons, or if provision of such facilities and services is not practicable, such housing is necessary to provide important housing opportunities for older persons.

The city may impose the requirement of a covenant to run with the land for an elderly housing complex to ensure that, if such elderly housing complex is ever converted to a conventional apartment complex, additional off-street parking will be provided in accordance with any applicable parking ordinance requirements in effect at the time of the conversion.

“Emergency cache” means a publicly owned metal shipping container, or similar public facility, that is owned, placed, and maintained by the city, county, special district, or state government and that contains basic survival items such as water, food, and basic medical supplies to sustain individuals for a limited period of time until authorities are able to respond to the emergency.

“Emergency shelter” means a facility consisting of dwelling units, dormitories and/or yurts which provides necessary counseling services for 50 or fewer homeless persons for a period not to exceed 180 days per person and which includes associated cooking and sanitation facilities necessary to accommodate the maximum occupancy of the facility.

“Essential emergency communications, early warning and associated emergency facilities” means a publicly owned and operated facility used for emergency communications or warning such as a police, fire, rescue, or ambulance radio transmitting, receiving, or relay station or antenna, a tsunami or fire warning siren, or other similar emergency preparation facilities, including emergency caches, that the city council has declared by resolution to be essential to the public safety.

“Family” means one person or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, legal adoption or guardianship, or a group of not more than five persons (excluding servants) all or part of whom are not related by blood, marriage, legal adoption or guardianship living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.

“Farm animals” means animals such as cattle, horses, sheep, and llamas.

Fence, Sight-Obscuring. “Sight-obscuring fence” means a fence, consisting of wood, metal or masonry, or an evergreen hedge or other evergreen planting, arranged in such a way as to obstruct vision.

Flag Lot. Located behind another lot, a “flag lot” has two distinct parts: the flag, which is the building site; and the pole, which connects the flag to the street, provides the only street frontage for the lot, and at any point is less than the minimum lot width for the zone (see illustration below).
[IMAGE]


“Floor area” means the sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings, but not including:

1. Attic space providing headroom of less than seven feet;

2. Basement or cellar;

3. Uncovered steps or fire escapes;

4. Private garages, carports or porches;

5. Accessory water towers or cooling towers;

6. Accessory off-street parking or loading spaces.

“Footprint” means the square footage of a building that rests, directly or indirectly, on the ground, including, for example, cantilevers, bay windows with floor space, and chimneys. 

“Frontage” means all the property abutting on a street.

“Garden, community” means an area of land managed and maintained by a group of individuals to grow and harvest crops such as food crops and ornamental crops for personal or group use, consumption, or donation. Community gardens may be divided into separate plots for cultivation by one or more individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of the group and may include common areas maintained and used by group members.

“Garden, market” means an area of land managed and maintained by an individual or a group of individuals to grow and harvest crops such as food crops and ornamental crops to be sold for profit. Crops may be sold on site or off site.

“Garden, personal” means an area of land located on a lot developed with one or more residences and managed and maintained by an individual or a family to grow and harvest crops such as food crops and ornamental crops for personal or family use, consumption, or donation.

“Government buildings” means all buildings and structures used by the public that are constructed, purchased, leased or rented, in whole or in part, by the use of federal, state, county or municipal funds or funds of any political subdivision of the state.

Grade, Ground Level. “Ground level grade” means the average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of a building. Where the walls are parallel to and within five feet of a sidewalk, the ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk.

“Grazing” means the use of land for pasture of horses, cattle, sheep, goats and/or other domestic herbivorous animals, alone or in conjunction with agricultural pursuits.

“Greenhouse” means a building sheathed in glass, plastic, or fiberglass in which plants are cultivated.

“Groundcover” means plants that grow densely and close to the ground, covering large expanses, and deliberately planted to prevent weeds or soil erosion.

“Hardscape” means landscaping elements composed of permanent non-living materials, some of which are designed to sustain foot traffic and/or provide an extension of livable space to the outdoors. Examples include decks, patios, walkways, stairways, and gazebos; retaining walls, other stonework and decorative landscape art. Depending on the extent that the material prevents infiltration of storm water into the soil below, hardscape can be considered either impervious or pervious.

“High water line or mark” means the high water elevation as shown on the county assessor’s records, or as determined by the county surveyor, based upon the line where normal high water elevation results in a pronounced change in vegetation characteristics.

“Home occupation” means any lawful activity, not otherwise specifically provided for in this title, commonly carried on within a dwelling by a member or members of a family, no employee or other person being engaged in the same, and in which the activity is secondary to the use of the dwelling for living purposes. A home occupation is one that is conducted in such a manner as not to give the appearance of a business nor to infringe upon the right of neighboring residences to enjoy the peaceful occupancy of their homes.

“Hoop house” means a structure made of PVC piping or other material covered with translucent plastic and constructed in a half-round or hoop shape and not more than seven feet high or 20 feet long.

“Horticulture” means the cultivation of plants, garden crops, trees and/or nursery stock.

“Hotel” means a building or portion thereof designed or used for occupancy of individuals who are lodged with or without meals, and in which no provision is made for cooking in any individual room or suite.

“Impervious surface/area” means any surface that does not allow for the infiltration of water directly into the underlying earth. Types of impervious surfaces include rooftops and eaves, asphalt and concrete parking lots other than those surfaced with pervious materials, driveways, roads, sidewalks and pedestrian plazas, and standing water. Note: Uncovered, slatted decks are considered pervious. Gravel surfaces are considered pervious unless they cover impervious surfaces or are compacted. 

Institution, Educational. “Educational institution” means a college or university supported by public or private funds, tuitions, contributions or endowments, giving advanced academic instruction as approved by a recognized accrediting agency, including fraternity and sorority houses, excluding elementary and high schools, and trade and commercial schools.

“Junk yard” means any property where any person is engaged in breaking up, dismantling, sorting, storing, distributing, buying or selling of any scrap, waste materials or junk.

“Kennel” means a lot or premises on which four or more cats and/or dogs, more than four months of age, are kept for business purposes such as animal boarding, animal day care, commercial breeding, and the like.

“Landscaping” includes not only trees, grass, shrubs, flowers and garden areas, but also the arrangement of fountains, patios, decks, street furniture and ornamental concrete or stonework areas and artificial turf or carpeting, but excludes artificial plants, shrubs, bushes or flowers.

“Legislative” is a term applied to the making or giving of laws. In land use actions, it is the formulation of general policy that is applicable to the entire jurisdiction or a large part therein.

“Loading space” means an off-street space or berth on the same lot, or parcel, with a building or use, or contiguous to a group of buildings or uses, for the temporary parking of a vehicle while loading or unloading persons, merchandise or materials, and which space or berth abuts upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access and egress.

“Lot” means a plot, parcel or area of land owned by or under the lawful control and in the lawful possession of one distinct ownership.

“Lot area” means the total area of a lot measured in a horizontal plane within the lot boundary lines exclusive of public and private roads, and easements of access to other property.

Lot, Corner. “Corner lot” means a lot abutting on two or more streets, other than an alley, at their intersection.

“Lot depth” means the average horizontal distance between the front lot line and rear lot line.

Lot, Interior. “Interior lot” means a lot other than a corner lot.

“Lot line” means the property line bounding a lot.

Lot Line, Front. “Front lot line” means, for an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street; and for a corner or through lot, a line separating either (but not both) frontages of the lot from the street.

Lot Line, Rear. “Rear lot line” means, for an interior lot, a line separating one lot from another on the opposite side of the lot from the front lot line; for corner lots, either (but not both) interior lot line separating one lot from another; and for an irregular or triangular-shaped lot, a straight line 10 feet in length that is parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.

Lot Line, Side. “Side lot line” means, for interior lots, a line separating one lot from the abutting lot or lots fronting on the same street; for corner lots, a line other than the front lot line separating the lot from the street or line separating the lot from the abutting lot along the same frontage.

Lot, Through. “Through lot” means an interior lot having frontage on two streets.

“Lot width” means the average horizontal distance between the side lot lines, ordinarily measured parallel to the front lot line.

Lot, Zoning. A “zoning lot” is either:

1. A lot of record existing on the effective date of the zoning ordinance or any applicable subsequent amendment thereto; or

2. A tract of land, either not subdivided or consisting of two or more contiguous lots of record located within a single block in single ownership.

“Manufactured dwelling” means a manufactured home, mobile home, or residential trailer as those terms are defined in this title. “Manufactured dwelling” does not mean any building or structure subject to the structural specialty code adopted pursuant to ORS 455.100 through 455.450 or any unit identified as a recreational vehicle by the manufacturer.

“Manufactured home” means a structure constructed for movement on the public highways, that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes and that was constructed after June 15, 1976, in accordance with Federal Manufactured Housing Construction Safety Standards and Regulations in effect at the time of construction.

“Mixed use” means a development that includes a mix of commercial and residential uses that are planned and developed together on the same site or adjoining sites. The mix of uses may occur in the same building or in separate buildings.

“Mobile home” means a structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes and that was constructed between January 1, 1962, and June 15, 1976, and met the construction requirements of Oregon mobile home law in effect at the time of construction.

“Mobile home park” means any place where four or more mobile homes are located within 500 feet of one another on a lot, tract or parcel of land under the same ownership, the primary purpose of which is to rent space or keep space for rent to any person for a charge or fee paid or to be paid for the rental or use of facilities or to offer space free in connection with securing the trade or patronage of such person.

“Motel” means one or more buildings designed or used by temporary occupants.

Motor Vehicle Repair, Major. “Major motor vehicle repair” means the general repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers; collision service including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; overall painting or paint shop.

Motor Vehicle Repair, Minor. “Minor motor vehicle repair” means the replacement of parts for and motor service to passenger cars and trucks not exceeding one and one-half tons capacity, but not including any operation named under “Motor Vehicle Repair, Major.”

“Nonconforming commercial site development” means characteristics of existing developed properties that do not meet standards specified in Chapter 17.74 LCMC, Commercial Design Standards, or design standards adopted for specific pearl districts, as applicable. 

“Nonconforming structure” means a structure that was lawful at the time of construction, but that presently does not conform to the provisions of the zoning district in which it is situated. Any existing structure, including a sign or sign structure, for which zoning regulations now require a conditional use permit or other permit, shall be deemed to be nonconforming until such a permit is secured.

“Nonconforming use” means a use that was originally lawful, but no longer is a permitted use in the district in which it is situated. Any existing use for which zoning regulations now require a conditional use permit shall be deemed to be nonconforming until such a permit is secured.

“Order” is a term applied to the direction of public administrative officers in quasi-judicial land use proceedings.

“Ordinary low water line” means the line on the bank or shore to which the low water ordinarily recedes annually in season.

“Outdoor sales display” means the temporary or permanent outdoor display of items for direct sale, rental, or lease to the consumer.

“Outdoor storage area” means an area in which goods, junk, material, merchandise, vehicles, or other items are kept in the same place for more than 24 hours, other than as an outdoor sales display.

“Owner” means the person in whom is vested the ownership, dominion or title of property; proprietor; including an authorized agent of the owner.

“Pathway” means a pedestrian and/or bicycle way on private property that provides pedestrian and/or bicycle circulation within a site and to adjacent sites and facilities.

“Perennial” means a landscape plant that persists for several years with new herbaceous growth from a part that lives over from one growing season to another.

“Person” means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, social or fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, branch of government, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

“Pier” means a fixed moorage facility constructed outward from the shoreline.

“Place of worship” means a special-purpose building that is architecturally designed and particularly adapted for the primary use of conducting religious services on a regular basis.

“Planned unit development” means a development in which the applicable subdivision and zoning restrictions apply to the development as a whole rather than to each individual lot. Under this procedure, detailed project plans must be approved by the planning commission.

“Planted area” means landscaped area that supports living vegetation. The area includes non-living groundcover (as defined in LCMC 17.52.100(F)(2)) in between plantings and is intended to reduce soil erosion and beautify the area. 

“Quasi-judicial” is a term applied to the action, discretion, etc., of public officers, who are required to investigate facts, or ascertain the existence of facts, and draw conclusions from them, as a basis for their official action, and to exercise discretion of judicial nature. In land use actions, it is the applying of policy to particular persons, places or circumstances.

“Recreation” means activities or pastimes offering diversion and relaxation to persons.

Recreational Facility, Private. “Private recreational facility” means a recreational facility under private ownership and operated by a profit or nonprofit organization, open to bona fide members, and providing one or more of the following types of recreation activity: tennis, handball, squash, volleyball and swimming.

“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle with or without motive power that is designed for human occupancy and has a gross floor area not exceeding 400 square feet in the set-up mode and as further defined by rule by the Oregon Department of Consumer and Business Services Building Codes Division.

“Recreational vehicle park” means any place where two or more recreational vehicles are located within 250 feet of one another on a lot, tract, or parcel of land under the same ownership, the primary purpose of which is to rent space or keep space for rent to any person for a charge or fee paid or to be paid for the rental or use of facilities or to offer space free in connection with securing the trade or patronage of such person.

“Residential home” means a residential treatment or training or an adult foster home licensed by or under the authority of the department, as defined in ORS 443.400, under ORS 443.400 through 443.825, a residential facility registered under ORS 443.480 through 443.500 or an adult foster home licensed under ORS 443.705 through 443.825 which provides residential care alone or in conjunction with treatment or training or a combination thereof for five or fewer individuals who need not be related. Staff persons required to meet licensing requirements shall not be counted in the number of facility residents, and need not be related to each other or to any resident of the residential home.

“Residential trailer” means a structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes and that was constructed before January 1, 1962.

“Resort” means a place providing lodging and recreation to vacationers.

School, Commercial. “Commercial school” means a building or land where instruction is given to pupils in arts, crafts or trades, and operated as a commercial enterprise as distinguished from schools endowed and/or supported by taxation.

School, Primary, Elementary, Junior High or High. “Primary, elementary, junior high or high school” includes public, private or parochial, but not nursery school, kindergarten or day nursery, except when operated in conjunction with a school.

“Screening” means the visual shielding of one structure or use from another structure or use by fences, walls, berms, or densely planted vegetation so as, on installation, to substantially, but not necessarily totally, eliminate visual impacts of the shielded structure or use on the other structure or use.

“Shared street” means a low-volume and low-speed street, as the city’s transportation system plan designates, used by pedestrians, bicyclists, and motor vehicles, and where pedestrians have priority over motor vehicles and bicyclists. Shared streets do not have clear division between pedestrian and motor vehicle space (e.g., no continuous curb) and typically include such features as street furniture (e.g., planters, street trees, benches) and areas for social interaction. Design criteria for shared streets are in the transportation system plan.

“Shared-use path” means a facility for non-motorized travel outside of the roadway, intended for transportation, recreation, or both. Typical design standards for shared-use paths are in the city’s transportation system plan.

“Shoreline” means the boundary line between a body of water and land, measured on tidal waters at mean high water, and on non-tidal waterways at the ordinary high water mark.

“Sign” means an identification, description, illustration or device which is affixed to or represented, directly or indirectly, upon a building, structure or land and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution or business.

Sign, Advertising. “Advertising sign” means a sign which directs attention to a business, product, activity or service which is not necessarily conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located.

“Significant aesthetic resource” means a site that is identified as a significant aesthetic resource in the comprehensive plan natural resource inventory.

“Silviculture” means the care and cultivation of forest trees; forestry.

“Site plan” means a plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and completely all dimensions of the uses proposed for a specific parcel of land.

“Slope” means the ratio of vertical distance to horizontal distance on a surface, where a ratio of one vertical foot in change to two horizontal feet in change equals a 1:2 ratio. Example:
[IMAGE]


“Small animals” means animals commonly kept as household pets, other than animals such as aquarium fish, reptiles, hamsters, gerbils, or cage birds such as finches, canaries, and parakeets, and includes the following:

1. Cats (Felis catus);

2. Dogs (Canis familiaris) but not dog-wolf hybrids;

3. Rabbits (Leporidae);

4. Vietnamese, Chinese, or Asian potbelly pigs (Sus scrofa bittatus) but not any greater than 22 inches in height at the shoulder or more than 150 pounds in weight;

5. Miniature, pygmy, or dwarf goats, but not any greater than 24 inches in height at the shoulder or more than 100 pounds in weight, and not any that have not been dehorned, or any unneutered adult male goats.

Offspring of small animals that are less than five months of age are not considered “small animals” as that term is used in this title.

“Small solar energy system” means a system composed of a solar energy collector, an energy storage facility, and components for the distribution of transformed energy that may be attached to a residence or other structure. A small solar energy system may be a photovoltaic system to convert the sun’s energy to electricity or it may be a solar thermal system used to heat water.

“Small wind energy system” means a wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, a support structure, and associated control or conversion electronics and that has a rated capacity of not more than 10 kilowatts and that is intended to reduce on-site consumption of utility power.

“Story” means that portion of a building included between a floor and the ceiling above.

Story, Half. “Half story” means a story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than two feet above the floor of such story.

“Street” means the entire width between the right-of-way lines of every way for vehicular and pedestrian traffic and includes the terms “road,” “highway,” “land,” “place,” “avenue,” “alley” and other similar designations.

“Structure” means something constructed or built and having a fixed base on, or fixed connection to, the ground or another structure.

“Temporary occupant” means any person that occupies any room or rooms for habitation for a continuous period not exceeding 30 days. This excludes any person who pays for lodging on a monthly basis.

Time-Share.

1. “Accommodation” means any apartment, condominium unit, cabin house, lodge, hotel or motel room or any other private or commercial structure that is situated on real property designed for residential use by one or more individuals.

2. “Time-share period” means a period of time when a purchaser of a time-sharing plan is entitled to possession and use of accommodations and facilities of the time-sharing plan.

3. “Time-share plan” means any arrangement, plan, scheme or device including exchange programs, whether by membership, agreement, share, tenancy-in-common, sale, lease, deed, rental agreement, license, right-to-use agreement or otherwise, whereby a purchaser, in exchange for consideration, receives a right-to-use accommodation and facilities for a period of time less than 30 days during any given year.

“Transitional area” means an area consisting of a lot, lots or parts of lots, within any residential district, having side lot lines abutting a boundary of a commercial or industrial zone, and extending not more than 100 feet from such boundary into the residential zone.

“Transportation uses” means transportation facilities, services, and improvements, as identified in the Transportation Planning Rule, OAR 660-012-0045(1), including the following:

1. Operation, maintenance, and repair of existing transportation facilities identified in the city transportation system plan;

2. Dedication of right-of-way, authorization of construction, and the construction of facilities and improvements, where the improvements are consistent with clear and objective dimensional standards; and

3. Changes in the frequency of transit.

“Underlying zone” means the existing zone on the property at the time of application.

“Use” means the purpose or activity for which land or a building thereon is designed, arranged or intended or for which it is maintained, and shall include any manner or performance of such activity with respect to the performance requirements of this title.

“Use limitations” means regulations intended to limit or emphasize the desired nature and quality of uses permitted within a business or special district.

“Use regulations” means regulations which relate to a specific condition such as density or intensity or to building size, bulk or siting conditions occurring anywhere and for any type of building located within a given zoning district.

“Vacation rental dwelling” means a dwelling unit that is used, rented or occupied on a daily or weekly basis, or is available for use, rent, or occupancy on a daily or weekly basis, or is advertised, or listed by an agent, as available for use, rent, or occupancy on a daily or weekly basis.

“Vacationer” means any person enjoying a recess or leave of absence from their place of residence, the majority of whom are temporary occupants.

“Variance” is a term applied to the authorization after a public hearing for the construction or maintenance of a building or structure. The rationale for the use of a variance is to provide for administrative relief from the literal terms of a zoning code.

“Vermiculture” means worm composting in bins.

“Wharf” means a fixed moorage facility constructed parallel to the shoreline and usually attached continuously thereto.

“Wireless communications facilities” means facilities, including towers, providing licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services, including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR) paging, and similar services that are marketed to the general public.

“Yard” means an open space on a lot which is unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this title.

Yard, Front. “Front yard” means a yard between side lot lines and measured horizontally at right angles to the front lot line from the lot line to the nearest point of the building.

Yard, Rear. “Rear yard” means a yard between side lot lines or between a street side yard and opposite side lot line and measured horizontally at right angles to the rear lot line from the rear lot line to the nearest point of a main building.

Yard, Side. “Side yard” means a yard between the front and rear yard measured horizontally and at right angles from the side lot line to the nearest point of the building.

Yard, Street Side. “Street side yard” means a yard adjacent to a street between the front yard and the rear lot line measured horizontally and at right angles from the side lot line to the nearest point of the building.

Yard, Transitional. “Transitional yard” means a yard that must be provided with landscaping and screening on a lot in a commercial district which adjoins a lot in a residential district. A transitional yard shall include any required yard or right-of-way setback. (Ord. 2019-24 § 1; Ord. 2017-09 § 1; Ord. 2014-08 § 1; Ord. 2012-06 § 5; Ord. 2011-09 § 2; Ord. 2011-03 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 2010-06 § 12; Ord. 2009-07 § 4; Ord. 2009-06 § 1; Ord. 2009-05 §§ 1 – 3; Ord. 2009-02 § 8; Ord. 2007-10 § 2; Ord. 2005-14 § 2; Ord. 2003-24 § 2; Ord. 2003-08 § 3; Ord. 2003-01 § 3; Ord. 2001-01 §§ 3, 4; Ord. 2000-11 § 9; Ord. 98-12 § 2; Ord. 98-11 § 6; Ord. 97-11 § 1; Ord. 97-8 § 1; Ord. 97-5 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 95-15 § 1; Ord. 92-28; Ord. 93-2 § 1; Ord. 92-8 § 1; Ord. 92-4 §§ 1 – 3; Ord. 91-4 § 1; Ord. 89-11 § 1; Ord. 84-2 § 1.040)


Chapter 17.12 ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED

Sections:

17.12.010    Classification of zones.

17.12.020    Location of zones.

17.12.030    Boundaries of zones.

17.12.040    Severability.

17.12.050    Zoning of annexed areas.


17.12.010 Classification of zones.

A. For the purpose of this title, the following zones are hereby established in the city.

	Zone Description	Abbreviated Description

	Residential, Single-family	R-1

	Residential, Roads End	R-1-RE

	Vacation Rental	VR

	Recreation-Residential	R-R

	Residential, Multifamily	R-M

	Professional Campus	PC

	Recreation Commercial	RC

	General Commercial	GC

	Nelscott Plan District	NP

	Oceanlake Plan District	OP

	Taft Village Core	TVC

	Planned Industrial	PI

	Marine-Waterway	M-W

	Natural Resource Overlay	NR

	Park	P

	Open Space	OS

B. The adoption of Ordinance No. 2016-20 recognized the changing nature of the vacation rental dwelling market from second homes to business investments, the changes to the city’s housing mix, and the city’s desire to limit the influx of vacation rental dwellings in some areas of the city. Therefore, as of the effective date of Ordinance No. 2016-20, no additional properties may be zoned into the vacation rental (VR) zone. Areas zoned vacation rental (VR) prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 2016-20 may retain that zoning designation. (Ord. 2017-17 § 2; Ord. 2016-20 § 12; Ord. 2014-21 § 1; Ord. 2010-05 § 1; Ord. 95-15 § 2; Ord. 92-3 § 1; Ord. 84-2 § 2.010)


17.12.020 Location of zones.

The boundaries for the zones listed in this title are indicated on a map entitled “Zoning Map of Lincoln City, Oregon,” which is attached as Exhibit “A” to the ordinance codified in this title and is incorporated herein as though fully set forth. (Ord. 92-3 § 1; Ord. 84-2 § 2.020)


17.12.030 Boundaries of zones.

If a zone boundary as shown on the map divides a lot between two zones, the entire lot shall be deemed to be in the zone in which the greater area of the lot lies; provided, that this adjustment involves a distance not to exceed 20 feet from the mapped zone boundary. (Ord. 92-3 § 1; Ord. 84-2 § 2.030)


17.12.040 Severability.

The provisions of this title are severable. If any section, clause or phrase of this title is adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this title. (Ord. 92-3 § 1; Ord. 84-2 § 2.040)


17.12.050 Zoning of annexed areas.

Areas annexed to the city will be classified with the underlying county zoning designation until rezoned by the city. (Ord. 92-3 § 1; Ord. 84-2 § 2.050)


Chapter 17.16 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-1) ZONE

Sections:

17.16.010    Purpose.

17.16.020    Permitted uses.

17.16.030    Accessory uses.

17.16.040    Conditional uses.

17.16.050    Restrictions.

17.16.060    Maximum building height.

17.16.070    Lot requirements.

17.16.080    Signs.

17.16.090    Off-street parking and loading.

17.16.100    Other required conditions.

Prior legislation: Ords. 85-10, 89-11, 91-1, 91-4 and 92-8.


17.16.010 Purpose.

To promote and encourage a suitable environment for family living and to protect and stabilize the residential characteristics of the zone. The R-1 zone is intended to provide primarily for single-family dwellings. (Ord. 2011-09 § 1; Ord. 95-15 § 3(1); Ord. 84-2 § 3.010(1))


17.16.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses are permitted:

A. Residential.

1. Single-family dwellings;

2. Attached single-family dwelling, if attached to no more than one other single-family dwelling;

3. Two-family and duplex dwellings when developed on a minimum 8,000-square-foot lot;

4. Cottage housing developments, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.120;

5. Manufactured homes when developed in accordance with the standards set forth in LCMC 17.52.250;

6. A mobile home used during construction of a permitted use for which a building permit has been issued, but not exceeding six months;

7. Residential homes;

8. Four-flat dwellings, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.140.

B. Commercial.

1. Bed and breakfast accommodations, subject to the standards set forth in LCMC 17.80.060;

2. Vacation rental dwellings in the R-1-5 zone, subject to LCMC 17.80.050 and to the license requirements of Chapter 5.14 LCMC.

C. Other.

1. Essential emergency communications, early warning and associated emergency facilities;

2. Community gardens and market gardens not larger than 12,500 square feet, in accordance with the standards of LCMC 17.80.080;

3. Public parks, playgrounds and other similar publicly owned recreation areas;

4. Transportation uses, defined in Chapter 17.08 LCMC. (Ord. 2019-24 § 3; Ord. 2019-02 § 1; Ord. 2017-09 § 2; Ord. 2016-20 § 1; Ord. 2014-10 § 1; Ord. 2011-09 § 1; Ord. 2009-05 § 4; Ord. 2009-02 § 2; Ord. 2005-14 § 3; Ord. 2002-02 § 2; Ord. 95-15 § 3(2); Ord. 84-2 § 3.010(2))


17.16.030 Accessory uses.

The following accessory uses are permitted:

A. Guest houses, not rented or otherwise conducted as a business and provided there are no cooking facilities in the guest house;

B. Home occupations, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.52.010;

C. Gardens and animals, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.080;

D. Accessory dwelling units in association with single-family dwellings, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.110;

E. Vacation rental dwelling, provided it is not rented for more than 30 nights in any calendar year, and subject to LCMC 17.80.050 and to the license requirements of Chapter 5.14 LCMC;

F. Other accessory uses and accessory buildings and structures customarily appurtenant to a permitted use. (Ord. 2016-20 § 2; Ord. 2014-08 § 2; Ord. 2011-09 § 1; Ord. 2009-05 § 5; Ord. 95-15 § 3(3); Ord. 84-2 § 3.010(3))


17.16.040 Conditional uses.

The following conditional uses may be permitted subject to a receipt of a conditional use permit, and subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.60 LCMC:

A. Places of worship, and accessory uses set forth in LCMC 17.80.160(A);

B. Public or private schools (kindergarten through 12th grade, educational institutions, nursery schools and day care centers);

C. Community meeting buildings, fraternal and social organizations, and recreation centers;

D. Public or private golf courses, except driving ranges or miniature courses operated as a business;

E. Mobile home parks submitted under the provisions of LCMC 17.80.040;

F. Temporary real estate offices in legally recorded subdivisions;

G. Cemeteries;

H. Utility substations, but not wireless communications facilities;

I. Radio or television transmitters or towers, but not wireless communications facilities;

J. Government buildings;

K. Hospitals, sanitariums, rest homes, nursing homes and assisted living facilities;

L. Docks, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.44.040. (Ord. 2019-23 § 2; Ord. 2019-21 § 1; Ord. 2012-06 § 6; Ord. 2011-09 § 1; Ord. 2003-08 §§ 4, 5; Ord. 97-8 § 2; Ord. 95-15 § 3(4); Ord. 84-2 § 3.010(4))


17.16.050 Restrictions.

No development shall occur unless all city services are available, except as provided in LCMC 17.52.120(A). (Ord. 2011-09 § 1; Ord. 95-15 § 3(5); Ord. 84-2 § 3.010(5))


17.16.060 Maximum building height.

The maximum building height shall be 35 feet, except as provided in LCMC 17.52.190 and 17.52.200. (Ord. 2011-09 § 1; Ord. 95-15 § 3(6); Ord. 84-2 § 3.010(6))


17.16.070 Lot requirements.

The map designations R-1-5, R-1-7.5 and R-1-10 create separate single-family residential zoning classifications as though separately listed in LCMC 17.12.010. Lot requirements for the zoning classifications designated on the zoning map shall be as follows:

 

	REQUIRED MINIMUMS

	Zone	Lot Area	Lot Width	Lot Depth	Front Yard(3)	Side Yard	Street Side Yard(3)	Rear Yard	Maximum Lot Coverage(5)

	R-1-5	5,000 sq. ft.; 8,000 for duplex or two-family	50' detached;

35' attached	70'	5'(1)

7-1/2'(2)	5'(1)

7-1/2'(2)

or 0' for common wall of attached dwellings	5'(1)

7-1/2'(2)	5'(1)

7-1/2'(2)	35%(4)

	R-1-7.5	7,500 sq. ft.; 8,000 for duplex or two-family	70' detached;

35' attached	80'	same as above	35%(4)

	R-1-10	10,000 sq. ft.	80'	80'	same as above	35%(4)

(1)    For one-story structures.

(2)    For structures more than one story.

(3)    The front and street side yards shall be increased to a minimum of 20 feet in front of a garage/carport and/or driveway entrance to a garage/carport. The increase in setback shall not apply to portions of the dwelling that are below or to the side of the garage/carport or driveway entrance. The increase in setback shall not apply to any portion of the dwelling above the garage/carport that is cantilevered (i.e., supported only by the wall of the structure from which it projects), provided the lowest point of the cantilever is a minimum of seven feet above grade. On corner lots, the clear-vision area requirement of LCMC 17.52.060 and 17.52.070 shall apply.

(4)    For existing lots between 3,000 sq. ft. and 4,000 sq. ft., maximum lot coverage shall be 40 percent. For existing lots less than 3,000 sq. ft., maximum lot coverage shall be 50 percent.

(5)    Includes accessory buildings (garages and outbuildings).

(Ord. 2012-07 § 1; Ord. 2011-09 § 1; Ord. 2010-06 § 1; Ord. 95-15 § 3(7); Ord. 84-2 § 3.010(7))


17.16.080 Signs.

Signs shall be permitted as set forth in Chapter 17.72 LCMC. (Ord. 2011-09 § 1; Ord. 95-15 § 3(8); Ord. 84-2 § 3.010(8))


17.16.090 Off-street parking and loading.

Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.56 LCMC. (Ord. 2011-09 § 1; Ord. 95-15 § 3(9); Ord. 84-2 § 3.010(9))


17.16.100 Other required conditions.

All single-family dwellings (site-built, modular and manufactured homes) to be constructed or located in residential zones shall use at least two of the following design features to provide visual relief along the front of the home:

A. Dormers;

B. Gables;

C. Recessed entries;

D. Covered porch entries;

E. Cupolas;

F. Pillars or posts;

G. Bay or bow windows;

H. Eaves (minimum six-inch projection);

I. Off-sets on building face or roof (minimum 16 inches). (Ord. 2011-09 § 1; Ord. 2010-06 § 2; Ord. 95-15 § 3(10); Ord. 84-2 § 3.010(10))


Chapter 17.17 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL, ROADS END (R-1-RE) ZONE

Sections:

17.17.010    Purpose.

17.17.020    Permitted uses.

17.17.030    Accessory uses.

17.17.040    Conditional uses.

17.17.050    Restrictions.

17.17.060    Maximum building height.

17.17.070    Lot requirements.

17.17.080    Signs.

17.17.090    Off-street parking and loading.

17.17.100    Other required conditions.


17.17.010 Purpose.

To retain and maintain the historic and traditional nature of the Roads End neighborhood, to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family living and to protect and stabilize the residential characteristics of the area. The R-1-RE zone is intended to provide primarily for single-family dwellings. Nonconforming uses are permitted to continue in accordance with Chapter 17.64 LCMC. (Ord. 2017-17 § 1)


17.17.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses are permitted:

A. Residential.

1. Single-family dwellings;

2. Manufactured homes built to meet the standards in LCMC 17.52.250;

3. Duplexes on corner lots when each unit fronts on a separate street; duplex lots must be a minimum 8,000 square feet and VRDs are prohibited;

4. A recreational vehicle used during construction of a permitted use for which a building permit has been issued, but not exceeding one year;

5. Residential homes as defined in Chapter 17.08 LCMC.

B. Commercial.

1. Vacation rental dwellings, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.050 and Chapter 5.14 LCMC.

C. Essential emergency communications, early warning and associated emergency facilities. (Ord. 2019-24 § 4; Ord. 2017-17 § 1)


17.17.030 Accessory uses.

The following accessory uses are permitted:

A. Guest houses with no cooking facilities, not rented separately from the principal dwelling or otherwise used as a business, excepting home occupations;

B. Vacation rental dwellings not rented for more than 30 nights in any calendar year, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.050 and Chapter 5.14 LCMC;

C. Home occupations, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.52.010(E);

D. Gardens and animals, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.080;

E. Accessory dwelling units in association with single-family dwellings, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.110;

F. Other accessory uses and accessory buildings and structures customarily appurtenant to a permitted use. (Ord. 2017-17 § 1)


17.17.040 Conditional uses.

The following conditional uses may be permitted subject to a receipt of a conditional use permit, and subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.60 LCMC:

A. Utility substations, but not wireless communications facilities;

B. Government buildings;

C. Public and private pocket parks as defined in the city’s parks and recreation system plan, and playgrounds for neighborhood use;

D. Places of worship, and accessory uses set forth in LCMC 17.80.160(A). (Ord. 2019-24 § 5; Ord. 2019-21 § 2; Ord. 2017-17 § 1)


17.17.050 Restrictions.

A. No development shall occur unless all city services are available, except as provided in LCMC 17.52.120(A);

B. Lighting shall be as required by LCMC 17.52.150;

C. Fencing may not exceed three and one-half feet in height in a required front yard or required street side yard, or more than six feet in any other yard;

D. Planned unit developments that include housing incompatible with single-family R-1 zone are prohibited. (Ord. 2017-17 § 1)


17.17.060 Maximum building height.

The maximum building height shall be 30 feet except as provided in LCMC 17.52.190 and 17.52.200. (Ord. 2017-17 § 1)


17.17.070 Lot requirements.

Lot requirements shall be as follows:

A. The minimum lot area shall be 5,000 square feet and 8,000 square feet for a duplex.

B. The minimum lot width shall be 50 feet.

C. The minimum lot depth shall be 70 feet.

D. The minimum front yard shall be 20 feet. Except that the minimum setbacks from Logan Road need not exceed the average setback of buildings on all lots within 100 feet of the lot on which the proposed building is to be located and that abut Logan Road.

E. The minimum interior side yard shall be seven and one-half feet for single-story buildings and 10 feet for buildings with more than one story.

F. The minimum street side yard shall be 20 feet, except that it may be one foot less for each two feet of front yard setback over the minimum, but not to less than 10 feet.

G. On corner lots, the clear-vision area requirement of LCMC 17.52.060 and 17.52.070 shall apply.

H. The minimum rear yard shall be seven and one-half feet for single-story buildings and 10 feet for buildings with more than one story. In no case shall the distance between residential structures on the same lot or on adjacent lots be less than 10 feet.

I. The maximum building coverage shall be 35 percent. (Ord. 2017-17 § 1)


17.17.080 Signs.

The regulations of Chapter 17.72 LCMC apply to the permitting, use, and characteristics of signs. (Ord. 2017-17 § 1)


17.17.090 Off-street parking and loading.

The regulations of Chapter 17.56 LCMC apply to off-street parking and loading. Driveways shall not have an impervious width of more than 20 feet. Driveways may be gravel. (Ord. 2017-17 § 1)


17.17.100 Other required conditions.

All single-family dwellings (site-built, modular and manufactured homes) to be constructed or located in residential zones shall use at least two of the following design features on the front of the dwelling:

A. Dormers;

B. Gables;

C. Recessed entries;

D. Covered porch entries;

E. Cupolas;

F. Pillars or posts;

G. Bay or bow windows;

H. Eaves (minimum six-inch projection);

I. Offsets on building face or roof (minimum 16 inches). (Ord. 2017-17 § 1)


Chapter 17.18 VACATION RENTAL (VR) ZONE

Sections:

17.18.010    Purpose and locational criteria.

17.18.020    Permitted uses.

17.18.030    Accessory uses.

17.18.040    Conditional uses.

17.18.050    Restrictions.

17.18.060    Maximum building height.

17.18.070    Lot/yard other requirements.

17.18.080    Signs.

17.18.090    Off-street parking and loading.

17.18.100    Other required conditions.


17.18.010 Purpose and locational criteria.

A. The vacation rental district (VR) is provided to facilitate lodging alternatives for vacationers in areas in close proximity to the community’s attractions and recreation uses. The district is intended to provide a location for family vacation use in a mixed use setting which is less commercial than the recreation-commercial zone but which has sufficiently sized public facilities and services to accommodate the intensity of vacation rental use. While the VR zone permits residential use, it is intended for use in discrete geographic areas devoted to vacation rentals or as a transition between commercial zones and purely residential zones, and therefore facilitates the protection and stability of established neighborhoods. 

B. The vacation rental zone authorizes vacation rental dwellings as a principal use. Unlike residential zones, this zone permits VRD use and operation without the accessory use limitation, that is, the use is authorized on its own, and need not be incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the residence as the owner’s vacation home. This zone would be appropriate for discrete geographic areas where tourist accommodations would not disrupt established residential neighborhoods. Owing to the increased intensity of use, VR areas must be in close proximity to the community’s attractions and recreation uses; further, such areas must be served with the full complement of public facilities and services, including specifically sewer. This zone is appropriate in proximity to commercial zones, existing multifamily residential development, as well as a transition between commercial zones and established single-family residential zones. (Ord. 2014-21 § 2)


17.18.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses are permitted:

A. Single-family dwellings and duplexes, if developed under the standards set forth for single-family dwellings in the R-1 zone;

B. Attached single-family dwellings when developed in accordance with the standards specified in LCMC 17.52.260;

C. Bed and breakfast accommodations, subject to the standards set forth in LCMC 17.80.060;

D. Vacation rental dwellings, subject to the license requirements of Chapter 5.14 LCMC;

E. Manufactured homes when developed in accordance with the standards set forth in LCMC 17.52.250;

F. A mobile home used during construction of a permitted use for which a building permit has been issued, but not exceeding six months;

G. Community gardens and market gardens not larger than 12,500 square feet, in accordance with the standards of LCMC 17.80.080;

H. Public parks, playgrounds and other similar publicly owned recreation areas;

I. Essential emergency communications, early warning and associated emergency facilities;

J. Transportation uses, defined in Chapter 17.08 LCMC;

K. Four-flat dwellings, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.140. (Ord. 2019-24 § 6; Ord. 2019-02 § 2; Ord. 2017-09 § 3; Ord. 2014-21 § 2)


17.18.030 Accessory uses.

The following accessory uses are permitted:

A. Home occupations, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.52.010;

B. Gardens and animals, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.080; 

C. Accessory dwelling units, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.110, except LCMC 17.80.110(B)(11).

D. Other accessory uses and accessory buildings and structures customarily appurtenant to a permitted use. (Ord. 2014-21 § 2)


17.18.040 Conditional uses.

The following conditional uses may be permitted subject to a receipt of a conditional use permit, and subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.60 LCMC:

A. Places of worship, and accessory uses set forth in LCMC 17.80.160(A);

B. Public or private schools (kindergarten through twelfth grade, educational institutions, nursery schools and day care centers);

C. Community meeting buildings, fraternal and social organizations, and recreation centers;

D. Public or private golf courses, except driving ranges or miniature courses operated as a business;

E. Mobile home parks submitted under the provisions of LCMC 17.80.040;

F. Temporary real estate offices in legally recorded subdivisions;

G. Cemeteries;

H. Utility substations, but not wireless communications facilities;

I. Radio or television transmitters or towers, but not wireless communications facilities;

J. Government buildings;

K. Hospitals, sanitariums, rest homes, nursing homes and assisted living facilities. (Ord. 2019-21 § 3; Ord. 2014-21 § 2)


17.18.050 Restrictions.

No development shall occur unless all city services are available. (Ord. 2014-21 § 2)


17.18.060 Maximum building height.

The maximum building height shall be 35 feet, except as provided in LCMC 17.52.190 and 17.52.200. (Ord. 2014-21 § 2)


17.18.070 Lot/yard other requirements.

The minimum requirements for the VR district shall be as follows:

	REQUIRED MINIMUMS

	Zone	Lot Area	Lot Width	Lot Depth	Front Yard(3)	Side Yard	Street Side Yard(3)	Rear Yard	Maximum Lot Coverage(5)

	VR	5,000 sq. ft.; 8,000 for duplex or two-family	50' detached;

35' attached	70'	5'(1)

7-1/2'(2)	5'(1)

7-1/2'(2)

or 0' for common wall of attached dwellings	5'(1)

7-1/2'(2)	5'(1)

7-1/2'(2)	35%(4)

(1)    For one-story structures.

(2)    For structures more than one story.

(3)    The front and street side yards shall be increased to a minimum of 20 feet in front of a garage/carport and/or driveway entrance to a garage/carport. The increase in setback shall not apply to portions of the dwelling that are below or to the side of the garage/carport or driveway entrance. The increase in setback shall not apply to any portion of the dwelling above the garage/carport that is cantilevered (i.e., supported only by the wall of the structure from which it projects), provided the lowest point of the cantilever is a minimum of seven feet above grade. On corner lots, the clear-vision area requirement of LCMC 17.52.060 shall apply.

(4)    For existing lots between 3,000 sq. ft. and 4,000 sq. ft., maximum lot coverage shall be 40 percent. For existing lots less than 3,000 sq. ft., maximum lot coverage shall be 50 percent.

(5)    Includes accessory buildings (garages and outbuildings).

(Ord. 2014-21 § 2)


17.18.080 Signs.

Signs shall be permitted as set forth in Chapter 17.72 LCMC. (Ord. 2014-21 § 2)


17.18.090 Off-street parking and loading.

Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.56 LCMC. (Ord. 2014-21 § 2)


17.18.100 Other required conditions.

All single-family dwellings (site-built, modular and manufactured homes) to be constructed or located in residential zones shall use at least two of the following design features to provide visual relief along the front of the home:

A. Dormers;

B. Gables;

C. Recessed entries;

D. Covered porch entries;

E. Cupolas;

F. Pillars or posts;

G. Bay or bow windows;

H. Eaves (minimum six-inch projection);

I. Off-sets on building face or roof (minimum 16 inches). (Ord. 2014-21 § 2)


Chapter 17.20 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-M) ZONE

Sections:

17.20.010    Purpose.

17.20.020    Permitted uses.

17.20.030    Accessory uses.

17.20.040    Conditional uses.

17.20.050    Minimum lot area and density requirements.

17.20.060    Lot width, building coverage and yard requirements.

17.20.070    Maximum building height.

17.20.080    Signs.

17.20.090    Parking.

17.20.100    Other required conditions.

Prior legislation: Ord. 89-11.


17.20.010 Purpose.

This zoning district is designed to provide an environment suitable for higher density urban residential uses, and community services. (Ord. 90-11 § 1(1); Ord. 84-2 § 3.040(1))


17.20.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses are permitted:

A. Single-family dwellings, if developed under the standards set forth for single-family dwellings within the R-1 zone (except for the building coverage standards, which shall be as set out in LCMC 17.20.060(D)), and two-family dwellings or duplexes;

B. Multiple-family dwellings and apartment houses;

C. Cottage housing developments, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.120;

D. Rooming and boarding houses;

E. Community gardens and market gardens not larger than 12,500 square feet, in accordance with the standards of LCMC 17.80.080;

F. A mobile home used during construction of a permitted use for which a building permit has been issued, but not exceeding six months;

G. Bed and breakfast accommodations, subject to the standards set forth in LCMC 17.80.060;

H. Manufactured homes when developed in accordance with the standards specified in LCMC 17.52.250;

I. Attached single-family dwellings, when developed in accordance with the standards specified in LCMC 17.52.260;

J. Transportation uses, defined in Chapter 17.08 LCMC;

K. Tiny house developments, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.040(C);

L. Four-flat dwellings, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.140;

M. Essential emergency communications, early warning and associated emergency facilities. (Ord. 2019-24 § 7; Ord. 2019-02 § 3; Ord. 2019-05 § 1; Ord. 2017-09 § 4; Ord. 2014-10 § 2; Ord. 2010-06 § 3; Ord. 2009-05 § 6; Ord. 2005-14 § 4; Ord. 97-12 § 1; Ord. 95-15 § 4; Ord. 94-12 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 91-4 § 4; Ord. 90-11 § 1(2); Ord. 84-2 § 3.040(2)).


17.20.030 Accessory uses.

The following accessory uses are permitted:

A. Offices incidental and necessary to the conduct of a permitted use;

B. Off-street parking lots when appurtenant to a permitted use in the R-M zone, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.56 LCMC;

C. Home occupations, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.52.010(E);

D. Gardens and animals, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.080;

E. Accessory dwelling units in association with single-family dwellings, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.110;

F. Vacation rental dwelling, provided it is not rented for more than 30 nights in any calendar year, and subject to LCMC 17.80.050 and to the license requirements of Chapter 5.14 LCMC;

G. Other accessory uses and accessory buildings and structures customarily appurtenant to a permitted use. (Ord. 2016-20 § 3; Ord. 2014-08 § 3; Ord. 2009-05 § 7; Ord. 92-8 § 4; Ord. 90-11 § 1(3); Ord. 84-2 § 3.040(3))


17.20.040 Conditional uses.

The following conditional uses may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit:

A. Time-share units, when developed subject to requirements and standards of this section;

B. Places of worship, and accessory uses set forth in LCMC 17.80.160(A);

C. Public or private schools (kindergarten through 12th grade, educational institutions, nursery schools and day care centers);

D. Community meeting buildings, fraternal and social organizations and recreation centers, public parks, playgrounds and similar publicly owned recreational areas;

E. Public or private golf courses, except driving ranges or miniature courses operated as a business;

F. Mobile home parks submitted under the provisions of LCMC 17.80.040;

G. Temporary real estate offices in legally recorded subdivisions;

H. Cemeteries;

I. Utility substations, but not wireless communications facilities;

J. Radio and television transmitters or towers, but not wireless communications facilities;

K. Government buildings;

L. Hospitals, sanitariums, rest homes and nursing homes;

M. Docks, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.44.040. (Ord. 2019-23 § 3; Ord. 2019-21 § 4; Ord. 2012-06 § 7; Ord. 2009-02 § 3; Ord. 2003-08 §§ 6, 7; Ord. 95-15 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 90-11 § 1(4); Ord. 84-2 § 3.040(4))


17.20.050 Minimum lot area and density requirements.

The minimum lot area shall be 5,000 square feet for a single-family dwelling and a minimum of 8,000 square feet for a duplex or the first two units of a multifamily development. For each additional dwelling unit, the following standards shall apply:

A. Low Density. Where the entire lot is in excess of 150 feet from a boundary of a commercial zone, the lot must have an additional area of 2,250 square feet for each additional dwelling.

B. High Density. Where the entire lot is within 150 feet of the boundary of a commercial zone, the lot must have an additional area of 1,200 square feet for each additional dwelling unit.

C. Mixed Density. Where a portion of the parcel is within 150 feet of a boundary line of a commercial zone and a portion of the parcel is in excess of 150 feet of the boundary of a commercial zone, calculate allowed density (number of dwelling units) in the following manner: 

1. Deduct the 8,000 square feet required for the first two units from the larger of the two portions. If neither portion is 8,000 square feet, deduct as much as possible from the larger portion and the remainder from the smaller portion, or if the same size, subtract equally from both portions; 

2. Divide the remainder (i.e., square feet of the portion within 150 feet of a commercial zone, less the square footage deducted from this portion in step one) by 1,200 square feet per unit; 

3. Divide the remainder (square feet of the portion more than 150 feet from a commercial zone, less the square footage deducted from this portion in step one) by 2,250 square feet per unit; 

4. Add the quotients from steps 2 and 3. Round the resulting quotient down to the nearest whole number; 

5. To this sum add the two units from step 1 to get the maximum number of dwelling units allowed on the parcel. The site plan may distribute the allowed units on the lot without regard to distance from commercial zoning. 

6. Example of calculation described in subsections (C)(1) through (5) of this section:

A 50,000 square foot parcel with 20,000 square feet within 150 feet of a commercial zone and 30,000 square feet in excess of 150 feet from a commercial zone. 

1. Deduct the 8,000 square feet required for the first two units from the 30,000 square foot portion. 

2. Divide the 20,000 square feet of the area within 150 feet of a commercial zone by 1,200 square feet per unit. The result is 16.67 units. 

3. Divide the 22,000 square feet (remaining after step 1) of the area in excess of 150 feet of a commercial zone by 2,250 square feet per unit. The result is 9.78 units. 

4. Add the quotients from steps 2 and 3 to get 26.45. Round down to 26. 

5. Add the two units from the first step to 26 for a total of 28 units. (Ord. 2014-16 § 1; Ord. 90-11 § 1(5); Ord. 84-2 § 3.040(5))


17.20.060 Lot width, building coverage and yard requirements.

A. Lot Width. The minimum average lot width shall be at least 50 feet for single-family residences and duplexes; at least 60 feet for triplexes or greater number of dwelling units.

B. Front Yard. The minimum front yard shall be 20 feet.

C. Side and Rear Yard. The minimum side and rear yard shall be at least five feet, except that the street side yard shall be a minimum of 15 feet. The side and rear yard shall be increased by one-half foot for each foot by which the building height exceeds 15 feet.

D. Building Coverage. The maximum building coverage by buildings and structures shall not exceed 45 percent of the total lot area.

E. Special yards and distances between buildings shall be provided as follows:

1. The distance between any principal building and any accessory building shall be a minimum of 10 feet.

2. An inner court providing access to double-row dwelling groups shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width.

3. Except for single-family dwellings on one lot, the distance between principal buildings shall be at least one-half the sum of the height of both buildings; provided, however, that in no case shall the distance be less than 15 feet. This requirement shall also apply to portions of the same building separated from each other by a court or other open space.

4. For special yard requirements, see Chapter 17.52 LCMC, Supplementary Regulations and Exceptions. (Ord. 2010-06 § 4; Ord. 90-11 § 1(6); Ord. 84-2 § 3.040(6))


17.20.070 Maximum building height.

Maximum building height shall be 35 feet except as provided in LCMC 17.52.190 and 17.52.200. (Ord. 90-11 § 1(7); Ord. 84-2 § 3.040(7))


17.20.080 Signs.

Signs shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.72 LCMC. (Ord. 90-11 § 1(8); Ord. 84-2 § 3.040(8))


17.20.090 Parking.

Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.56 LCMC. (Ord. 92-8 § 5; Ord. 90-11 § 1(9); Ord. 84-2 § 3.040(9))


17.20.100 Other required conditions.

A. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with LCMC 17.52.100.

B. Recreation Area. A multifamily development shall have a minimum of 250 square feet of recreation area for each living unit. The recreation area must be exclusively for recreational use, and shall not be located in the required yard and shall not be considered as required landscape areas. The recreation area, which may include useable floor space in recreation buildings, must be available and free for use by occupants and their guests, and accessible to occupants without having to leave the property comprising the multifamily dwelling complex. The recreation area may be in one or more locations in the multifamily dwelling complex. Any location for use by more than an individual unit shall be at least 20 feet in width and within view of the residences it serves. 

C. [Reserved]

D. Access Barrier. Each lot, with its buildings, other structures, and parking and loading areas, shall be physically separated from each adjoining highway or street by a curb or other suitable barrier against unchanneled motor vehicle ingress or egress. Such a barrier shall be located at the edge of, or within, the front yard or in side yards abutting streets unless suitable curbs and gutters are provided within the highway or street right-of-way. Except for the access ways permitted below, such barrier shall be continuous for the entire length of any lot line adjoining a street or highway.

E. Access Ways. Each lot shall have not more than two access ways to any one street or highway, which shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Width of Access Way. The width of any access way leading to or from a street or highway shall not exceed 24 feet, or where the city engineer or the Oregon Department of Transportation requires a turn lane, 36 feet, nor be less than 15 feet in width at the right-of-way line for a one-way ingress or egress. The alignment of access ways and curb return dimensions is subject to site plan review committee approval.

2. Spacing of Access Ways. At its intersection with the lot line, no part of any access way shall be nearer than 20 feet to any other access way on the same lot, nor shall any part of the access way be nearer than 10 feet to any side or rear property line and its intersection with a right-of-way line. Insofar as practicable, the use of common access ways by two or more permitted uses is encouraged in order to reduce the number and closeness of access points along the highways.

3. Traffic Hazards. The location and number of access ways shall be so arranged that they will reduce the possibilities of traffic hazards as much as possible.

F. Restrictions. No development shall occur in the R-M zone unless all city services (sewer and water) are available to serve such development, except as provided in LCMC 17.52.120(A).

G. Design Features. All single-family units (site-built, modular and manufactured homes) to be constructed or located in the multifamily residential zone shall utilize at least two of the following design features to provide visual relief along the front of the home:

1. Dormers;

2. Gables;

3. Recessed entries;

4. Covered porch entries;

5. Cupolas;

6. Pillars or posts;

7. Bay or bow windows;

8. Eaves (minimum six-inch projection);

9. Off-sets on building face or roof (minimum 16 inches). (Ord. 2014-16 § 2; Ord. 98-13; Ord. 91-8 § 1; Ord. 91-4 § 5; Ord. 90-11 § 1(10); Ord. 84-2 § 3.040(10))


Chapter 17.24 PROFESSIONAL CAMPUS (PC) ZONE

Sections:

17.24.010    Purpose.

17.24.020    Uses permitted.

17.24.030    Accessory uses.

17.24.040    Conditional uses permitted.

17.24.050    Yard requirements.

17.24.060    Maximum building height.

17.24.070    Signs.

17.24.080    Parking.

17.24.090    Other required conditions.


17.24.010 Purpose.

The professional campus zone (PC) is provided for the cohesive development of professional, institutional, office and special service uses in common areas within the community. (Ord. 84-2 § 3.050(1))


17.24.020 Uses permitted.

In a PC zone, the following are given as examples of those uses which meet the intent of this zone:

A. Offices, studios or clinics of accountants, architects, artists, attorneys, authors, writers, dentists, designers, engineers, investment counselors, landscape architects, management consultants, physicians, surgeons and psychologists;

B. Offices of administrative, editorial, educational, utility, executive, financial, government, philanthropic, insurance, real estate, religious, research, scientific or statistical organizations whose activities are such that few visitors, other than employees, have reason to come to the premises;

C. Hospitals and accessory uses such as pharmacies, and related health facilities, sanitariums, nursing homes, residential homes and assisted living facilities;

D. Public parks and recreation facilities;

E. Government buildings;

F. Elderly housing units developed under the standards and provisions of the low density section of the R-M zone;

G. Mixed use development;

H. Essential emergency communications, early warning and associated emergency facilities;

I. Transportation uses, defined in Chapter 17.08 LCMC. (Ord. 2019-24 § 8; Ord. 2017-09 § 5; Ord. 2005-14 § 5; Ord. 2001-01 § 2; Ord. 91-44 § 1; Ord. 84-2 § 3.050(2))


17.24.030 Accessory uses.

The following accessory uses are permitted:

A. Off-street parking lots when appurtenant to a permitted use in the R-M zone, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.56 LCMC;

B. Gardens and animals, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.080;

C. Other accessory uses and accessory buildings and structures customarily appurtenant to a permitted use. (Ord. 2009-05 § 8)


17.24.040 Conditional uses permitted.

In a PC zone, the following are given as examples of those uses which meet the intent of this zone on a conditional basis, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.60 LCMC:

A. Theaters;

B. Utility substation;

C. Research and development establishments engaged in the development and assembly of electronic equipment, precision instruments or similar products, so long as the occupancy of such an establishment does not exceed one employee per 170 square feet of gross office, laboratory, processing or assembly floor area;

D. Public use of public utility;

E. Wireless communications facilities, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.52.270. (Ord. 2003-08 § 8; Ord. 84-2 § 3.050(3). Formerly 17.24.030)


17.24.050 Yard requirements.

A. Front Yard. The minimum front yard shall be 20 feet.

B. Side and Rear Yard. The minimum side and rear yard shall be at least five feet, except that the street side yard shall be a minimum of 15 feet. The side and rear yards shall be increased by one-half foot for each foot by which the building height exceeds 15 feet.

C. For special yard requirements, see Chapter 17.52 LCMC, Supplementary Regulations and Exceptions. (Ord. 91-14 § 1; Ord. 84-2 § 3.050(4). Formerly 17.24.040)


17.24.060 Maximum building height.

Maximum building height shall be 45 feet, except as provided in LCMC 17.52.190 and 17.52.200. (Ord. 91-14 § 2; Ord. 91-8 § 2; Ord. 84-2 § 3.050(5). Formerly 17.24.050)


17.24.070 Signs.

Signs shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.72 LCMC. (Ord. 91-14 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.050(6). Formerly 17.24.060)


17.24.080 Parking.

Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.56 LCMC. (Ord. 92-8 § 6; Ord. 91-14 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.050(7). Formerly 17.24.070)


17.24.090 Other required conditions.

A. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with LCMC 17.52.100.

B. Restrictions. No development shall occur in the PC zone unless all city services (sewer and water) are available to serve such development. (Ord. 91-14 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.050(8). Formerly 17.24.080)


Chapter 17.28 RECREATION-COMMERCIAL (RC) ZONE

Sections:

17.28.010    Purpose.

17.28.020    Uses permitted.

17.28.030    Accessory uses.

17.28.040    Conditional uses permitted.

17.28.050    Yard requirements.

17.28.060    Minimum lot area.

17.28.070    Maximum building height.

17.28.080    Signs.

17.28.090    Parking.

17.28.100    Other required conditions.


17.28.010 Purpose.

The recreation-commercial zone (RC) is provided for those commercial uses having a definite relationship to the community’s resort and recreation industry. Allowed herein are uses that provide food, lodging, recreational activities and services that have a resort rather than a carnival character. Residential multifamily housing is also permitted which meets demands for housing in areas of concentrated recreation services, including seasonal and retirement homes. (Ord. 84-2 § 3.060(1))


17.28.020 Uses permitted.

In an RC zone, the following are given as examples of those uses which meet the intent of this zone:

A. Motels and resorts;

B. Eating or drinking establishments;

C. Gift shops;

D. Convention centers;

E. Single-family dwellings and duplexes, if developed under the standards set forth for single-family dwellings within the R-1 zone;

F. Time-share units, when developed under the standards of LCMC 17.28.050;

G. Bed and breakfast accommodations;

H. Attached single-family dwellings, when developed in accordance with the standards specified in LCMC 17.52.260;

I. Manufactured homes when developed in accordance with the standards specified in LCMC 17.52.250;

J. Essential emergency communications, early warning and associated emergency facilities;

K. Community gardens and market gardens not larger than 12,500 square feet, in accordance with the standards of LCMC 17.80.080;

L. Mixed-use development;

M. Transportation uses, defined in Chapter 17.08 LCMC;

N. Tiny house developments, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.040(C);

O. Four-flat dwellings, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.140. (Ord. 2019-24 § 9; Ord. 2019-02 § 4; Ord. 2019-05 § 2; Ord. 2017-09 § 6; Ord. 2012-06 § 4; Ord. 2009-07 § 2; Ord. 2009-05 § 9; Ord. 2005-14 § 6; Ord. 95-15 § 7; Ord. 94-13 § 1; Ord. 94-12 § 3; Ord. 85-10; Ord. 84-2 § 3.060(2))


17.28.030 Accessory uses.

The following accessory uses are permitted:

A. Gardens and animals, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.080;

B. Accessory dwelling units in association with single-family dwellings, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.110;

C. Other accessory uses and accessory buildings and structures customarily appurtenant to a permitted use. (Ord. 2014-08 § 4; Ord. 2009-05 § 10)


17.28.040 Conditional uses permitted.

In an RC zone, the following are given as examples of those uses that meet the intent of this zone on a conditional basis, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.60 LCMC:

A. A use listed as a permitted use in this zone, with drive-in service facilities;

B. Public use or public utility;

C. Utility substation;

D. Outdoor commercial amusement establishments;

E. Recreational vehicle parks;

F. Multifamily dwellings developed under the standards of the R-M zone;

G. Wireless communications facilities, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.52.270;

H. Emergency shelters;

I. Docks, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.44.040. (Ord. 2019-23 § 4; Ord. 2012-06 § 1; Ord. 2009-02 § 4; Ord. 2003-08 § 9; Ord. 97-11 § 2; Ord. 95-15 § 8; Ord. 89-11 § 5; Ord. 84-2 § 3.060(3). Formerly 17.28.030)


17.28.050 Yard requirements.

A. Front Yards. The minimum front yard shall be five feet.

B. Side and Rear Yard. The minimum side and rear yard shall be at least five feet, except that the street side yard shall be a minimum of five feet. The side and rear yard shall be increased by one-half foot for each foot by which the building height exceeds 15 feet.

C. For special yard requirements, see Chapter 17.52 LCMC, Supplementary Regulations and Exceptions. (Ord. 91-14 § 4; Ord. 84-2 § 3.060(4). Formerly 17.28.040)


17.28.060 Minimum lot area.

None required, except for motels and resorts which shall have a minimum lot area of 10,000 square feet. (Ord. 91-14 § 5; Ord. 91-8 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.060(5). Formerly 17.28.050)


17.28.070 Maximum building height.

Maximum building height shall be 45 feet, except as provided in LCMC 17.52.190 and 17.52.200. (Ord. 91-14 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 3.060(6). Formerly 17.28.060)


17.28.080 Signs.

Signs shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.72 LCMC. (Ord. 91-14 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 3.060(7). Formerly 17.28.070)


17.28.090 Parking.

Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.56 LCMC. (Ord. 92-8 § 7; Ord. 91-14 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 3.060(8). Formerly 17.28.080)


17.28.100 Other required conditions.

A. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with LCMC 17.52.100.

B. No development shall occur in the RC zone unless all city services (sewer and water) are available to serve such development.

C. Design Features. All single-family units (site-built, modular and manufactured homes) to be constructed or located in the zone shall utilize at least two of the following design features to provide visual relief along the front of the home:

1. Dormers;

2. Gables;

3. Recessed entries;

4. Covered porch entries;

5. Cupolas;

6. Pillars or posts;

7. Bay or bow windows;

8. Eaves (minimum six-inch projection);

9. Off-sets on building face or roof (minimum 16 inches).

D. All commercial or mixed use buildings in the RC zone must conform to Chapter 17.74 LCMC, Commercial Design Standards.1 (Ord. 2007-10 § 3; Ord. 94-13 § 2; Ord. 91-14 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 3.060(9). Formerly 17.28.090)1

Code reviser’s note: This subsection was added by Ord. 2007-10 as LCMC 17.28.090(C). It has been editorially relettered to avoid duplication. 


Chapter 17.32 GENERAL COMMERCIAL (GC) ZONE

Sections:

17.32.010    Purpose.

17.32.020    Uses permitted.

17.32.030    Accessory uses.

17.32.040    Conditional uses permitted.

17.32.050    Yard requirements.

17.32.060    Minimum lot width.

17.32.070    Maximum building height.

17.32.080    Maximum building size.

17.32.090    Signs.

17.32.100    Parking.

17.32.110    Other required conditions.


17.32.010 Purpose.

The general commercial zone (GC) is provided to accommodate a wide range of retail commercial uses including those which attract shoppers from a community or larger market area, as well as convenience service/retail uses and single-family residential dwelling units. Retail commercial uses are those that sell services and/or products to the ultimate consumer. Also permitted as conditional uses are low intensity fabrication uses and other limited service facilities as listed. (Ord. 84-2 § 3.070(1))


17.32.020 Uses permitted.

In a GC zone, the following are given as examples of those uses that meet the intent of this zone:

A. Convenience service/retail use;

B. Eating and drinking establishments, excluding drive-in restaurants;

C. Carpet, rug, fabric and interior decorating shops including reupholstering, making of draperies and other similar articles which are conducted as part of, and secondary to, a retail sales operation;

D. Sporting goods stores;

E. Motels and resorts;

F. Building supply stores;

G. Public facilities;

H. Garden supplies and nursery;

I. Community meeting buildings, fraternal or social organizations;

J. Automotive parts and accessories;

K. Printing;

L. Carpenter, plumbing, cabinet, upholstering and sheet metal shops, if conducted wholly within an enclosed building;

M. Appliance sales and service;

N. Single-family dwellings and duplexes, if developed under the standards in the R-1 zone;

O. Mini-warehouses, if existing on or if site plan approval was applied for before June 9, 2008. Mini-warehouses in existence on or applied for before June 9, 2008, may be expanded within the boundaries of the lot or lots they occupied as of that date, subject to the standards applicable as of the date of application for expansion;

P. Time-share units, when developed under the standards of LCMC 17.28.050;

Q. Bed and breakfast accommodations;

R. Professional and business offices;

S. Art gallery and studio;

T. Physical therapy;

U. Equipment rental establishments;

V. Physical fitness center;

W. Manufactured homes when developed in accordance with the standards specified in LCMC 17.28.100(C) and 17.52.250;

X. Veterinary clinics;

Y. Community gardens and market gardens not larger than 12,500 square feet, in accordance with the standards of LCMC 17.80.080;

Z. Mixed-use development;

AA. Essential emergency communications, early warning and associated emergency facilities;

BB. Retail marijuana facilities, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.130;

CC. Indoor theaters;

DD. Transportation uses, defined in Chapter 17.08 LCMC;

EE. Tiny house developments, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.040(C);

FF. Four-flat dwellings, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.140;

GG. Places of worship, and accessory uses set forth in LCMC 17.80.160(B). (Ord. 2019-24 § 10; Ord. 2019-21 § 5; Ord. 2019-02 § 5; Ord. 2019-05 § 3; Ord. 2017-09 § 7; Ord. 2017-08 § 1; Ord. 2016-05 § 1; Ord. 2014-29 § 1; Ord. 2012-06 § 2; Ord. 2010-05 § 2; Ord. 2009-07 § 3; Ord. 2009-05 § 11; Ord. 2008-05 § 2; Ord. 2005-14 § 7; Ord. 95-26 § 1; Ord. 95-15 § 9; Ord. 94-13 § 3; Ord. 94-3 § 1; Ord. 90-22 § 1; Ord. 90-21 § 1; Ord. 90-12 § 1; Ord. 90-5 § 1; Ord. 85-10; Ord. 84-2 § 3.070(2))


17.32.030 Accessory uses.

The following accessory uses are permitted:

A. Gardens and animals, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.080;

B. Accessory dwelling units in association with single-family dwellings, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.110;

C. Other accessory uses and accessory buildings and structures customarily appurtenant to a permitted use. (Ord. 2014-08 § 5; Ord. 2009-05 § 12)


17.32.040 Conditional uses permitted.

In a GC zone, the following are given as examples of those uses which meet the intent of this zone on a conditional basis, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.60 LCMC:

A. A use listed in this zone with drive-in service facilities and including, but not limited to, drive-in restaurants, service stations, car washes and photo processing booths;

B. Repealed by Ord. 2019-21;

C. Indoor commercial recreation establishments;

D. Passenger terminals;

E. Public utility;

F. Utility substation;

G. Outdoor commercial recreational establishments, such as swimming pool and miniature golf;

H. Automobile and trailer sales; provided, that any incidental repair activities shall be conducted and confined wholly within a building;

I. Light fabrication establishments entailing the assembly of electronic or precision equipment, the sewing of fabric or materials or similar activities;

J. Recreational vehicle parks;

K. Multifamily dwellings developed under the standards and provisions of the high density section of the R-M zone;

L. Motor vehicle repair facility;

M. Tire shops;

N. Kennels;

O. Aggregate sales and storage;

P. Manufactured dwelling sales and service;

Q. Mortuary;

R. Wireless communications facilities, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.52.270;

S. Emergency shelters;

T. Docks, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.44.040. (Ord. 2019-23 § 5; Ord. 2019-21 § 6; Ord. 2017-08 § 2; Ord. 2012-06 §§ 3, 8; Ord. 2010-05 § 8; Ord. 2003-08 § 10; Ord. 97-11 § 3; Ord. 95-17 § 1; Ord. 92-4 § 4; Ord. 91-31 § 1; Ord. 84-2 § 3.070(3). Formerly 17.32.030)


17.32.050 Yard requirements.

A. Front Yard. None, except when the front yard is abutting or across the street from a parcel in a residential zone and then the front yard shall be the front yard required in the contiguous residential zone. However, the provisions of LCMC 17.52.060 and 17.52.070 shall apply.

B. Side, Street Side and Rear Yard. None, except when the side, street side or rear yard is abutting or across the street from a parcel in a residential zone, and then the side, street side or rear yard shall be a minimum of 10 feet. The required side, street side or rear yard shall be increased by one-half foot for each foot by which the building height exceeds 15 feet. However, the provisions of LCMC 17.52.060 and 17.52.070 shall apply. (Ord. 92-19 § 1; Ord. 91-19 § 1; Ord. 91-14 § 7; Ord. 84-2 § 3.070(4). Formerly 17.32.040)


17.32.060 Minimum lot width.

Automobile service stations, drive-in restaurants and similar drive-in establishments shall have a minimum lot width of 100 feet. (Ord. 91-14 § 8; Ord. 91-8 § 4; Ord. 84-2 § 3.070(5). Formerly 17.32.050)


17.32.070 Maximum building height.

Maximum building height shall be 45 feet, except as provided in LCMC 17.52.190 and 17.52.200. (Ord. 91-14 § 9; Ord. 84-2 § 3.070(6). Formerly 17.32.060)


17.32.080 Maximum building size.

A. No building or group of contiguous buildings shall exceed a footprint of 60,000 square feet. Notwithstanding this limitation, any building or group of contiguous buildings in lawful existence that exceeded this limitation on January 1, 2003, may expand its footprint, by not more than 10 percent of the footprint on January 1, 2003; provided, that the use of the building or combined contiguous buildings has not ceased for a period of six months or more ending at any time on or after January 1, 2003.

B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 17.64 LCMC, any building or group of contiguous buildings in lawful existence and that exceeded this limitation on January 1, 2003, may be rebuilt if destroyed by any cause to any extent up to its footprint immediately prior to its destruction.

C. Variances under Chapter 17.68 LCMC to the footprint limitation set out in this section shall not be allowed. (Ord. 2003-01 § 2; Ord. 84-2 § 3.070(7). Formerly 17.32.070)


17.32.090 Signs.

Signs shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.72 LCMC. (Ord. 2003-01 § 2; Ord. 91-14 § 9; Ord. 84-2 § 3.070(8). Formerly 17.32.080)


17.32.100 Parking.

Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.56 LCMC. (Ord. 2003-01 § 2; Ord. 92-8 § 8; Ord. 91-14 § 9; Ord. 84-2 § 3.070(9). Formerly 17.32.090)


17.32.110 Other required conditions.

A. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with LCMC 17.52.100.

B. Outdoor Storage Areas. All outdoor storage areas shall be screened from ground level view from adjacent properties and from public streets.

C. Outdoor Sales Displays. Outdoor sales displays are allowed, but shall not be located in any yard, landscaped area, or off-street parking or loading area which is required by this title.

D. Restrictions. No development shall occur in the GC zone unless all city services (sewer and water) are available to serve such development.

E. All commercial or mixed use buildings in the GC zone must conform to Chapter 17.74 LCMC, Commercial Design Standards.1 (Ord. 2007-10 § 4; Ord. 2003-01 § 2; Ord. 98-12 § 1; Ord. 91-14 § 9; Ord. 84-2 § 3.070(10). Formerly 17.32.100)1

Code reviser’s note: This subsection was added by Ord. 2007-10 as LCMC 17.32.100(C). It has been editorially relettered to avoid duplication. 


Chapter 17.34 NELSCOTT PLAN (NP) DISTRICT

Sections:

Article I. Nelscott Plan District – General Provisions

17.34.005    Definitions.

17.34.010    Purpose and overall guiding principles.

17.34.020    Nelscott district overlay zones.

17.34.030    Applicability of municipal code regulations.

17.34.040    Administration of design standards.

Article II. Nelscott Land Use Standards

17.34.050    Permitted uses.

17.34.060    General development standards.

Article III. Nelscott Design Standards

17.34.070    Purpose.

17.34.080    Block layout.

17.34.090    Buildings and structures.

17.34.100    Streetscapes.

17.34.110    Pedestrian spaces.

17.34.120    Off-street parking and circulation.

17.34.130    Pedestrian access.

17.34.140    Landscaping.

17.34.150    Signs.

17.34.160    Exterior lighting.

Article I. Nelscott Plan District – General Provisions


17.34.005 Definitions.

Note: The following definitions are informational. Where conflicts occur between the definitions below and an adopted building code, the adopted building code shall apply. For terms that are not defined below and are not defined in the building code, the reviewing authority will use its discretion in selecting from professional source materials that are most relevant to the question at hand.

“Accessibility” means the locational and design characteristics of a use, structure, or facility that permit it to be reached by one with a disability, as prescribed under the Americans with Disabilities Act and associated building codes and guidelines.

“Accessory dwelling unit” means a dwelling unit either attached to a single-family or duplex primary dwelling unit or located on the same lot, having an independent primary means of access, visually subordinate to the primary dwelling, and having a total floor area of not more than 750 square feet.

“Alcove” means a recessed section of a building’s exterior wall; may provide weather protection, outdoor seating or other pedestrian amenities.

“Basement” means the lowest story of a building where 50 percent or more of the floor is located below the grade plane.

“Belt course” means a horizontal course in a masonry wall that is of a different color, texture, size, or material and which is compatible with the overall form and architectural composition.

“Bollard” means a post of metal, wood or masonry, or a combination thereof, that is used to separate or direct traffic (vehicles, pedestrians or both). Bollards may contain sidewalk or pathway lighting.

“Clerestory” means a window that extends from the ground floor of a building to near the top of an outside wall.

“Corbel” means a projection on a building out from a masonry wall, sometimes to support a load and sometimes for decorative effect.

“Cornice” means the exterior trim of a structure at the meeting of the roof and wall.

“Facade” means the front or principal face of a building; any side of a building that faces a street, way, or pedestrian space.

“False-front” means a front wall that extends beyond the side walls or rooftop of a building to create a more imposing facade. (See also “Parapet.”)

“Fenestration” means the arrangement and design of windows and doors in a building.

“Grade” means the surface elevation of the ground.

“Guideline” means a recommended approach, parameter, example, and/or rationale for interpreting, applying, and/or modifying a standard through the site plan review process. For the purpose of site plan review, the photographs, illustrations, and diagrams contained in this chapter are intended to be used as guidelines, except where an illustration contains a specific dimensional requirement or is accompanied by the words “shall” or “must,” then the illustration is intended as a standard.

“Lintel” means a heavy horizontal beam of wood or stone over an opening of a door or window to support the weight above it.

“Medallion” means a small decorative detail used to accent a building’s exterior.

“Mezzanine” means an intermediate level between a ground floor and the upper story(ies) occupying a partial area of floor space.

“Parapet” means a low protective wall at the edge of a roof.

“Pedestrian-scale lighting” means lighting that is designed and located to illuminate a sidewalk, pathway or other area that is used principally by pedestrians. Bollards, wall-mounted lights and step lights are typical of pedestrian-scale lighting.

“Pedestrian space” means a public gathering space, such as a plaza, square, outdoor seating area, alcove, sculpture garden, or similar space, oriented to pedestrians and connecting one or more developments to the adjacent streetscape.

“Pediment” means a low-pitched gable over a portico, door or window; may be used to reduce the scale of a building facade.

“Pier” means a portion of a wall between windows, doors or other openings.

“Pilaster” means a shallow pier used to buttress a wall; or a rectangular column with a capital and base, projecting only slightly from a wall as an ornamental motif.

“Pocket park” means a small plaza or landscaped pedestrian space, typically less than one-quarter acre and not for recreational use.

“Portico” means a porch or entrance to a building consisting of a covered and often columned area; may be used to address building orientation standards where redeveloping a building to meet the front property line is not feasible.

“Public art” means artwork in the public realm, regardless of whether it is on public or private property, or whether it is acquired through public or private funding. Public art can be a sculpture, mural, manhole cover, paving pattern, lighting, seating, kiosk, gate, fountain, engraving, carving, fresco or similar artwork which is approved through design review. In evaluating public art proposals, the reviewing authority may refer to guidelines and inventories prepared by the Arts Committee, the National Trust for Historic Preservation and/or other references it deems appropriate.

“Spandrel” means the blank space between windows and successive stories; or the area between the top of a column or pier and the apex of the arch springing from it.

“Split-barrel roof” means a rounded roof that resembles a barrel split in half and resting rounded side up.

“Standard” means a requirement for the purposes of design review approval. Dimensional requirements and provisions containing the words “shall,” “must,” “not permitted,” “prohibited,” “required/requirement,” or similar prescriptive or proscriptive terms indicate the presence of a standard.

“Streetscape” means the interface between development and a public street along the development’s street frontage; it typically includes storefronts, building entrances, weather protective canopies or awnings, pedestrian spaces such as plazas and curb extensions at intersections, a building front zone along the sidewalk where outdoor seating may occur, a through zone for pedestrians, a street furnishings zone for lights, trees, and other furnishings, and on-street parking where applicable.

“Transparency (windows)” means nonreflective glass with a visible transmittance rating of 0.50 or greater, per the National Fenestration Rating Council.

“Turret” means a small tower extending above a building.

“Wayfinding sign” means a directional sign that is part of an overall sign program for a district, neighborhood, or other city-recognized area as approved through design review. (Ord. 2011-11 § 1; Ord. 2008-18 § 4, Appx. A)


17.34.010 Purpose and overall guiding principles.

The Nelscott plan district (NPD) is established to provide for the integration of residential, commercial, and recreational uses in a well-planned, pedestrian-oriented, mixed use environment. The purpose of the district is to provide maximum flexibility in land use while protecting the unique character of Nelscott. Where a proposed development meets the design requirements of this chapter, the land use approvals process should be as predictable and efficient as possible while striving for excellence in design. The NPD land use and design standards in Articles II and III are intended to ensure that projects support the following objectives:

• Integration and functionality of land uses;

• Connecting Nelscott to the ocean;

• Respecting neighborhood transitions;

• Designing for the climate;

• Aesthetics and context-sensitive design;

• Balancing durability and affordability.

A. Integration and Functionality of Land Uses. Connections between building entrances, sidewalks and associated pedestrian areas should be made to encourage visual and physical integration with a strong sense of place. Due to the small parcel sizes and limited right-of-way widths within Nelscott, developments should maximize the opportunity to consolidate and share parking, for example, by sharing driveways. Where such connections are not practicable, site plans should maximize the opportunity to provide shared parking serving multiple developments.

B. Connecting Nelscott to the Ocean. Nelscott has a network of east-west streets and alleys providing visual and, in some cases, physical access to the beach. The area is defined by village-scale storefronts, beach cottages and hotels nestled between rolling hills, shore pines, and the ocean. While the city recognizes that it is not possible or practical to preserve all views of the ocean, new projects should be designed to take advantage of ocean views while maintaining view corridors from adjacent rights-of-way and pedestrian spaces to the greatest extent practicable.

C. Respecting Neighborhood Transitions. Developments on the edge of the Nelscott Plan District should be made compatible with abutting single-family residential uses outside the plan district – particularly the single-family dwellings and cottages to the north. The design standards for Nelscott are intended to address compatibility through height, mass, scale, materials, detailing, setbacks and other elements.

D. Designing for the Climate. Temperatures in Lincoln City vary widely and it can rain any day of the year. People like being outside and will often walk from place to place even when it’s raining. Nelscott has many visitors in the summer and more people are making it their home, or second home. Therefore, buildings should be designed to withstand high winds, as storms can generate winds of 100 miles per hour. Rooflines should not be overly complex and should have proper drainage for rainwater. Roofs should shed and drain water away from building openings, parking, refuse storage areas and other such areas. Commercial buildings should incorporate canopies, awnings, porticos or similar weather protection features. Pedestrian amenities such as plazas and outdoor seating areas should take advantage of southern exposures and be protected from the wind, to the greatest extent practical.

E. Sustainability. In order to reduce the environmental and energy effects of development, sustainable building practices are encouraged. Permeable pavements for driveways, walkways, and parking areas are encouraged, as is energy conservation in construction. Site designs should maximize the preservation of existing mature vegetation and should provide for on-site storm water quality treatment and management such as through providing bioswales or other natural water treatment features.

F. Aesthetics and Context-Sensitive Design. Nelscott’s aesthetic is rooted in the area’s eclectic mix of beach cottages, hotels, and the Nelscott Strip nestled between rolling hills, shore pines, and the ocean. The Nelscott Plan District encourages new development and redevelopment that honors the past while providing a contemporary interpretation of the area’s architecture and history. The predominant building materials are painted or natural-stain wood siding (shingle, lap, or board-and-batten), masonry block, brick and stone. Detailing may include any of these materials, as well as limited use of metal or vinyl for canopies, building detailing (e.g., flashing, roof gutters, drains, etc.), signs, art, and other detailing.

While each project is unique, the Nelscott design standards (Article III) are intended to provide clear and consistent standards. The standards discourage overly thematic, “formula” architecture, or designs used by retailers, national chain stores, franchises and other companies with stores or offices in multiple locations; provided, that corporate logos, art and similar commercial speech are not restricted.

G. Balancing Durability and Affordability. Balancing durability and affordability means that the city is practical in administering its codes. Great design does not have to be expensive. Sound design principles, quality workmanship, long-lasting materials, and routine maintenance are all important. Historically, development in Nelscott has been characterized by relatively simple building forms with moderate detailing and ornamentation. Traditional materials such as wood, stone, and brick are preferred, but other materials such as architectural-grade composite boards, shingles and trim may be used when it is demonstrated that the material is durable and fits the overall composition of the proposed design. Project designs should respect the past, while being practical and durable for the future. (Ord. 2008-18 § 4(1)(A))


17.34.020 Nelscott district overlay zones.

The NP district consists of three subdistricts as shown on the Zoning Map in Exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter.

A. Nelscott Business District (NBD). The intent of this zoning subdistrict is to encourage and enhance the traditional character of the Nelscott commercial core along Highway 101 and to concentrate the businesses in a pedestrian-friendly manner. The emphasis in this subdistrict is on providing retail, commercial, and personal services for the neighboring residents and visitors.

B. Nelscott Cottage Residential (NCR). The intent of this zoning subdistrict is to encourage and enhance the traditional character of the Nelscott residential areas located west of Highway 101. The emphasis in this subdistrict is on preserving and protecting the traditional cottage heritage in a family-friendly, pedestrian-oriented environment.

C. Nelscott Beachside Mixed Use (NBMU). The intent of this zoning subdistrict is to provide for a variety of small-scale beach-oriented commercial and residential uses in a family-friendly environment. (Ord. 2008-18 § 4(1)(B))


17.34.030 Applicability of municipal code regulations.

A. Applicability. The provisions of the Nelscott Plan District, in addition to all other applicable regulations of this title and other city ordinances, shall apply to all uses of land and development within the NP district.

B. Redevelopment and Remodels. Where an existing use or development is proposed to be modified through redevelopment or exterior remodeling, the standards shall apply only to that portion of the use or development that is to be modified; where more than 50 percent of the use or development is to be modified, the reviewing body may require the entire development to conform to the provisions of this chapter, as provided in subsection (E) of this section.

C. Burden of Proof. The applicant has the burden of proof of demonstrating conformity with the standards and criteria of this chapter.

D. Ordinance Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between this chapter and other Lincoln City Municipal Code regulations, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.

E. Nonconforming Situations. Existing uses and/or developments that do not conform to the provisions of this chapter, but were established lawfully prior to the city adopting this chapter, shall be allowed to continue, as provided in Chapter 17.64 LCMC, Nonconforming Situations, except, however, that a nonconforming residence that is destroyed by any cause to an extent exceeding 50 percent of the appraised value as determined by the records of the county assessor for the year preceding destruction may be rebuilt within the same footprint. To the extent any such rebuilt residence is expanded, including a vertical expansion, the area of expansion must conform to the NP regulations. (Ord. 2008-18 § 4(1)(C))


17.34.040 Administration of design standards.

A. Site Plan Review. The design standards will be applied to commercial development (including mixed use and multifamily dwellings, but not including single-family or two-family dwellings) that must receive approval through the city’s site plan review process during that process and prior to issuance of building permits. Single-family or two-family dwellings are subject to the design standards requirements relating to block layout and must receive approval through the building permit review process. The planning director may refer any site plan review application to the planning commission for a public hearing when:

1. The applicant has requested an adjustment or modification to one or more Nelscott code standard(s), as provided in subsection (C) of this section; or

2. The applicant requests a hearing; or

3. The planning director determines that the size or scale of the development (relative to its appearance, traffic generation, parking, or other characteristics) warrants a public hearing.

B. Design Standards Versus Guidelines. The code sections that follow provide intent statements, followed by standards and guidelines. Most sections contain objective standards and approval criteria; however, some criteria require the reviewing body to apply discretion. Where discretion is involved, the code provides guidelines to assist the reviewing body in evaluating a proposal. The following further explains the relationship between intent statements, standards and guidelines.

1. Intent statements are not applicable approval criteria, except requests for adjustments or variance must demonstrate how the proposal conforms to the code’s intent.

2. Standards use the words “shall” or “must” and are mandatory.

3. Guidelines use the words “should,” “may,” “preferred,” and “discouraged,” and are advisory. Guidelines supplement the standards and provide examples of acceptable or unacceptable design. Guidelines also assist in reviewing requests for adjustments and variances and may serve as the basis for approval, denial, or approval with modifications in such instances.

4. Graphics are used to illustrate standards and guidelines. They are not intended to prescribe a particular design but serve as examples of acceptable or unacceptable design solutions.

5. Standards and guidelines both serve as approval criteria, but the reviewing body is afforded greater latitude in applying guidelines. Where the word “should” is used, the applicant must demonstrate that the proposal is consistent with the guideline, or that applying an alternate design solution is consistent with the code’s stated intent. Where a guideline conflicts with any code standard, the standard shall prevail.

6. In the case of a proposed variance or adjustment to a code standard, the applicant must demonstrate how the variance or adjustment results in equal or greater conformity to the intent of the code and all other applicable standards and guidelines.

7. Nullification of one standard or guideline by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not cause any other standard or guideline to be nullified.

C. Adjustments/Modifications to the Standards. The standards contained in this chapter may be adjusted or modified without the need for a variance if the applicant demonstrates that:

1. The chapter’s guiding principles and the intent statement(s) under the applicable standard to be adjusted can be better met through a proposed alternative design solution; or

2. There are practical difficulties in meeting a standard based on the necessary characteristics of an allowed use. In such cases the design must provide other features that tend to meet the goal of the standard (such as a trellis with vines, a sculpture, or a pergola).

Where the code language suggests more than one way to meet a particular standard, the applicant is encouraged to be creative and propose the most appropriate design solution given the site’s context and the purpose of the code. The decision-making body shall refer to the guiding principles in LCMC 17.34.010, the purpose in LCMC 17.34.070, and the intent under each standard in making its decision; the purpose, guiding principles and intent statements shall serve as the approval criteria for adjustments.

D. Incentives for Design Excellence. The city encourages excellence in design. Projects that provide superior pedestrian spaces, pedestrian amenities, public art, alleys, shared parking, or superior architecture may be rewarded, for example, with reduced off-street parking requirements, reduced lot sizes, increased allowable building coverage, and/or assistance from the city’s urban renewal program. These “incentives” are in addition to the “adjustments” provided in subsection (C) of this section. In granting incentives, the hearing body shall find that the incentive results in a design that is superior to what is required under the base standard(s), and is consistent with one or more of the following guidelines:

1. Integration and Functionality of Land Uses. Mixed use projects combining upper-story residential uses with ground floor commercial or civic uses are preferred over single-use developments in the NBD and NBMU subdistricts.

2. Connecting Nelscott to the Ocean. Oceanfront projects that provide the public with physical beach access are preferred over those that provide only visual access or no access at all. Nonoceanfront projects should maintain views of the ocean from public rights-of-way where such views currently exist. Where a project results in diminished ocean views, the decision body may consider other mitigating circumstances in approving an incentive, such as the provision of pedestrian spaces (e.g., plaza) or public parking facilities in the vicinity that enable the public to more easily access the shoreline.

3. Respecting Neighborhood Transitions. Where an applicant requests an exception to the maximum building height standards abutting a residential zone, the project must incorporate mitigating design features, such as additional open space or buffering adjacent to residential uses. Applicants are encouraged to do neighborhood outreach prior to submitting site plans to the city for review. The applicant’s efforts to engage the public (e.g., through a design charrette) prior to submitting a site plan application may influence the decision body in approving or denying incentives.

4. Designing for the Climate. Design elements that show special attention to the Nelscott climate, such as innovative rain protection features, wind protection features, and solar exposure features, are encouraged. Projects going beyond basic wind and rain protection and taking advantage of solar exposure are preferred over projects that do not.

5. Sustainability. Incentives may be appropriate for projects incorporating green building practices, such as the preservation of existing mature vegetation, use of water quality treatment in parking lots, rooftops, and landscapes, use of renewable energy, and energy conservation in construction. Projects eligible for green certification through a nationally recognized program (e.g., Leadership Through Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) or similar program approved by the city) are preferred over those that do not meet such criteria.

6. Aesthetics and Context-Sensitive Design. Architecture that goes beyond base code requirements and achieves the vision contained in the Nelscott Redevelopment Plan is preferred over architecture that merely conforms to the base code requirements. For example, corner properties along Highway 101, particularly those in gateway locations, should incorporate a tower or other signature architectural feature. Oceanfront designs should be superior in both their street-fronting elevation as well as their ocean-fronting elevation.

7. Balancing Durability and Affordability. In granting incentives, preference may be given to projects providing affordable workforce housing or affordable commercial space to small businesses (except overnight accommodations). “Affordable housing” means households earning less than the area median income pay no more than 30 percent of their income toward housing costs. Where incentives are provided, the reviewing authority may require the applicant/owner to record deed restrictions or provide other assurances that the subject housing remains affordable for not less than 10 years. (Ord. 2010-06 § 5; Ord. 2008-18 § 4(1)(D))

Article II. Nelscott Land Use Standards


17.34.050 Permitted uses.

Table 17.34.050.A identifies the land uses allowed in the each of the three Nelscott subdistricts. Uses permitted subject to site plan review are identified with “P”; those that are allowed subject to conditional use permit are identified with “C”; prohibited uses are identified with “N.” If a use is not listed, the planning commission may interpret the code and make a similar use ruling following the procedure for authorization of similar uses found in LCMC 17.52.020.

Table 17.34.050.A – Land Uses Allowed in Nelscott  

	Uses	Status of Use in District

	Use Categories	Business District	Cottage Residential	Beachside Mixed Use

	Residential Categories	 	 	 

	Single-family dwelling	P	P	P

	Attached single-family dwelling	P	N	P

	Duplex or two-family dwelling (when developed on a minimum 7,000-square-foot lot) 	P	P	P

	Accessory dwelling unit, accessory to single-family dwelling or duplex, subject to compliance with design guidelines	P	P	P

	Multiple-family dwellings	P	N	P

	Mixed use

– dwelling(s) above or abutting a ground floor commercial use

– dwelling(s) below a ground floor commercial use fronting on Highway 101	P

N	N

N	P

P

	Manufactured homes when developed in accordance with the standards set forth in LCMC 17.52.250	 	P	 

	Commercial Categories	 	 	 

	Drive-up/drive-in/drive-through (drive-up windows, ATMs, similar uses/facilities)

– lawfully existing as of June 1, 2008

– new or expanded use	P

N	N

N	N

N

	Walk-up windows, ATMs, similar uses/facilities	P	N	P

	Bed and breakfast inn, per LCMC 17.80.060	P	P	P

	Educational services, not a school (e.g., tutoring or similar services)	P	P	P

	Entertainment, major event	P	N	P

	Overnight accommodations, except bed and breakfast inns	P	N	P

	Offices	P	N	P

	Outdoor recreation, commercial	CU	N	CU

	Surface parking lot, except for public facilities and parking as an accessory use	CU	CU	CU

	Vehicle servicing or vehicle repair	N	N	N

	Retail sales and service, excluding drive-up	P	N	P

	Retail sales and service, greater than 60,000 square feet	N	N	N

	Retail marijuana facility, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.130	P	N	N

	Self-service storage	N	N	N

	Vacation rental dwelling, subject to LCMC 17.80.050 and to the license requirements of Chapter 5.14 LCMC	P	N	P

	Industrial Categories	 	 	 

	Industrial service, excluding drive-up 

– fully enclosed (e.g., office)

– not enclosed	CU

N	N

N	N

N

	Manufacturing and production in conjunction with an allowed commercial use

– fully enclosed

– not enclosed	CU

N	N

N	N

N

	Warehouse and freight movement	N	N	N

	Waste-related, except as accessory to a primary permitted use	N	N	N

	Wholesale sales

– fully enclosed

– not enclosed	CU

N	N

N	N

N

	Institutional Categories	 	 	 

	Basic utilities	P	P	P

	Colleges	CU	N	N

	Government use 	P	CU	CU

	Day care, adult or child day care; does not include family day care (16 or fewer children) under ORS 657A.440	CU	CU	CU

	Nursing home, assisted living facility, hospital, rest home, sanitarium, and similar uses	CU	N	N

	Parks and open space

– pedestrian amenities

– parks and recreation facilities 

– other open space	P

P

P	P

P

P	P

P

P

	Places of worship1	CU	CU	CU

	Schools 	CU	CU	CU

	Other Categories	 	 	 

	Accessory structures (with a permitted use)	P	P	P

	Community gardens and market gardens not larger than 12,500 square feet, in accordance with the standards of LCMC 17.80.080	P	P	P

	Gardens and animals, accessory to a permitted use and subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.080	P	P	P

	Radio frequency transmission facilities such as mini-cell antennas and wi-fi antennas	CU	CU	CU

	Stand-alone wireless communication facilities	N	N	N

	Essential emergency communications, early warning and associated emergency facilities	P	P	P

	Transportation facilities (operation, maintenance, preservation, and construction in accordance with the city’s transportation system plan) 	P	P	P

1.    Together with accessory uses as specified in LCMC 17.80.160.

(Ord. 2019-29 § 1; Ord. 2019-24 § 11; Ord. 2019-21 § 7; Ord. 2016-20 §§ 4, 5; Ord. 2016-05 § 2; Ord. 2014-29 § 2; Ord. 2009-05 § 15; Ord. 2009-02 § 7; Ord. 2008-18 § 4(2)(A))


17.34.060 General development standards.

Except as modified through the procedures in LCMC 17.34.040(C) and (D), the development standards in Table 17.34.060.B apply to all Nelscott uses and development.

Table 17.34.060.B – Development Standards  

	Standard	Business District	Cottage Residential	Beachside Mixed Use

	Minimum Lot Area* (square feet)

*Development must conform to lot width, depth, yard setback and coverage standards

– Detached single-family dwelling

– Attached single-family dwelling

– Other structures 	3,750 sq. ft.

3,750 sq. ft.

3,750 sq. ft.	3,750 sq. ft.

Not applicable

3,750 sq. ft.	3,750 sq. ft.

3,750 sq. ft.

3,750 sq. ft.

	Maximum Dwelling Unit Density

– Single-family dwelling

– Duplex or two-family dwelling

– Multiple-family dwelling1	 

One unit per 3,750 sq. ft.

Two units per 7,000 sq. ft.

As in R-M zone (high density)	One unit per 3,750 sq. ft.

Two units per 7,000 sq. ft.

Not applicable	One unit per 3,750 sq. ft.

Two units per 7,000 sq. ft.

As in R-M zone (high density)

	Minimum Lot Width	50 ft.	35 ft.	50 ft.

	Minimum Lot Depth	50 ft.	50 ft.	50 ft.

	Building/Structure Height

Maximum height (see exceptions in LCMC 17.34.090(B)(2)(a))

Minimum height	45 ft.

18 ft.	35 ft.

None	35 ft.

None

	Fences, retaining/garden walls

Max. height – Front and street yards

Max. height – Interior side and rear yards	 

3.5 ft.

6 ft.	 

3.5 ft.

6 ft.	 

3.5 ft.

6 ft., except as may be prohibited in coastal zone

	Building Coverage

Maximum building coverage (footprint of building including projections such as balconies, cantilevers, etc.)	90%	35%2	80%

	Min. Landscape Area (% site area), except does not apply to single-family dwellings. Landscape area may include plant areas and approved pedestrian spaces. Street trees and other street frontage landscaping included. Single-family and duplex development is subject to landscaping standards in LCMC 17.52.100.	10%	10% (may be reduced to 5% where at least one significant shore pine is preserved on site, subject to site plan review)	10% (may be reduced to 5% where at least one significant shore pine is preserved on site, subject to site plan review)

	Minimum Setbacks (feet):

(See also LCMC 17.34.090(B)(2)(h)(ii), Height Step-Back)

Front, street, side, and rear property lines, except garage or carport, and subject to building code

Garage/carport entry, setback from street

Alley or walkway, building setback from alley or walkway	 

 

 

0 ft., except as required for utility easements; single-family dwellings subject to NCR standards

20 ft.

5 ft.	 

 

 

5 ft. for one-story dwellings, 7.5 ft. for more than one-story dwellings

20 ft.

5 ft.	 

 

 

10 ft.; single-family dwellings subject to NCR standards

20 ft.

Not applicable

	Build-To Line (feet):

New buildings only: At least one primary building entrance shall be built no farther from the street right-of-way than the build-to line; except where a greater setback is required for a planned street improvement, then the build-to line increases accordingly. The build-to line may also be increased through site plan review when pedestrian amenities are provided between a primary building entrance and the street right-of-way	10 ft.	Not applicable	Not applicable

	Special setback for planned street improvements	30 feet from the street centerline where the ultimate right-of-way width is 60 feet; 24 feet from the street centerline where the ultimate right-of-way width is 48 feet; 15 feet from the street centerline where the ultimate right-of-way width is 30 feet.

1.    Multifamily dwellings must meet the standards of LCMC 17.20.100.

2.    For lawfully created, pre-existing lots between 3,000 and 4,000 square feet, the maximum building coverage is 40 percent. For lawfully created, pre-existing lots smaller than 3,000 square feet, the maximum building coverage is 50 percent.

(Ord. 2010-06 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 2008-18 § 4(2)(B))

Article III. Nelscott Design Standards


17.34.070 Purpose.

The Nelscott design standards are intended to implement the vision for Nelscott, specifically to help ensure that new buildings and rehabilitated existing buildings convey an image consistent with local history and the Oregon coastal environment. The standards reflect the following values and objectives:

• Retain Nelscott’s compact, walkable character and the traditional small-scale commercial development in the Highway 101 commercial area;

• Promote the formation of pedestrian-friendly facilities and structures;

• Encourage architectural variety, consistent with the eclectic character of Nelscott; provided, that new development creates a close, intimate human scale and architectural design addresses all four sides of a building;

• Encourage the use of contextually appropriate materials, textures and colors;

• Create vibrant pedestrian spaces (e.g., plazas, public art, cafe seating areas, etc.); pedestrian spaces should help identify Nelscott, create intrigue, and offer weather protection and comfort to pedestrians while adding value to the district;

• Break down large building masses and provide visual interest along the street;

• Balance rhythm and continuity – encourage creativity in the design of building elevations, rooflines and facade elements;

• Retain the small-scale beach cottage character of the interior residential area. (Ord. 2008-18 § 4(3)(A))


17.34.080 Block layout.

A. Intent. New development and redevelopment projects should reinforce the historic street grid of Nelscott. Commercial and mixed use buildings should be placed at or near the sidewalk edge and parking should be set back behind or beside such buildings. Parking should be provided on-street where shoulders are approved to accommodate parking spaces or bays. By maintaining the integrity of Nelscott’s historic form, land is used efficiently, traffic is distributed evenly, and new development contributes to a cohesive, pedestrian-friendly district.

B. Standards.

1. Rights-of-Way.

a. New development and redevelopment projects that are projected to generate additional vehicle and/or pedestrian traffic may be required to dedicate rights-of-way and/or improve abutting streets and walkways.

b. Street and walkway right-of-way shall not be vacated, except where it is demonstrated that the development will improve the pedestrian environment.

2. Street Access.

a. New vehicle access to Highway 101 is discouraged. Access to Highway 101 and connecting streets is subject to the provisions of Lincoln City highway access standards. The city or ODOT may require vehicle access be provided from side streets, and existing highway approaches be consolidated as a condition of development approval.

b. The alignment of streets and walkways shall be maintained in new development to ensure connectivity from block to block. The city may require the extension and improvement of a walkway as a condition of development approval. Walkway extensions shall be 10 to 20 feet in width (consistent with the existing width of the walkway), subject to site plan review.

c. Walkways shall be contained in a public right-of-way or public access easement improved to city standards.

3. Buildings Abutting Interior Parking Areas. Where a block is planned to contain an interior parking area (i.e., served by an alley or shared access drive), buildings abutting the parking area shall provide entrance(s) opening onto it or be connected to the street by a continuous pedestrian walkway (e.g., between buildings). Buildings and development shall not be configured in a way that precludes public access to such public parking facilities. (See also LCMC 17.34.090 through 17.34.130.) (Ord. 2008-18 § 4(3)(B))


17.34.090 Buildings and structures.

A. Single-Family Dwellings and Duplexes.

1. Intent. The guidelines for single-family dwellings and duplexes are intended to help ensure that new buildings and rehabilitated dwellings convey an image consistent with local history and the Oregon coastal environment. Clear and basic building forms and quality design details are preferred.

2. Incentives.

a. Accessory Dwelling Units. A dwelling that complies with at least four of the five guidelines below is eligible for an accessory dwelling unit.

b. Building Coverage. A dwelling that complies with at least four of the five guidelines below is eligible for increased building coverage of 10 percent. For example, if a dwelling would be allowed 35 percent building coverage without compliance, with compliance it would be entitled to 45 percent building coverage.

3. Guidelines.

a. Roofs. Roofs should be pitched, not flat, and should include dormers, gables, and eave trim that enrich the visual quality of the community. High quality architectural embellishments are encouraged.

b. Facades. The facades are the fronts of the dwellings and convey the relationship of the building to the street and neighborhood. They include windows, doors, shutters, awnings, molding, porches, steps, stoops, and other design elements arranged to convey the character of the building. One- to two-story homes are encouraged. Porches are common in Nelscott and should be provided unless the configuration of the lot precludes it. High-quality exterior woodwork and attention to detail elements is encouraged. Garage entrances should not be a part of the primary building facade.

c. Chimneys. In Nelscott many buildings include unique chimneys of varying shapes that are sheathed with a range of materials including stone, brick, and wood shingles. Dwellings should include chimneys as design elements.

d. Texture and Materials. In Nelscott many homes use textures and materials that relate to elements of the local natural environment, such as river rock chimneys, wood shingled siding, brick, and exposed aggregate paving. Dwellings should make use of high-quality natural materials and should be sided with historic wood materials such as shingles, clapboard, bevel siding, or board-and-batten. Foundations should be faced with rock.

e. Landscape Materials. These include trees, shrubs, grasses, fences, walls, outdoor lighting, walkways and other hard surface gathering areas. Landscape materials add value to homes by enhancing the outdoor space and relate to the architecture of the building and surrounding areas. River rock and quarry stone are equally suitable for walls in Nelscott. Landscape materials should predominately incorporate native materials such as wood and rock and hardy native plantings. The front yard should consist primarily of landscaping, and should not be dominated by paved parking areas.

B. Multifamily Dwellings and Commercial Buildings in the Business District and Beachside Mixed Use District.

1. Intent. The Nelscott Strip, the eclectic group of buildings existing along Highway 101, is an iconic element of Nelscott’s image. Commercial development and redevelopment along the highway should continue the pattern established in the existing Nelscott Strip. Therefore building design standards for the business district draw on the design elements characterizing the strip while allowing for design variety. In the Beachside mixed use area, the building design standards draw on the cottage-scale development that exists there now. It is not the city’s intent to create an architectural theme or to freeze time. The design standards are not meant to halt progress or restrict property rights, but rather to ensure that new buildings and remodels fit within the context of their surroundings and support a compact, pedestrian-oriented district. In this way, the city can ensure that Nelscott retains its sense of place, vitality and economic base.

The key elements of the building design standards are:

• Eclectic coastal architecture, including commercial and mixed use development;

• Building height and articulated facades that create a sense of street enclosure at a human scale;

• Contextually appropriate materials, textures and colors;

• Storefront character (windows, pedestrian shelter, furnishings, etc.);

• Adaptable building styles that comfortably accommodate commercial and mixed land uses;

• A diversity of building facades and rooflines that fall into a consistent rhythm;

• Corner lots as focal points with vertical elements, furnishings and public art.

2. Standards.

a. Height. The maximum allowable height is 45 feet in the Nelscott Business District and 35 feet in the Nelscott Beachside Mixed Use District, except that in the Nelscott Beachside Mixed Use District buildings in existence on July 1, 2008, that exceed a height of 35 feet shall continue to be considered conforming and may be rebuilt if destroyed by any cause to an extent exceeding 50 percent of the appraised value (expansions of such buildings must conform to the 35-foot height limit). Chimneys, spires, towers, and other architectural projections exceeding the allowed height may be allowed through site plan review. To the extent they are permitted, building stories and projections exceeding 35 feet in height must be recessed behind the next lower building stories by not less than 10 feet, unless a lesser recess is allowed through site plan review on the basis of superior architectural design or as described in subsection (B)(2)(h)(ii) of this section.

b. Building Form.

i. Overall Form. Architectural designs shall address all four sides of a building. The predominant form abutting Highway 101 is a generally “flat” elevation on the lowest story with any recesses or projections (“articulations”) appearing subordinate to the dominant rectangular form. Upper stories generally are accommodated within gables and dormers (either gable or shed). New buildings should reflect the predominant form while expressing individuality, for example with vertical elements such as cupolas, turrets or towers on corner properties. New buildings should not mimic any other building in their form or detailing.

ii. Stepped Rooflines. Height shall vary from building to building to avoid a homogeneous appearance. This standard is met by using either stepped rooflines or slightly dissimilar overall height (i.e., building-to-building). Abrupt changes in height between buildings can be managed by having the taller building follow the horizontal lines of the shorter building along the first two floors and reference elements or detailing of the shorter building(s) on its upper stories. See also subsection (B)(2)(c) of this section.

iii. Roof Form. Side-facing gable roofs are the predominant roof form in the Highway 101 area, usually incorporating front-facing dormers, and this form shall be followed on new buildings. Shed roofs sloping to the rear are allowed as well. Mansard roofs, including false mansards (applied forms without windows), are discouraged and A-frame buildings and other nontraditional Nelscott forms are prohibited.

c. Storefront Character.

i. Fenestration (Windows and Doors).

(A) Applicability. The window transparency requirement does not apply to the auditorium portion of a theater (but does apply to the lobby and concession area), to the guestroom portion of a motel, hotel, or resort (but does apply to the lobby and other portions), or to multiple-family dwellings (but does apply to the commercial parts of mixed use buildings incorporating multiple-family dwellings).

(B) Standard. Consistent with the desired storefront character, buildings shall provide large display windows, windowed doors and transom windows. The ground floor, street-facing elevation of all buildings shall contain at least 60 percent transparent windows, measured as a section extending the width of the street-facing elevation between the building base (or 30 inches above the sidewalk grade, whichever is less) and a plane 80 inches above the sidewalk grade. Upper floors may have less window area, but should follow the vertical lines of the lower level piers and the horizontal definition of spandrels and any cornices. Buildings without a street-facing elevation, such as those that are set back behind another building and those that are oriented to a pedestrian space (e.g., side plaza or court), shall meet the 60 percent transparency standard on all elevations abutting pedestrian spaces and on elevations containing a primary entrance.

d. Building Orientation. New buildings shall conform to the build-to line requirements in LCMC 17.34.060. Primary building entrances shall be oriented to a front yard or a side yard, consistent with the build-to line requirement.

e. Primary Entrances. Buildings shall have clearly defined primary entrances. Primary entrances for buildings fronting onto Highway 101 shall be oriented to the highway or a corner where the highway and a side street meet. Buildings on other streets shall have primary entrances oriented to a street, court or walkway. All primary entrances shall be covered for a depth of not less than five feet; either by recess, overhang, canopy, portico and/or awning extending at least five feet over the entrance. See also subsection (B)(2)(n) of this section, Pedestrian Shelters.

f. Secondary Entrances. Buildings with more than 90 feet of frontage on a street shall have a second entrance oriented to that street. Buildings adjacent to an internal parking area shall provide a secondary entrance in conformance with LCMC 17.34.080(B)(3). (See also this section and LCMC 17.34.100, Streetscapes.)

g. Armature of the Block. Buildings fronting Highway 101 or Anchor Avenue shall give the impression of being individual, small-scale structures. This may be accomplished by providing a minimum six-foot separation between individual buildings, by a significant change in roofline combined with changes in cladding material and recessed entryways at the point of change, or by other means approved by the reviewing authority. Building separations shall contribute positively to the pedestrian environment, for example by providing a pedestrian space, a pedestrian access way to a parking facility, or an access to residences located on an upper building story or behind a commercial use.

h. Building Mass.

i. Traditional Building Pattern. Buildings shall incorporate offsets or divisions in the facade to express the traditional lot pattern and building width of Nelscott. Changes in facade material, window design, facade height or decorative details are examples of techniques that should be used. These variations should be expressed throughout the width of the structure such that the composition appears to be a collection of smaller buildings or storefronts.

ii. Height Step-Back. For properties fronting Highway 101, portions of a building exceeding two stories shall be set back on the street sides of each successive story of the building above the second story a minimum of 10 feet from the next immediate lower story. The purpose of the height step-back is to maintain the appearance of a shorter building from the street and to provide for light filtering down to the street. Note: Height step-backs also apply along the east-west (numbered) streets for the purpose of protecting coastal views and solar access, per subsection (A) of this section. The planning and community development director may approve an adjustment waiving the above standard for a portion of a building incorporating a signature vertical element (e.g., clock tower) on a street corner, as recommended in subsection (B)(2)(l) of this section. Any projection exceeding 45 feet shall not contain habitable floor space. 

iii. Street Level/Upper Floor. The distinction between street level and upper floors shall be established, for example, through the use of awnings, canopies, belt courses, or similar detailing, materials and/or fenestration.

i. Accessibility. Accessibility shall be provided consistent with applicable building codes. Where wheelchair ramps are required, the ramp design shall incorporate materials and detailing similar to the base of the building.

j. Openings.

i. Ground Floor Windows. Ground floor elevations shall conform to subsection (B)(2)(c)(i) of this section. Decorative detailing and ornamentation around windows (e.g., sills, corbels, medallions, pediments, or similar features) is encouraged.

ii. Upper Floor Windows. Upper floor window orientation should be primarily vertical, or have a width that is no greater than the width of the ground floor windows.

iii. Projecting Windows, Display Cases. Where windows, flower boxes or display cases break the front plane of the building on its ground floor, such items shall not encroach into a required sidewalk clear zone. For durability and aesthetic reasons, display cases, when provided, shall be part of the building (not affixed to the exterior) and integrated into the building with trim or other detailing.

iv. Entrances. Ground level entrances shall be recessed behind the front facade not less than three feet and be at least partly transparent, except transparency is not required on entrances to residences. This standard may be met by providing a door with a window(s) or sidelights beside the door.

v. ATMs and Service Windows. Where ATMs or service windows are proposed on any street-facing elevation, they shall be visible from the street for security and have a canopy, awning, or other weather protection shelter.

vi. Corner Entrances. Buildings on corner lots should have corner entrances. Such entrances are not required to be recessed, but shall have an awning or canopy for weather protection. Where a corner entrance is not provided, the building plan shall provide for a corner plaza consistent with LCMC 17.34.110, or the building shall provide architectural features that honor the corner as a pedestrian space; such features may include but are not limited to an alcove with seating, public art (e.g., sculpture or fountain), a vertical building element such as a tower (e.g., clock tower), or other feature approved through site plan review. (See also LCMC 17.34.110, Pedestrian spaces.)

vii. Remodels. The scale and proportion of altered or added building elements, such as the size and relationship of new windows, doors, entrances, columns, weather protection shelters, and other features shall be visually compatible with the overall composition of the building (i.e., including building materials, color, detailing, etc.).

k. Horizontal Rhythms.

i. Traditional Lot and Building Pattern. Street-facing elevations shall be articulated not less than once every 25 feet to maintain a pedestrian scale and to avoid blank walls. Other elevations may be articulated less frequently but should complement the overall building design. The approving authority may require detailing on a zero-lot-line elevation to reduce the apparent scale and avoid blank walls, i.e., until an abutting property develops.

ii. Horizontal Lines. New building designs and exterior remodels shall establish prominent horizontal lines and avoid blank walls. Examples of such horizontal lines include: base materials and detailing below a series of storefront windows, awning or canopy lines, belt courses between building stories, and cornice or parapet lines. It is not necessary for new lines to match existing lines.

iii. Ground Floor/Upper Floor Division. A clear visual division shall be maintained between the ground level floor and upper floors, for example, through the placement of windows, transoms, canopies, awnings, and signage. The majority of signage should be placed on the ground floor elevation (e.g., sign bands, canopy signs, or blade signs).

l. Vertical Lines. New construction or front elevation remodels should reflect a vertical orientation, either through breaks in volume or the use of surface details, to divide large walls and create a pedestrian scale. Building massing for corner properties on Highway 101 should accentuate the corner location with a vertical element. See also LCMC 17.34.080, Block layout.

m. Materials and Color.

i. Primary Materials. Exterior building materials shall predominately consist of painted or natural stain wood, stone, brick, rusticated concrete block (warm earth tones) or comparable cladding. Rough-hewn wood, timbers and metals may be used as accents but not as the primary exterior cladding. See also subsection (B)(2)(m)(ii) and (iii) of this section, Secondary Materials and Substitute Materials.

ii. Secondary Materials. Any of the primary materials listed in subsection (B)(2)(m)(i) of this section may also be used as secondary materials or accents. Metals such as copper, steel, iron, bronze and similar appearance metals may be used as trims or accents (e.g., flashing, weather protection features, ornamentation, etc.) when compatible with the overall building design, and subject to review and approval through site plan review.

iii. Substitute Materials. Substitute materials that are equal in appearance and durability to those in subsection (B)(2)(m)(i) of this section may be approved at the discretion of the reviewing authority through site plan review. The applicant will be required to provide specifications from the manufacturer.

iv. Color. Color schemes should be simple and coordinated over the entire building to establish a sense of overall composition. Color schemes should tie together signs, ornamentation, awnings, canopies and entrances. There shall be no more than one base color for each 25 horizontal feet of the front elevation; one base color for the entire front elevation is preferred. Using only one or two accent colors is also preferred, except where precedent exists for using more than two colors with some architectural styles (e.g., arts and crafts). Natural wood finishes are appropriate for doors, window sashes and trim, signs, canopies and other architectural accents. Luminescent, sparkling, neon and “day-glow” colors are not allowed (e.g., outlining building), except that neon signs are allowed subject to applicable sign codes. Metals shall be brushed finish or painted in muted or earth tones to minimize glare.

v. Contemporary Designs. Materials that provide a contemporary interpretation of local architecture styles, including arts and crafts, art deco, and vernacular (beach cottage) styles are encouraged. Buildings that resemble suburban strip malls (e.g., picture windows extending to near grade level) and those that use highly reflective glass, clerestory windows and/or similar nontraditional features are discouraged.

vi. Restoration and Rehabilitation. Restoration and rehabilitation projects should incorporate original materials and design elements (e.g., previously covered over), to the extent practicable.

n. Pedestrian Shelters. Awnings, canopies, recesses or similar pedestrian shelters shall be provided along at least 60 percent of a building’s ground floor elevation(s) where the building abuts a sidewalk, walkway, plaza, pedestrian access way, or outdoor seating area. Pedestrian shelters used to meet the above standard shall extend at least five feet over the pedestrian area, shed rain away from building entrance(s), be proportionate to the building in its dimensions, and not obscure the building’s architectural details. If mezzanine or transom windows exist, the shelter shall be below such windows where feasible.

Exception: The reviewing authority may reduce the minimum shelter depth upon finding that existing right-of-way dimensions or building code requirements preclude a larger shelter.

o. Mechanical Equipment.

i. Screening. When mechanical equipment, such as utility vaults, air compressors, generators, private antennas, private satellite dishes, or similar equipment, is adjacent to a street, sidewalk or pedestrian space, it shall be screened from view on all streets. Where such equipment is installed on a side or rear building elevation and is adjacent to a walkway, access way, or pedestrian space, its appearance shall be minimized or screened using materials and/or colors that are similar to those used on the subject building. Standpipes, meters, vaults and similar equipment should not be placed on a front elevation when other alternative locations exist; such equipment shall be placed on a side or rear elevation when practicable.

ii. Rooftops. Rooftop mechanical units shall not be visible from any street and shall not exceed the allowable building height.

iii. Ground-Mounted Units. Ground-mounted mechanical units shall be limited to side or rear yards and screened with fences or walls constructed of materials similar to those on adjacent buildings. Hedges may also be used as screens where there is adequate sunlight and irrigation to ensure their successful growth. (Ord. 2010-06 § 5; Ord. 2008-18 § 4(3)(C))


17.34.100 Streetscapes.

A. Intent. The relationship between the local street system, Highway 101 and adjoining properties is important from both a transportation planning and a land use perspective. The Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) is the permitting authority for all access onto Highway 101. As the permitting agency for land use, the city works cooperatively with ODOT to manage development adjacent to the highway. The city’s design standards are intended to implement the community’s vision of a cohesive streetscape, with on-street parking, wide sidewalks, weather protection (pedestrian) shelters, benches, pedestrian-scaled lighting, public art, opportunities for cafe seating, and other amenities. A safe, inviting and comfortable pedestrian environment benefits businesses, highway users and the community as a whole.

B. Standards. In addition to standards for block layout, alleys and parking lot access provided in LCMC 17.34.080, the following provisions apply to all new development:

1. Transportation Plan Conformity. New development shall conform to the policies, standards, specifications and design details (e.g., street sections) contained in the city’s transportation system plan (TSP) and the requirements of this chapter, specifically LCMC 17.34.080, Block layout, and 17.34.110, Pedestrian spaces. When streetscape improvements are required of new development, such improvements shall conform to the TSP.

2. Local Streets. LCMC 17.34.080 provides standards for local street improvements.

3. Pedestrian Amenities. LCMC 17.34.110 provides standards for pedestrian spaces and pedestrian amenities. Additionally, the Nelscott Redevelopment Plan provides specifications for street furnishings such as benches, trash receptacles, wayfinding signs, and streetlights. (Ord. 2008-18 § 4(3)(D))


17.34.110 Pedestrian spaces.

A. Intent. The increased development intensity, mixture of uses, pedestrian activity, close building orientation and minimal private open space envisioned for Nelscott require that pedestrian space be provided along building frontages and in breaks between buildings. Pedestrian spaces, such as plazas, extra-wide sidewalks, outdoor seating areas, pedestrian access ways between buildings, alcoves and pocket parks, provide visual relief, pedestrian resting areas and opportunities for socialization. Pedestrian spaces do not have to be publicly owned or maintained. Public or private, they are as important as building design and central parking to the success of Nelscott. Therefore, the city requires that all new developments and redevelopment projects contribute their proportionate share of pedestrian space.

B. Standards.

1. Pedestrian Space Standard. At least three percent of every development site, except for residential developments (but including mixed use developments), shall be designated and improved as pedestrian space. The highest priority locations for pedestrian space are those areas with the highest pedestrian activity (e.g., street corners and mid-block pedestrian access ways) that have a western or southern exposure (within 45 degrees of true south or west). Where no such area exists, then pedestrian space should be provided as an extended sidewalk or walkway connecting multiple developments.

2. Dimensions. All pedestrian spaces shall have dimensions of not less than eight feet across and have a surface area of not less than 64 square feet.

3. Public Access. Such areas shall abut a public right-of-way or otherwise be connected to and visible from a public right-of-way by a sidewalk or pedestrian access way; access ways shall be identifiable with a change in paving materials (e.g., pavers inlaid in concrete or a change in pavement scoring patterns and/or texture). Where a right-of-way connection is not possible, the owner shall be required to provide a public access way easement to the pedestrian space. Pedestrian spaces shall not be gated or closed to public access, unless otherwise required by the city.

4. Pedestrian Amenities Required. Where pedestrian space is required, it shall contain pedestrian amenities such as plaza space, extra-wide sidewalks (e.g., outdoor cafe space), benches, public art, pedestrian-scale lighting, wayfinding signs (as approved by the city) or similar pedestrian areas in an amount equal to or greater than one-half of one percent of the estimated construction cost of the subject building(s). Where a pedestrian space adjoins a building entrance it should incorporate a canopy, awning, pergola, portico, or similar weather protection feature. Pedestrian amenities such as seating, planters, public art and pedestrian lighting (e.g., antique lamps or bollard lights) at street corners or pedestrian access ways may be counted in fulfilling the one-half of one percent percent requirement. Cost estimates for pedestrian amenity improvements shall be prepared by a licensed architect, landscape architect, or other qualified professional, and shall be subject to review and approval by the administrator.

5. Mechanical Equipment and Garbage Storage Areas. Mechanical equipment and garbage storage areas are not permitted within pedestrian space(s). Such facilities shall be screened completely from view and set back 20 feet or more from a pedestrian space for aesthetic reasons and to minimize odors and noise. (Ord. 2008-18 § 4(3)(E))


17.34.120 Off-street parking and circulation.

A. Intent. Parking is to be provided to meet the anticipated normal demand. Where areas of surface parking exist, such areas shall be oriented behind or to the side of buildings. Off-street parking and loading for uses within the Nelscott Plan District are to be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.56 LCMC except as provided below.

B. Standards. In addition to the standards of Chapter 17.56 LCMC and the standards for block layout, alleys and parking lot access provided in LCMC 17.34.080, the following provisions apply to all new development:

1. Drive-Up and Drive-Through Uses. New drive-up/drive-through facilities (e.g., windows, ATMs, etc.) are not permitted. Where applicable, the reviewing authority may approve the relocation and improvement of existing drive-up facilities, subject to a conditional use permit.

2. On-Street Parking. Existing or required paved, standard-sized parking spaces that abut a parcel and that are located in a public street may be counted toward the required parking for commercial development on that parcel. For parcels fronting on Highway 101, the number of on-street parking spaces for standard-sized vehicles within 200 feet of a parcel may be counted toward the required number of parking spaces for commercial or mixed uses.

3. Off-Street Parking. There is no minimum off-street parking requirement for the commercial component of any mixed use building within 400 feet of a public parking facility; all other uses shall conform to the minimum parking standards of the municipal code except that required off-street parking spaces may be located on another parcel not more than 400 feet from the parcel they are intended to serve. Where new surface parking is planned, it shall be limited to parallel on-street parking spaces, parking bays abutting the street, and/or parking areas located behind or to the side of a building.

4. Parking Lot Design. Surface parking areas shall be divided into bays of not more than 12 parking spaces per bay. The minimum dimensions for landscape areas are four feet in width and 24 square feet in area. Additionally, where a parking area or access drive abuts a street or pedestrian access way, a landscape screen of not less than four feet in width and four feet in height shall be provided. Alternatively, the screen may be reduced to two feet in width where a masonry, wrought iron, brick or similar architectural-grade wall is also provided, subject to site plan review. Landscaping shall be provided in conformance with LCMC 17.34.140. The planning commission may allow a greater number of consecutive parking spaces where the development preserves and protects one or more existing mature trees or exceeds the minimum pedestrian space requirement in LCMC 17.34.110. The commission shall use its discretion in adjusting the standard; provided, that more credit may be awarded to projects that preserve the largest or most visible trees as viewed from public rights-of-way.

5. Redevelopment of Surface Parking Lots. Site plans for properties adjacent to city-owned parking lots should allow for conversion of such lots to structured parking in the future. Site plans should also allow for the conversion of nonconforming, front yard parking lots to new building sites or pedestrian spaces as properties redevelop. Where a proposed project would construct underground parking, the review authority may adjust building coverage, setbacks, or other development standards to facilitate provision of public-private parking spaces.

6. Parking in Front of Buildings. Due to the pedestrian orientation of Nelscott, surface parking is not allowed between any new building and the street to which is it oriented. Where such parking currently exists, the owner may be required to install landscaping or other buffering between the parking area and the sidewalk with future redevelopment.

7. Service and Loading Areas. The visual, traffic, odor and noise impacts of service and loading areas, relative to streets, pedestrian spaces, pedestrian access ways and adjacent residences, shall be minimized. Service areas and loading docks/bays shall be accessed from an alley and screened using architectural elements that are compatible with adjacent building(s). Where no alley exists, service areas shall be accessed from streets other than Highway 101.

8. Exception for Commercial Vacation Rental Dwellings. A vacation rental dwelling in the NBMU or NBD subdistricts that (a) is in a building that existed on October 1, 2008, or pursuant to LCMC 17.34.040(E), replaces, with no increase in the number of bedrooms, such a building that was destroyed by calamity (e.g., fire, flood, earthquake), and (b) is on a lot that is too small to accommodate the number of parking spaces required by LCMC 17.80.050, need only provide the number of parking spaces that, as determined by the planning and community development director, reasonably can be accommodated on the lot. (Ord. 2010-06 § 5; Ord. 2008-18 § 4(3)(F))


17.34.130 Pedestrian access.

A. Intent. In new development, the pedestrian circulation system shall provide a direct, convenient and comfortable means of accessing individual uses and connecting to other parts of Nelscott. The pedestrian system includes sidewalks, pathways, mid-block access ways, and the ocean beach.

B. Standards. To ensure safe, direct and convenient pedestrian circulation, all developments shall provide a continuous pedestrian system conforming to city standards. (Ord. 2008-18 § 4(3)(G))


17.34.140 Landscaping.

A. Intent. Nelscott is identifiable, in part, by its shore pines and other coastal vegetation. While it is inevitable that some existing trees will be removed with new development, native vegetation should be preserved where practicable or otherwise replanted in required landscape areas. Trees and hedges serve as windbreaks and visual screens in an area that is otherwise being exposed to high winds. Grassy swales capture and cleanse surface water runoff before it infiltrates into the ground or seeps onto the beach. Mature vegetation also enhances real estate values. For these reasons, as well for aesthetic reasons, the city requires that all new developments and redevelopment projects attempt to save mature vegetation that is not within building envelopes and provide landscaping in surface parking areas, as buffers between uses, within street planter strips, and to soften the appearance of large building elevations.

B. Standards.

1. Mature Landscaping. Site plans shall incorporate existing, mature vegetation that is not within building envelopes and not within areas that are required to be graded or excavated (e.g., for utilities, foundations, and driveways) into the project’s landscape design to the greatest extent practicable. Where mature tree removal is unavoidable (e.g., a tree’s location precludes reasonable development consistent with prescribed building envelopes, required building orientation, or public improvement requirements), mitigation shall be required as per subsection (B)(3)(g) of this section.

2. Volume Landscaping and Screening. Large trees and/or shrub planting may be required in quantities exceeding the base requirements of this code to mitigate adjustments to other standards or the loss of mature trees as described under subsection (B)(1) of this section.

3. Minimum Landscape Standards.

a. All off-street parking and vehicular use areas (including driveways and loading docks) shall have perimeter landscaping of not less than four feet in depth, and interior landscaping covering at least 10 percent of the entire vehicular use area. The planning commission authority may reduce the minimum landscape area to not less than five percent where the development preserves and protects one or more existing mature trees. The commission shall use its discretion in awarding credit; provided, that more credit may be awarded to projects that preserve the largest or most visible trees as viewed from public rights-of-way including the beach. Areas with preserved trees are counted toward the required parking lot landscaping.

b. Each separate landscape area shall be a minimum of 24 square feet with a minimum dimension of at least four feet and shall contain at least one tree. All remaining land in the landscape area shall be covered by a combination of shrubs, ground cover plants or other city-approved nonvegetative ground cover.

c. All required buffer strips, screens, and other required landscape areas shall be planted at a density to ensure the intended buffering or screening intent is met; in no case shall a landscape area have less than one tree per 200 square feet of surface or less than one shrub per 50 square feet of area.

d. Required trees and shrubs shall be noninvasive species that are known to thrive in the northern Oregon coastal environment.

e. The following guidelines apply:

i. Vegetation native to the Pacific Northwest coast is encouraged.

ii. Turf and grass is discouraged, except in residential developments and in water treatment swales.

iii. Species should be those contained in the Lincoln City tree planting guide and list of recommended species, or species recommended by a licensed nurseryman as being suitable for the local climate, as approved by the planning director.

f. Trees shall be at least two inch caliper at time of planting.

g. When tree mitigation is required the number of mitigation trees required shall be equal to at least one-half total number required to achieve the number of inches of mature tree(s) removed (diameter measured at four feet above grade). For instance, if a 12-inch diameter tree is removed, then two three-inch trees of the same or comparable species shall be planted.

h. Irrigation systems shall be provided for all planted areas for a period of at least two years, or until it is demonstrated that new plants have become naturalized.

i. Shrubs shall be at least a three-gallon size when planted.

j. If hedges are planted for screening, plants shall be at least of an initial size so that the required screening will be achieved within two years.

k. Trees shall be planted so that encroachment below eight feet into a public right-of-way can be prevented without long-term detriment to the subject tree.

l. Landscaping shall preserve an adequate line of sight around vehicle accesses.

m. All landscaping materials shall be in vigorous and healthy growing condition and shall be installed according to common planting procedures, with consideration given to soil condition. The property owner is responsible for maintaining and replacing, as necessary, all approved landscape plants on his property and those within abutting rights-of-way (e.g., street trees).

4. Parking Area Landscaping. Surface parking areas shall contain landscaping as described under LCMC 17.34.120.

5. Water Quality. Where a surface parking area incorporates water quality filters/swales and porous paving materials, such as pavers set in sand, concrete blocks allowing grass to grow through, and/or porous concrete (e.g., particularly along walkways and in parking areas that are used infrequently), the reviewing authority may allow additional building (lot) coverage, consistent with the standards in Table 17.34.060.B. Porous paving may also be used for small areas, such as the first four feet of a parking lot’s perimeter, where it would help reduce or slow surface water runoff. (Recommended: Figure 17.34.140.)


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


Figure 17.34.140: Typical parking lot landscape concepts, incorporating water quality features.

(Ord. 2008-18 § 4(3)(H))


17.34.150 Signs.

A. Intent. The number, size, configuration, placement, color, materials and illumination of signs all play a part in shaping the built environment. Signs in Nelscott should function primarily as cues for pedestrian wayfinding and business identification. Business identification does not require that owners maximize the size or number of signs. The highway streetscape has built-in traffic calming features that, together with the building design standards, will enable motorists and pedestrians to notice signs at a relatively small scale. Signs designed to a “highway scale” are not necessary and are discouraged through the following standards.

B. Standards. Signs shall not be installed without a sign permit. Where a sign permit is required as part of a larger project, the sign package shall be reviewed with the site plan under the applicable provisions of Chapter 17.72 LCMC and the following guidelines and standards. Where a sign permit is requested apart from any other development application, it shall be processed administratively under the applicable provisions of the Lincoln City Municipal Code and the following guidelines and standards:

1. Building Signs. Building-mounted signs shall be positioned to emphasize established architectural elements such as entrances, windows, gables, etc. Signs should appear to fit within “frames” created by components of the facade design. Signs should not obscure building details. An individual building shall have no more than six building-mounted signs totaling not more than 48 square feet.

2. Freestanding Signs. New freestanding signs shall not exceed six feet in height, except that signs suspended from an awning, canopy or similar architectural feature may be approved subject to applicable building codes. Portable signs shall conform to LCMC 17.72.060(C)(4).

3. Contextual Design. Signs should complement Nelscott’s natural surroundings. For example, signs engraved or sculpted from metal or wood (natural or painted wood) are preferred over those that are predominately made of plastic, Plexiglas, or similar reflective materials. Pictographic symbols are encouraged, as they often communicate more than text and add visual interest to the street. Fluorescent (e.g., day-glow), sparkling, reflective, or similar colors or finishes are not permitted. Banner signs, streamers, moving signs, video or animated signs, flashing signs, and similar sign types are considered a nuisance and traffic safety hazard and are therefore not permitted.

4. Pedestrian Signs. Pedestrian-scale signs, such as blade signs, wood cutout signs, door signs and permanent stylized window signs (allowing at least 50 percent transparency throughout the window) are encouraged. Such signs are exempt from the overall sign area limitations.

5. Signs for buildings with multiple tenants should be designed to allow for new business names to be added or replaced easily.

6. Illuminated Signs. When signs are to be illuminated, external light sources shall be used. Light sources shall be placed close to and directed onto the sign they are intended to illuminate, and shielded to minimize glare into the street or onto adjacent properties. Where possible, lights should be incorporated into the sign bracket. Lights placed below any sign (up-lighting) shall be cut off to minimize spillover into the night sky. Lights in canisters and backlit signs, except for those existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, are prohibited. See also LCMC 17.34.160, Exterior lighting. 
[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


Figure 17.34.150: Examples of encouraged sign types (from top, left to right: mural, blade, wood cutout, hanging sign).

(Ord. 2019-14 § 3; Ord. 2008-18 § 4(3)(I))


17.34.160 Exterior lighting.

A. Intent. The number, size, design and placement of lights all contribute to creating a safe and aesthetically pleasing development. Excessive lighting contributes to light pollution, glare and light trespass, and it diminishes views of the night sky. Lights in Nelscott should function primarily as tools for pedestrian wayfinding and business visibility. Business visibility does not require that owners fully illuminate their building and parking areas.

B. Standards. Outdoor light fixtures shall not be installed without site plan review approval. Where a light fixture is required as part of a larger project, the lighting package shall be reviewed under the following guidelines and standards. Where an outdoor light fixture is to be installed apart from any other development application, it shall be processed administratively. Outdoor lighting that does not conform to current standards, but conformed to city standards prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are allowed to continue as nonconforming until such time that the light fixture and/or building is remodeled or replaced.

1. Contextual Design. Exterior lights shall be designed to fit their particular location and function. They should be simple in character and similar in color and intensity to those used traditionally. High-pressure sodium lights are appropriate, except where good color rendition is required; enhanced color rendition high-pressure sodium lamps, or more uniform spectrum lamps, may also be used.

a. Pedestrian ways and entrances that are not otherwise illuminated by building-mounted lights or streetlights shall be illuminated using bollards, step lights, or other low-profile fixtures that are appropriate for walkways and plazas. Illumination between one to two foot-candles for such areas is required.

b. Building-mounted lights should complement the building background in style; using lights to draw attention to (wash) architectural elements is permitted; provided, that unshielded, high intensity light sources and sources that direct light upward without cut-offs are not permitted. (See subsection (B)(2) of this section.)

c. Antique-style lights are preferred over recessed can lights and globe fixtures. Contemporary light fixtures that draw on historic elements or provide a new interpretation of a historic style are encouraged.

d. Maximum initial luminance of outdoor sales areas, storage areas and service station canopies and similar areas shall not exceed 20 foot-candles, except as otherwise approved by the planning director.

e. Maximum initial luminance of parking lots shall not exceed four foot-candles, except as otherwise approved by the planning director.

2. Impacts of Lighting. The visual impacts of site and architectural lighting, such as overspray of lights onto adjacent residential properties and lights shining into the night sky, shall be avoided.

a. Light poles shall not exceed a height of 20 feet.

b. Only shielded lights are permitted. Shielding should be integral to the light fixture and direct light downward. Exception: Up-lighting of official flags may be allowed; provided, that the luminance level is minimized.

c. Lighting associated with service areas, parking lots and parking structures, as well as streetlights, shall be shielded or provide cut-offs to avoid glare, light pollution (night sky) and light spillover onto residential properties. Luminance at the property line, or no more than five feet over the property line, shall be zero.

d. The planning director may require the installation and use of timers or activity switches to prevent unnecessary sources of light by controlling the length of time that exterior lights are in use late at night.

e. Lights used to wash a building elevation (including any signs) shall not wash more than 75 percent of the facade. Interior lights (e.g., store displays, etc.) are exempt.

f. Uplighting is prohibited. Where lighting is used to wash an exterior wall, the use of recessed eave lighting is preferred. The maximum illumination limits for wall washing are one foot-candle for dark-colored surfaces and one-half foot-candle for light-colored surfaces.

g. The manufacturer’s data or measurement shall be provided to demonstrate conformance with the standards set out in subsection (B)(1) of this section. Photometric plans are required with site plan review applications, unless waived by the planning director. 


[IMAGE]
 
[IMAGE]


Figure 17.34.160: Examples of acceptable lights.

(Ord. 2008-18 § 4(3)(J))


Chapter 17.36 PLANNED INDUSTRIAL (PI) ZONE

Sections:

17.36.010    Purpose.

17.36.020    Uses permitted.

17.36.030    Conditional uses permitted.

17.36.040    Yard requirements.

17.36.050    Maximum building height.

17.36.060    Signs.

17.36.070    Parking.

17.36.080    Other required conditions.


17.36.010 Purpose.

The planned industrial (PI) zone is provided to accommodate light industrial manufacturing, wholesale and warehousing commercial uses. (Ord. 84-2 § 3.080(1))


17.36.020 Uses permitted.

In a PI zone, the following are given as examples of those uses which meet the intent of this zone:

A. Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or storage of materials, goods or products, and business offices accessory thereto, similar in character and nature to the following activities with the standards provided for this zone:

1. Dry cleaning and laundry plants;

2. Electrical and household equipment repair shops;

3. Printing, lithography and publishing plants;

4. Sign fabrication and painting;

5. Automobile, truck or trailer sales and repairs;

6. Building material sales and storage;

7. Heating, plumbing and air conditioning supplies and equipment fabrication;

8. Carpenter, cabinet or upholstery shops;

9. General contractor;

10. Machine parts and tool manufacture, including warehouse and other storage establishments and facilities;

B. Any business or commercial establishments including warehouse and other storage establishments and facilities which provide supplies and/or services to industrial or manufacturing customers, or which provide sales and services primarily at wholesale, so long as such establishments are maintained with the standards listed below;

C. Frozen food locker;

D. Garden supplies and equipment, and greenhouses and nurseries;

E. Automobile, truck, trailer or motorcycle repair;

F. Kennels;

G. Mini-warehouses;

H. Manufactured dwelling sales and service;

I. Essential emergency communications, early warning and associated emergency facilities;

J. Transportation uses, defined in Chapter 17.08 LCMC. (Ord. 2019-24 § 12; Ord. 2017-09 § 8; Ord. 2005-14 § 8; Ord. 92-4 § 5; Ord. 90-5 § 2; Ord. 84-2 § 3.080(2))


17.36.030 Conditional uses permitted.

In a PI zone, the following are given as examples of those uses which meet the intent of this zone on a conditional basis, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.60 LCMC:

A. Retail establishments other than those listed as permitted uses above which sell goods and services primarily to employees of industrial or wholesale commercial establishments located in the zone;

B. Utility substation;

C. Automobile car wash;

D. Automobile wrecking;

E. Aggregate sales and storage;

F. Wireless communications facilities, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.52.270;

G. Emergency shelters. (Ord. 2003-08 § 11; Ord. 97-11 § 4; Ord. 92-4 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 3.080(3))


17.36.040 Yard requirements.

A. Front Yard. The minimum front yard shall be five feet.

B. Side, Street Side and Rear Yard. The minimum side, street side and rear yard shall be at least five feet. The side and rear yard shall be increased by one-half foot for each foot by which the building height exceeds 15 feet.

C. For special yard requirements, see Chapter 17.52 LCMC, Supplementary Regulations and Exceptions. (Ord. 91-19 § 2; Ord. 91-14 § 10; Ord. 91-8 § 5; Ord. 84-2 § 3.080(4))


17.36.050 Maximum building height.

Maximum building height shall be 45 feet, except as provided in LCMC 17.52.190 and 17.52.200. (Ord. 91-14 § 11; Ord. 84-2 § 3.080(5))


17.36.060 Signs.

Signs shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.72 LCMC. (Ord. 91-14 § 12; Ord. 84-2 § 3.080(6))


17.36.070 Parking.

Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.56 LCMC. (Ord. 92-8 § 9; Ord. 91-14 § 12; Ord. 84-2 § 3.080(7))


17.36.080 Other required conditions.

A. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with LCMC 17.52.100.

B. All operations, activities and storage may be maintained outside a building in a side or rear yard; provided, that such storage is separated from all public streets and other property by a sight-obscuring fence, wall or vegetative hedge at least six feet in height.

C. Properties to be used for surface mining shall be enclosed on the boundaries by a sight-obscuring fence, wall or vegetative hedge at least six feet in height, except for reasonable areas of ingress and egress.

D. Restrictions. No development shall occur in the PI zone unless all city services (sewer and water) are available to serve such development. (Ord. 91-14 § 12; Ord. 84-2 § 3.080(8))


Chapter 17.40 RECREATION-RESIDENTIAL (R-R) ZONE

Sections:

17.40.010    Purpose.

17.40.020    Permitted uses.

17.40.030    Accessory uses.

17.40.040    Conditional uses permitted.

17.40.050    Restrictions.

17.40.060    Standards.


17.40.010 Purpose.

The recreation-residential zoning district is intended to establish sites for a wide range of residential activities from weekend and seasonal residents to year-round residents in single-family homes, manufactured homes, and recreational vehicles sited on individual lots. (Ord. 92-4 § 7; Ord. 84-2 § 3.090(1))


17.40.020 Permitted uses.

In an R-R zone, the following uses are permitted:

A. Single-family dwelling;

B. Manufactured home;

C. Cottage housing developments, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.120;

D. Recreational vehicle;

E. Essential emergency communications, early warning and associated emergency facilities;

F. Community gardens and market gardens not larger than 12,500 square feet, in accordance with the standards of LCMC 17.80.080;

G. Transportation uses, defined in Chapter 17.08 LCMC. (Ord. 2019-24 § 13; Ord. 2017-09 § 9; Ord. 2014-10 § 3; Ord. 2009-05 § 13; Ord. 2005-14 § 9; Ord. 92-4 § 7; Ord. 84-2 § 3.090(2))


17.40.030 Accessory uses.

The following accessory uses are permitted:

A. Gardens and animals, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.080;

B. Accessory dwelling units in association with single-family dwellings, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.110;

C. Vacation rental dwelling, provided it is not rented for more than 30 nights in any calendar year, and subject to LCMC 17.80.050 and to the license requirements of Chapter 5.14 LCMC;

D. Other accessory uses and accessory buildings and structures customarily appurtenant to a permitted use. (Ord. 2016-20 § 6; Ord. 2014-08 § 6; Ord. 2009-05 § 14)


17.40.040 Conditional uses permitted.

In an R-R zone, the following conditional uses may be permitted, subject to provisions of Chapter 17.60 LCMC:

A. A conditional use listed in the R-1 zone (see LCMC 17.16.040). (Ord. 2009-02 § 5; Ord. 95-15 § 10; Ord. 92-4 § 7; Ord. 89-11 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 3.090(3). Formerly 17.40.030)


17.40.050 Restrictions.

No development shall occur unless all city services are available; however, existing lots of record, which do not front on a public sewer line but which will be connected to a public water line, may be developed utilizing an approved subsurface sewerage disposal system, provided a deferred improvement agreement is executed and recorded by the owner of record consenting to the establishment of a local improvement district to participate in future public sewer system extensions and connections. (Ord. 92-4 § 7; Ord. 91-1 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 3.090(4). Formerly 17.40.040)


17.40.060 Standards.

In an R-R zone, the following standards shall apply:

A. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of 10 feet.

B. Side Yard. There shall be side yards having a minimum width of five feet. For structures greater than one story in height, there shall be side yards of seven and one-half feet.

C. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard with a minimum depth of five feet.

D. The clear-vision area requirement of LCMC 17.52.060 and 17.52.070 shall be applicable to all corner lots.

E. Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be at least 5,000 square feet per dwelling unit. The minimum width at the building line shall be 50 feet, and the minimum average lot depth shall be 70 feet.

F. Off-Street Parking and Loading. Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided per single-family dwelling, manufactured home, or recreational vehicle in accordance with the standards set forth in Chapter 17.56 LCMC.

G. Height Restrictions. Maximum height of a structure shall be 35 feet.

H. Off-street parking of recreational vehicles is subject to LCMC 17.52.050.

I. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles sited on individual lots shall comply with the following requirements:

1. All manufactured homes shall be skirted or placed on foundations.

2. The manufactured home shall be provided with gutters and down spouts to direct surface water into storm drains or as approved by the planning director or designee.

3. If the manufactured home is removed from its foundation, the owner of the property shall agree in writing to remove the foundation and all additions to the manufactured home and to permanently disconnect and secure all utilities. This agreement authorizes the jurisdiction to perform the work and place a lien against the property for the cost of the work in the event the owner fails to accomplish the work within 30 days from the date the manufactured home is removed from its foundation. This condition shall not apply in the event that the manufactured home is replaced on the original foundation, or the original foundation as modified, by another approved manufactured home within 90 days of the removal of the original manufactured home.

4. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with LCMC 17.52.100.

5. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles shall be placed on concrete or asphaltic concrete pad or maintained crushed rock surface (minimum compacted depth of four inches of one and one-half inches to zero inches covered with minimum compacted depth of two inches of three-fourths inch to zero inches). (Ord. 92-8 § 10; Ord. 92-4 § 7; Ord. 84-2 § 3.090(5). Formerly 17.40.050)


Chapter 17.42 PARK (P) ZONE

Sections:

17.42.010    Purpose.

17.42.020    Permitted uses.

17.42.030    Conditional uses.

17.42.040    Prohibited uses.

17.42.050    Development standards.

17.42.060    Other requirements.


17.42.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the park (P) zone is to provide designated areas for parks and recreational facilities in the city. (Ord. 2002-01 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.095(1))


17.42.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses are permitted in the park (P) zone:

A. Public parks, playgrounds, recreational buildings and facilities;

B. Public athletic fields and facilities including but not limited to baseball/softball/soccer fields, basketball courts, volleyball courts, swimming pools, and gymnasiums;

C. Public community centers and auditoriums;

D. Commercial activity when authorized with an exclusive use permit and parks concession agreement;

E. Special events as approved by permit under Chapter 5.16 LCMC, including authorized commercial activity with a parks concession agreement;

F. Temporary emergency operations uses pursuant to Chapter 2.72 LCMC;

G. Uses permitted in the open space zone;

H. Public parking for park use;

I. Such other uses as the planning and community development director determines to be in accordance with the primary purpose of the park zone;

J. Essential emergency communications, early warning and associated emergency facilities;

K. Community gardens;

L. Transportation uses, defined in Chapter 17.08 LCMC. (Ord. 2019-24 § 14; Ord. 2019-13 § 1; Ord. 2017-09 § 10; Ord. 2009-05 § 18; Ord. 2005-14 § 10; Ord. 2002-01 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.095(2))


17.42.030 Conditional uses.

The following uses may be permitted subject to a receipt of a conditional use permit, and subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.60 LCMC:

A. Open-air farmers’ markets or outdoor rummage sales.

B. Public utilities.

C. Docks or boat launching facilities, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.44.040.

D. Commercial uses other than concession stands.

E. Campgrounds. (Ord. 2019-23 § 6; Ord. 2002-01 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.095(3))


17.42.040 Prohibited uses.

A. Industrial uses.

B. Any use not listed as a permitted or conditionally permitted use. (Ord. 2002-01 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.095(4))


17.42.050 Development standards.

A. Yard Requirements. Yard requirements will be those set forth in LCMC 17.32.040 unless the planning and community development director makes a finding that imposing said yard requirements will negatively impact the surrounding property owners.

B. Height. Maximum building height is 45 feet.

C. Minimum Lot Size. None. (Ord. 2002-01 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.095(5))


17.42.060 Other requirements.

A. Parking. Parking facilities must be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.56 LCMC. The planning and community development director may make exceptions to the requirements set forth in LCMC 17.56.110(D), (F) and (G) only when a finding can be made that the exception meets the purpose of the park zone and will not impose a public safety hazard.

B. Signs. No signs shall be permitted except for government signs, including signage authorized for approved vendors under special event permits or exclusive use permits with concession agreements.

C. Landscaping. Landscaping must be provided in accordance with LCMC 17.52.100. The planning and community development director may make exceptions to the landscaping requirements only when a finding can be made that the exception meets the purpose of the park zone and will not impose a public safety hazard.

D. Outside Storage. Outside storage areas must be screened from ground level view from adjacent properties and from public streets. (Ord. 2019-14 § 6; Ord. 2002-01 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.095(6))


Chapter 17.43 OPEN SPACE (OS) ZONE

Sections:

17.43.010    Purpose.

17.43.020    Permitted uses.

17.43.030    Conditional uses.

17.43.040    Development standards.

17.43.050    Other requirements.


17.43.010 Purpose.

The primary purposes of the open space zone are to preserve open space for future generations, maintain water quality in lakes and streams, provide educational opportunities, protect significant and sensitive natural resource areas and enhance the city’s scenic beauty. The open space zone is intended to ensure that designated lands remain in their natural state, including reclaimed areas, by protecting such areas from development and preserving open space. The secondary purpose includes uses such as passive recreational activities such as nature walks and educational activities.

Areas designated within the open space zone include lands having valuable wildlife habitat, exceptional aesthetic or flood control value, wetlands, riparian areas and areas with significant environmental constraints. Protecting sensitive natural areas is important for maintaining water quality and aquatic habitat, preserving wildlife habitat and sensitive plant communities, and providing flood control. (Ord. 2002-03 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.096(1))


17.43.020 Permitted uses.

The following uses are permitted in the open space (OS) zone:

A. Passive recreational activities such as hiking, biking on designated trails, birdwatching, picnicking, nature walks and other similar uses.

B. Development and maintenance of trails, including pedestrian footbridges, in accordance with standards set forth in the parks master plan with a maximum width of eight feet.

C. Educational activities and ecological research projects only if the planning and community director finds the use to be in accordance with the primary purposes of the open space zone.

D. Natural resource restoration and enhancement projects.

E. Interpretive displays.

F. Removal of timber, rocks or other materials in established public use areas for purposes of public safety.

G. Such other uses as the parks director determines to be in accordance with the primary purpose of the open space zone. (Ord. 2002-03 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.096(2))


17.43.030 Conditional uses.

The following uses may be permitted in the open space (OS) zone subject to a receipt of a conditional use permit, and subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.60 LCMC and the primary purpose of the open space zone:

A. Public facilities limited to a nature center and single-stall, unisexed, handicapped accessible restrooms.

B. Public driveways and parking areas for uses permitted in this zone.

C. Public utilities and drainage facilities.

D. Docks, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.44.040. (Ord. 2019-23 § 7; Ord. 2002-03 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.096(3))


17.43.040 Development standards.

A. Yard Requirements. Yard requirements will be those set forth in LCMC 17.16.070 unless the planning and community development director determines that imposing said yard requirements will negatively impact the resource value.

B. Height. Maximum building height is 18 feet.

C. Vegetation Removal. Native vegetation may not be removed except for the area occupied by permitted uses or required for clear vision per LCMC 17.52.060. (Ord. 2002-03 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.096(4))


17.43.050 Other requirements.

A. Parking. Parking facilities must be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.56 LCMC except for LCMC 17.56.110(D), (F) and (G).

B. Signs. No signs shall be permitted except for government signs. (Ord. 2019-14 § 7; Ord. 2002-03 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.096(5))


Chapter 17.44 MARINE WATERWAY (M-W) ZONE

Sections:

17.44.010    Purpose.

17.44.020    Uses permitted outright.

17.44.030    Conditional uses permitted.

17.44.040    Standards for conditional uses.


17.44.010 Purpose.

The marine waterway zone (M-W) is provided to accommodate those marine uses which have a definite relationship either to the community’s recreation industry or to the marine life of Devils Lake. (Ord. 84-2 § 3.100(1))


17.44.020 Uses permitted outright.

In an M-W zone the following are given as examples of those uses which meet the intent of this zone:

A. Wildlife or marine life sanctuary or preserve;

B. Marine life raising or production area;

C. Marine recreation activities such as fishing and boating;

D. Navigation activities;

E. Essential emergency communications, early warning and associated emergency facilities;

F. Transportation uses, defined in Chapter 17.08 LCMC. (Ord. 2019-24 § 15; Ord. 2017-09 § 11; Ord. 2005-14 § 11; Ord. 84-2 § 3.100(2))


17.44.030 Conditional uses permitted.

In an M-W zone, the following are given as examples of those uses which meet the intent of this zone on a conditional basis, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.60 LCMC:

A. Governmental structure or use;

B. Park or similar public recreation area;

C. Public utility facility;

D. Any use permitted in the M-W zone involving filling, dredging, draining, disposal of dredging spoils, and similar activities;

E. Any use permitted in the M-W zone involving construction, addition or reconstruction of piers, docks, bulkheads, boat houses or similar facilities;

F. Nonresident structure used in connection with the raising or production of marine life. (Ord. 84-2 § 3.100(3))


17.44.040 Standards for conditional uses.

In the M-W zone, or any other zone referencing these conditional use standards, the applicable provisions of this section shall apply. The standards for conditional uses shall be as follows:

A. Standards for Uses Involving Filling, Dredging, Drainage, Disposal of Dredging Spoils, and Similar Activities or Construction of Wharfs, Bulkheads or Similar Devices.

1. Evidence shall be provided that the applicant has complied with, or fully intends to comply with, all standards of the Department of Environmental Quality, the Division of State Lands, and all other agencies having interests or ordinances applicable to the property in question.

2. The activity shall not represent a source of water pollution to any nearby tidelands, marshlands, rivers, streams or other waterways used for the raising, production or preservation of marine life or other natural resources.

3. Any filling or dredging activity shall not substantially alter the course of any channel or the natural movement of any waters, result in increased flood hazards, or cause the formation of appreciable bottom or sludge deposits deleterious to marine life.

4. Any fill or dredging spoil area shall be deposited behind a watertight berm to avoid any sloughing and to stabilize the area.

5. If a fill is proposed of which any portion falls below mean higher high water or mean high water plus six feet, whichever is highest, and which is adjacent to or having potential access to a navigable waterway, the developer shall designate on the plan a portion of the parcel to remain unfilled for possible off-channel moorage or similar use. The size of the area to remain unfilled shall be determined on the basis of the need generated by proposed or anticipated uses on the fill, and shall be not less than 20 percent of that portion of the parcel lying below the highest above-mentioned elevation. The location and design of the unfilled portion shall be approved by the planning department.

6. Applications for a permit for filling, dredging or similar activities shall include:

a. The source of the applicant’s right to fill or dredge;

b. The purpose of the proposed operation;

c. The legal description of the area where the operation will take place;

d. The depth to which dredging or filling is to take place and the proposed angle of slope;

e. The manner in which material will be dredged or used for fill and the type of material to be used;

f. The method to be used to stabilize the dredge or fill area;

g. A map showing the plan of dredging or filling and the uses proposed for the area;

h. The time when the project is scheduled to begin and to be completed.

In taking action, the planning department may consult any state, federal or local agency it feels appropriate for consultation and advice.

B. Standards for Uses Involving Construction, Addition or Reconstruction of a Pier, Dock, Boat House or Similar Facility.

1. Evidence shall be provided that the applicant has complied with, or fully intends to comply with, all standards of the Department of Environmental Quality, the Division of State Lands, and all other agencies having interests or ordinances applicable to the property in question.

2. The facility or any use related to it shall not allow any water pollution to occur to any nearby tidelands, marshlands, rivers, streams or other waterways used for the raising, production or preservation of marine life or other natural resources.

3. The facility shall not substantially alter the course of any channel or the natural movement of any waters or result in increased flood hazards, or the formation of appreciable bottom or sludge deposits deleterious to marine life, and shall meet all of the following requirements:

a. No dock, pier or similar facility shall extend into any watercourse more than 25 feet from ordinary low water line nor 50 feet from ordinary high water line, unless it can be shown that such extension is necessary and will not increase flood hazards or create other problems such as the deterioration or destruction of marine life or wildlife habitat as a result of the extension.

b. No dock, pier or similar facility shall extend into the navigable channel any distance greater than required for safe moorage and shall be designed so as to minimize potential flood hazard and loss of navigable waterway area.

c. No pier, dock or similar facility shall extend into any watercourse more than five percent of the width thereof as measured perpendicular from the mean low water line on one side of the watercourse to the mean low water line on the opposite side.

4. No plumbing facilities for the handling of domestic or industrial waste shall be part of the facility unless approved by the city manager or design.

5. Application for a permit for a pier, dock, bulkhead, boat house, or similar facility shall include:

a. The source of the applicant’s right to construct the facility;

b. The purpose of the facility;

c. The legal description of the area where the facility will be located;

d. A map and drawings, showing the plan for construction of the facility. Such plan shall include a vicinity map drawn to scale showing location and design of similar facilities and other development within 250 feet of the parcel upon which the improvement is proposed;

e. The time when the project is scheduled to begin and to be completed.

6. Plans for a pier, dock, boat house, or similar facility shall meet the following requirements:

a. In new subdivisions considered by the planning commission following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, docks having less than 10 moorage spaces will be approved only in the instance that no other public or private means of launching or moorage is available or can be developed within 1,000 feet of the site in question.

b. Facilities being proposed in areas where it is likely that additional similar structures will be desired shall be designed to be combined into joint facilities whenever possible.

c. The design of moorages must provide sheer logs or similar devices for fending debris. Such improvements need not be maintained during periods where there is no danger of flood water.

d. Docks shall have the long dimension running parallel to the channel unless future development will result in pier construction or moorages being connected, necessitating facility design perpendicular to the channel. The width of those portions of such facilities shall be the minimum dimension required to provide safe access and moorage.

e. One dock shall not be closer to another dock than the length of the shorter structure or 25 feet, whichever distance is greater.

f. Additionally, docks allowed with conditional use approval in the GC, TVC, OS, P, RM, RC, and R1 zoning districts, must meet the following requirements and standards:

i. Total area of dock on water must not exceed 144 square feet with a width not exceeding six feet and a length not exceed 24 feet.

ii. No part of the dock can be covered or enclosed, such as but not limited to boat houses, sheds, fish cleaning stations, kayaks, canoes, hot tubs, and/or benches.

iii. Docks must have at least 50 percent of the float surface composed of grating containing at least 60 percent open space surface.

iv. The ramp/gangway of the dock must be 100 percent grated to allow light to pass through. Ramp width must not exceed five feet. The ramp square footage is not included in the total dock area square footage.

v. Grated surfaces on the docks must not be used for storage (e.g., boats, benches, kayaks, fish cleaning stations, etc.) or other purposes that will reduce natural light penetration through the dock.

vi. Treated wood is not allowed as a construction material for docks or ramps. Treated wood is lumber, pilings, and other wood products preserved with alkaline copper quaternary (ACQ), ammoniacal copper arsenate (ACA), ammoniacal copper zinc arsenate (ACZA), copper naphthenate, chromated copper arsenate (CCA), pentachlorophenol, or creosote.

vii. Oregon law requires encapsulation of expanded polystyrene foam flotation used in state waters. Encapsulation methods and materials must be approved by the Oregon State Marine Board prior to installation of foam flotation.

viii. All pilings must be fitted with devices to prevent perching by piscivorus birds.

ix. All work must be completed in accordance with the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife Guidelines for Timing of In-Water Work to Protect Fish and Wildlife Resources.

x. There must be minimal disturbance to any buried, submerged, or floating woody debris removal during construction.

xi. For piling removal, dislodge the piling with a vibratory hammer, when possible, to avoid a pile break by twisting or bending. A floating surface boom may be necessary to capture floating surface debris. (Ord. 2019-23 § 1; Ord. 2010-05 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.100(4))


Chapter 17.45 TAFT VILLAGE CORE (TVC) ZONE

Sections:

17.45.010    Purpose.

17.45.020    Application.

17.45.030    Definitions.

17.45.040    Land use activities.

17.45.050    Site development standards.

17.45.060    General preferences, requirements and standards.

17.45.070    Signs.

17.45.080    Parking.

17.45.090    Development incentives.

17.45.100    Nonconforming uses and structures.


17.45.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the Taft Village core (TVC) zone is to provide for a wide variety of uses, including retail, professional office, service-oriented businesses, single-family and multifamily residences and combinations of the above in mixed use developments within a core area of the village of Taft where concentrations of a variety of uses will encourage a pedestrian-oriented pattern of development that is different from the patterns found between Lincoln City’s village nodes. (Ord. 2000-09 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.105(1))


17.45.020 Application.

The TVC zone constitutes the primary zoning provisions (development standards) for the core area of the village of Taft. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to other requirements of this title. If there is a conflict between the regulations provided in other chapters of this title and this chapter, the regulations provided in this chapter shall prevail. Where direction is not provided in this chapter, provisions in other chapters of this title shall prevail. (Ord. 2000-09 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.105(2))


17.45.030 Definitions.

For purposes of the TVC zone, the following definitions shall apply:

“Automated teller machine (ATM)” means a pedestrian-oriented machine used by bank and financial patrons for conducting transactions including deposits, withdrawals, and fund transfer, without contact with financial institution personnel.

“Building facade” means the entire building front including the parapet.

“Building facade – primary” means the side of a building that faces the street and has a main pedestrian entrance from the street.

“Building footprint” means the ground surface area above which a building, including cantilevered parts of the building, is located.

“Building orientation” means the manner in which the building is positioned on a lot and its architectural features relate to surrounding structures, spaces, and landscapes.

“Development incentives” means discretionary measures provided to applicants of new development by the city of Lincoln City or the urban renewal agency to encourage improvements with a pedestrian orientation.

“Edge treatment” means the design treatment of the setback between a building facade and an adjacent street.

“Floor area – gross” means the total area of all floors in a structure, or on a specified level of a structure, as measured from the outside surface of exterior walls or the centerline of common walls. It excludes any crawl space, area used exclusively for vehicle parking or loading, breezeway, attic without floor, and an open porch, colonnade, deck, balcony, or terrace.

“Joint use parking” means the sharing of parking areas by two or more uses, structures, or parcels of land to satisfy parking requirements, reduce the amount of land dedicated to vehicular parking, and increase the amount of land available for new development, plazas, or other uses.

“Mixed use” means a development that includes a mix of commercial and residential uses that are planned and developed together on the same site or adjoining sites. The mix of uses may occur in the same building or in separate buildings.

“Monument sign” means a freestanding sign that is permanently affixed at grade and has a monolithic or columnar line and which maintains essentially the same contour from grade to top.

“New development” means any construction, or alteration of an existing structure or land use, or establishment of a land use, after December 31, 2000.

“Outdoor sales” means the outdoor retail sales of merchandise associated with an adjacent existing commercial establishment.

“Pedestrian orientation” means any physical structure or place with design qualities and elements that contribute to an active, inviting and pleasant place for pedestrians, including but not limited to:

1. Street furniture;

2. Design amenities related to the street level such as awnings, pedestrian connections, colonnades, and arcades;

3. Visibility into buildings at the street level;

4. Highly articulated facades at the street level with interesting uses of material, color, and architectural detailing;

5. Continuity of the sidewalk with a minimum of intrusions into pedestrian right-of-way;

6. Continuity of building facades along the street with few interruptions in the progression of buildings and stores;

7. Pedestrian-oriented signs; and

8. Landscaping.

“Pedestrian-oriented sign” means a sign with design qualities and elements that are oriented and scaled to the pedestrian rather than the motorist.

“Plaza” means a public or private area generally open to the public on a controlled basis and used for passive recreational activities and relaxation. Plazas are pedestrian areas typically provided with amenities such as seating, fountains, art, and landscaping. The paving or surface materials of plazas must comply with Americans with Disabilities Act requirements.

“Pole sign” means any sign which is supported by one or more uprights, poles or braces in or upon the ground which are not a part of any building or enclosed within the exterior walls of any building and are separated therefrom by a distance of at least six inches.

“Setback” means the distance by which a structure or parking area must be separated from a lot line or other structure.

“Sidewalk cafe” is any group of tables and chairs, and its authorized decorative and accessory devices, situated and maintained upon the public sidewalk or along the private porches, plazas, and arcades for use in connection with the consumption of food and beverage sold to the public from or in an adjoining indoor restaurant or delicatessen.

“Story” means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above or, if there is no floor above, the space between the floor and the ceiling.

“Structured parking” means a structure established for the short-term storage of operative vehicles for patrons. Structured parking can be constructed as an accessory to another primary use or uses that require the provision of off-street parking.

“Taft Village core” means the area depicted graphically below and generally defined by the Fleet Avenue alignment at Highway 101 (north), Schooner Creek bridge and Siletz Bay (south), Inlet Avenue (east), and the west end of SW 51st Street (west).


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 2008-21 § 3; Ord. 2000-09 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.105(3))


17.45.040 Land use activities.

This section contains a matrix that establishes which land uses are permitted (P), conditionally permitted (C), or expressly prohibited (–) within the TVC zone. A conditionally permitted use requires approval of a use permit by the planning commission in compliance with applicable provisions of Chapter 17.60 LCMC. If a particular use is not listed, the planning director shall be responsible to make a use determination to decide if the proposed use is similar to a listed use. Unless a proposed use is determined to be similar to a listed permitted or conditionally permitted use, it is a prohibited use. A permitted or conditionally permitted use may be subject to site plan review in accordance with LCMC 17.52.240.

 

	TVC Land Use Activity	P or C

	A. Administrative and Professional Offices	 

	Commercial establishments where the administrative, clerical and managerial functions of a business or industry are conducted or where members of a profession conduct their practice. Examples include accounting, medicine, physical therapy, veterinary with no kennels, engineering, real estate.	P

	B. Automotive Related Uses	 

	Commercial establishments which provide parts, repair and service for motor vehicles:	 

	1. Auto parts/supplies sales – No installations	P

	2. Auto parts/supplies sales – With installations	–

	3. Car washes	–

	4. Fuel/service stations	–

	5. Vehicle (car, RV and truck) sales/leasing	–

	C. Boarding and Lodging Facilities1	 

	Commercial establishments which provide boarding and lodging facilities:	 

	1. Bed and breakfast accommodations	P

	2. Condominiums with 10 units or less and with nightly rentals2	C

	3. Hotels/motels with 10 units or less	P

	4. Recreational vehicle parks	–

	5. Time-share units	C

	6. Vacation rental dwelling, subject to LCMC 17.80.050 and to the license requirements of Chapter 5.14 LCMC	P

	D. Eating/Drinking Establishments	 

	Commercial establishments which serve prepared food or beverages for consumption on or off the premises:	 

	1. Night clubs/bars/lounges/micro-brew pubs	P

	2. Restaurants – without drive-throughs (including cafes, coffee shops, family restaurants, etc.)	P

	3. Restaurants – with drive-throughs	–

	4. Restaurants – with walk-up windows (with or without seating)	P

	5. Sidewalk cafes	C

	6. Wine tasting	P

	E. Entertainment/Recreation Establishments	 

	Commercial establishments which provide participant/spectator amusement, entertainment or sport, primarily for financial gain. Examples include auditoriums, theaters, museums. Game arcades are limited to five games/machines when located as an auxiliary use in an otherwise permitted use.	 

	1. Auditoriums, convention centers, movie theaters, museums	C

	2. Miscellaneous indoor establishments (i.e., pool halls, billiard parlors, game arcades)	C

	3. Miscellaneous outdoor establishments (i.e., amphitheater, swimming/aquatics facility)	C

	F. Financial	 

	Commercial establishments that engage in monetary transactions not directly related to the sale of a product/service. Examples include: banks, savings and loan, etc.	 

	1. Financial land use, with no ATMs	P

	2. Financial land use, with interior ATMs	P

	3. Financial land use, with exterior ATMs	C

	4. Interior ATMs, as an accessory to another permitted or conditionally permitted use	C

	5. Exterior ATMs, as an accessory to another permitted or conditionally permitted use	–

	G. Mixed Use	 

	Developments that contain office/retail/service establishments and residential uses, either within the same structure or on the same parcel.	P

	H. Personal Service	 

	Commercial establishments which provide services of a personal nature. Examples include: barber/beauty/nail shops, tailor shops, dance school/karate studio, dry cleaners/laundromat, health/athletic clubs, travel agent, therapeutic massage.	P

	I. Residential	 

	1. Single-family dwellings, in accordance with Chapter 17.16 LCMC	P

	2. Attached single-family dwellings, in accordance with LCMC 17.52.260	P

	3. Two-family and duplexes, in accordance with Chapter 17.16 LCMC	P

	4. Multifamily dwelling units, with edge treatment B, in accordance with R-M zone standards	C

	5. Multifamily dwelling units, with edge treatment A or C, in accordance with R-M zone standards	P

	6. Accessory dwelling units, in accordance with LCMC 17.45.060(D)	P

	7. Manufactured homes, in accordance with Chapter 17.16 LCMC and LCMC 17.52.250	P

	8. Four-flat dwellings, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.140	P

	J. Retail Commercial	 

	Commercial establishments which sell merchandise generally needed/desired by the residents, employees and visitors of/to the community. Examples include: packaged food, liquor, grocery, drugs, video rental, general merchandise, gift shops, sporting goods, building materials, garden supplies/nurseries, antiques/second hand stores, convenience stores, but exclude mini-warehouses.	P

	Retail marijuana facility, if located within 100 feet of the right-of-way of Highway 101, and subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.130.	P

	K. Service Commercial	 

	Commercial establishments which provide business, repair and miscellaneous services. Examples include: printing/publishing, laboratories, catering, interior design, miscellaneous repairs (indoor only).	P

	L. Other Uses	 

	1. Ambulance service	C

	2. Art gallery and studio	P

	3. Places of worship3	C

	4. Clubs, lodges, meeting halls	C

	5. Home occupations	P

	6. Handicraft-type industries with on-site sales (i.e., crafts, saddles)	P

	7. Parks/playgrounds/community gardens	C

	8. Police/fire facilities	C

	9. Public facilities/public parking lots	P

	10. Public/private schools, business/trade schools, in accordance with LCMC 17.80.010	C

	11. Public utility or utility substation	C

	12. Essential emergency communications, early warning and associated emergency facilities 	P

	13. Community gardens and market gardens not larger than 12,500 square feet, in accordance with the standards of LCMC 17.80.080	P

	14. Gardens and animals, accessory to a permitted use and subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.080	P

	15. Transportation uses, defined in Chapter 17.08 LCMC	P

	16. Docks, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.44.040	C

1    A cap of 212 units in boarding and lodging facilities are permitted in the TVC zone, not including bed and breakfast accommodations and other boarding and lodging facilities with 10 units or less.

2    A minimum of 50 percent of the ground-level gross floor area of new hotels/motels and condominiums with nightly rentals shall be comprised of eating/drinking establishments, entertainment/recreation establishments, or retail commercial uses.

3    Together with accessory uses as specified in LCMC 17.80.160.

(Ord. 2019-24 § 16; Ord. 2019-23 § 8; Ord. 2019-21 § 8; Ord. 2019-02 § 6; Ord. 2017-09 § 12; Ord. 2016-20 § 7; Ord. 2016-05 § 3; Ord. 2014-29 § 3; Ord. 2012-06 § 9; Ord. 2009-05 § 16; Ord. 2009-02 § 6; Ord. 2005-14 § 12; Ord. 2000-09 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.105(4))


17.45.050 Site development standards.

This section establishes development standards for projects in the TVC zone.

A. Development standards for single-family residential uses shall be in accordance with Chapter 17.16 LCMC, except as modified in this section.

B. Development standards for multiple-family residential uses and duplexes shall be in accordance with Chapter 17.20 LCMC, except as modified in this section.

C. Maximum building height is 38 feet (subject to the exceptions contained in LCMC 17.52.200, e.g., chimneys, spires, towers, etc.). Buildings must have a gable, hipped gable, hipped, or shed roofline. Buildings of more than two stories shall be set back on the street sides of each successive story of the building (above the second story) a minimum of 10 feet from the building face of the next immediate lower story.

D. Setbacks shall be provided consistent with the edge treatments contained in Table 17.45.050-1 and Figure 17.45.050-A.

E. For parking areas adjacent to a public right-of-way, a minimum 10-foot landscaped setback from face of curb shall be provided.

F. Weather protection structures, e.g., canopies, porches, arcades, and colonnades, must be provided to the curb line within the existing street right-of-way along street frontages designated for edge treatment A. (Figure 17.45.050-A)

G. Public facilities are exempt from site development standards.

H. All development with edge treatment A shall incorporate mixed use. See Figure 17.45.050-A.

I. A minimum of 50 percent of the ground-level gross floor area of new hotels/motels and condominiums with nightly rentals shall be comprised of eating/drinking establishments, entertainment/recreation establishments, or retail commercial uses.

J. If a hotel, motel, condominium, or other lodging facility in the TVC zone is destroyed by any cause to an extent exceeding 50 percent of the appraised value as determined by the records of the county assessor for the year preceding destruction, such lodging facility may be rebuilt with the same or fewer number of rooms, Chapter 17.64 LCMC to the contrary notwithstanding.

K. A cap of 212 units in boarding and lodging facilities are permitted in the TVC zone, not including bed and breakfast accommodations and other boarding and lodging facilities with 10 units or less.

	Table 17.45.050-1 

	 	Edge Treatments

	 	A – Street Adjacent	B – Semi-Street Adjacent	C – Setback from Street

	Description	Street Adjacent – Pedestrian Orientation. This edge treatment requires placing the front elevation or landscaping of new development on the front property line and at the sidewalk edge to create a strong relationship between buildings and the street, excluding architectural projections or other architectural features.	Semi-Street Adjacent – Landscaped Perimeters. This edge treatment requires landscaped setbacks of a minimum five feet between buildings and streets, interrupted only by pedestrian areas, plazas, and sidewalks.	Setback from Street – Limited Parking. This edge treatment requires one bay of parking (one to two rows plus aisle) between the street and new development, with landscaped parkway or street trees accenting the sidewalk edge.

	General Areas of Applicability	Highway 101, 51st Street, Fleet Avenue, and portions of local streets. Refer to Figure 17.45.050-A for specific edge condition locations.	Cottage commercial and residential environments. Refer to Figure 17.45.050-A for specific edge condition locations.	Along east edge of Inlet Avenue only. Refer to Figure 17.45.050-A for specific edge condition locations.

	Key Details	• Avoid setbacks from the sidewalk edge.

• Create continuous pedestrian activity in an uninterrupted sequence by minimizing gaps between buildings, blank walls and parking lots.

• Create pedestrian connections to parking lots at the rear or sides of buildings.

• Use building indentations to create small pedestrian plazas along the street wall.	• Create pedestrian connections between buildings.

• Use landscaped setbacks to create “outdoor rooms” with plazas and gardens.

• Parking absent from front yards and landscaped setbacks.	• Create pedestrian linkages from the public sidewalk to building perimeter and entries.

• Provide vehicular access and pedestrian connections to adjoining parcels whenever possible.

• Provide accent landscaping and enhanced paving at vehicular entries.

	 

	 

	 

	Edge Illustration	
[IMAGE]
	
[IMAGE]
	
[IMAGE]


Figure 17.45.050-A
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 2000-09 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.105(5))


17.45.060 General preferences, requirements and standards.

The following general preferences, requirements and standards apply to new development in the TVC zone.

A. Preferences. This subsection (A) is intended to promote compatible and enhanced site and building design throughout the village of Taft core area. This process provides a means for property owners to implement both the comprehensive plan and the village of Taft redevelopment plan related to Taft’s physical development and to the preservation of its unique character. This subsection (A) is not intended to create standards, approval criteria or legally enforceable requirements.

In reviewing projects/improvements subject to any approval, the planning director shall refer to appropriate design guidelines in the village of Taft redevelopment plan (or any others that may be adopted by the city) in order to provide guidance to applicants seeking to comply with the requirements of the village of Taft redevelopment plan and the TVC zone.

The design theme poster contained in Figure 17.45.060-A, Parts I, II, and III, is to be used by property owners, developers, architects, landscape architects and designers in the planning and design of projects in the village of Taft. The design guidance provided by the poster communicates the Lincoln City community and city’s desired qualities and characteristics of development and are intended to promote quality design that is compatible with Taft’s unique character and its vision for the future.

 

Figure 17.45.060-A, Part I
[IMAGE]


 

Figure 17.45.060-A, Part II
[IMAGE]


 

Figure 17.45.060-A, Part III
[IMAGE]


B. New Commercial/Mixed Use. New commercial buildings and mixed use buildings shall comply with the following pedestrian-oriented design standards and location and development criteria:

1. For building facades that face an abutting street, a minimum of 50 percent of the ground floor facade shall include windows and/or doors. The building facade shall be designed so a blank wall without a window or doorway is no greater than 20 feet in length.

2. A minimum of 50 percent of the lot frontage abutting a street shall be occupied by a building facade. For lots with three or more street frontages, this standard shall apply to two lot frontages.

3. Residential units must not be located on street level.

4. Public facilities are exempt from the mixed use requirement.

C. New Multifamily and Attached Single-Family Residential.

1. These standards do not apply to mixed use development in which residential uses are located above commercial uses.

2. Building Orientation. New multifamily and attached single-family dwellings shall meet the following standards:

a. Each ground floor unit located along a street shall include a covered or recessed entry, or porch, oriented to the street.

b. Units along a street shall be oriented with building fronts parallel to the street.

3. New Multifamily and Attached Single-Family Parking, Site Access, and Circulation. Parking areas or driveways adjacent to any street frontage shall not occupy more than the greater of: 25 percent of the street frontage; or 20 feet, if a two-way driveway. If garages are oriented to front on a street, the following standards shall be met:

a. Only single-car garage doors are permitted;

b. Garage doors must be recessed at least three feet behind the front facade.

D. Accessory Dwelling Units. Accessory dwelling units must meet the following criteria:

1. Density. One accessory dwelling unit may be allowed as an accessory use to a single-family dwelling on any residential lot that meets the minimum lot size requirement.

2. Unit Size. An accessory dwelling unit must not exceed 750 square feet.

3. Off-Street Parking. If paved, on-street parking is available abutting the lot, no off-street parking will be required for an accessory dwelling unit. If such on-street parking is not available, one off-street parking space must be provided on the lot for the accessory dwelling unit in addition to the parking required for the single-family dwelling.

E. Outdoor Sales. All commercial uses, including repair, service and storage, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building or be completely screened from view from off the subject site, except that the outdoor sales display of merchandise in conjunction with antique shops, flower shops, art galleries, beach equipment shops, kite shops, and similar specialty and craft businesses is permitted in the TVC zone subject to the following provisions:

1. Outdoor sales displays may be allowed upon the public sidewalk; provided, that a minimum width of four feet is maintained clear of any obstructions and the city grants a right-of-way incursion permit;

2. No additional signs or other advertising devices (temporary or permanent) shall be used in conjunction with outdoor sales displays except those allowed in compliance with this title;

3. The outdoor sales display of merchandise shall only occur during times when the associated establishment is also open for business; and

4. Only merchandise normally available at the associated business may be displayed outdoors.

F. Installation of Public Improvements. Project developers are responsible for providing public improvements in compliance with city standards at the time of development, in accordance with LCMC 17.52.230. For the purposes of this requirement, development shall also include the expansion of existing structures by 50 percent or more of the gross floor area.

G. Undergrounding of On-Site Utilities. All new development shall provide underground utilities service installation or connections in compliance with LCMC 17.52.120(B). For the purposes of this requirement, development shall also include the expansion of existing structures by 50 percent or more of the gross floor area.

H. Landscaping. In parking areas adjacent to public right-of-way, landscaping shall provide a two-and-one-half-foot to three-foot-high screen across the entire parking frontage except for driveways. Landscape screening may include a combination of low hedgerow plantings, landscaped berms or low decorative masonry walls. The minimum width of a landscaped area required for screening purposes shall be five feet. In addition, landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Table 17.45.050-1 and Figure 17.45.050-A, and LCMC 17.52.100, with the following exceptions:

1. Pedestrian plazas may be used to meet up to 50 percent of the lot area landscaping requirement.

2. Landscaping requirements may be reduced by 50 percent for lots under 10,000 square feet, where a primary building front is located adjacent to the right-of-way or adjacent to a pedestrian plaza that itself is adjacent to the right-of-way, and on-site parking within a surface lot is not provided.

3. Properties with structured or garage parking of more than 50 spaces are eligible for a 50 percent reduction of landscaping requirements.

4. Street trees and landscaping located in public right-of-way are exempted from the provisions of LCMC 17.52.100.

I. Mechanical Equipment. No mechanical equipment, vents, ducts, HVAC equipment, transformers, or dish antennas shall be visible from ground level from any adjacent parcel, or any public street or right-of-way. This shall be accomplished through the extension of the main structure or roof, or screening in a manner that is architecturally integrated with the main structure. Plantings may be used to screen mechanical equipment at ground level; provided, that the plantings achieve full screening upon installation.

J. Business Address Required. Each business or structure (as appropriate) shall provide its address in numbers a minimum of six inches in height. The address shall be placed on the building, awning valance, or canopy in a manner to be clearly visible from the adjacent street, alley, and sidewalk. The preferred locations are above the main pedestrian entrance and at rear or side entrances.

K. Sidewalk Cafes. Sidewalk cafes on public sidewalks can enhance the pedestrian ambiance of Taft and are encouraged. The purpose of this subsection is to set out the conditions and requirements under which a sidewalk cafe may be permitted to operate on a public sidewalk within the TVC zone.

1. Conditional Use Permit Required. A conditional use permit is required for all sidewalk cafes in accordance with Chapter 17.60 LCMC. Notwithstanding the requirements of Chapter 17.60 LCMC, the planning director may grant a conditional use permit for a sidewalk cafe. The planning director may require an applicant for a permit to obtain the permit from the planning commission.

2. ODOT Right-of-Way. The Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) may require a separate permit for sidewalk cafes located adjacent to Highway 101 within the ODOT right-of-way.

3. Limitations and Requirements. A sidewalk cafe may be permitted in the TVC zone subject to the sidewalk cafe being situated adjacent to an indoor restaurant or delicatessen as specified below, and the sidewalk cafe’s operation is incidental to and a part of the operation of such adjacent indoor restaurant or delicatessen.

a. A sidewalk cafe may be located on the public sidewalk immediately adjacent to and abutting the indoor restaurant or delicatessen which operates the cafe; provided, that the area in which the sidewalk cafe is located extends no farther along the sidewalk’s length than the actual sidewalk frontage of the operating indoor restaurant or delicatessen and all other applicable provisions of this section are fulfilled.

b. An indoor restaurant or delicatessen may be permitted to operate only one sidewalk cafe and each sidewalk cafe shall be confined to a single location on the sidewalk.

c. A sidewalk cafe may be permitted only where the sidewalk or porch is wide enough to adequately accommodate both the usual pedestrian traffic in the area and the operation of the proposed cafe, consistent with the Americans with Disabilities Act. There shall be a minimum 48-inch clear distance free of all obstructions, in order to allow adequate pedestrian movement.


[IMAGE]


d. All outdoor dining furniture, including tables, chairs, umbrellas, and planters, shall be movable. Umbrellas must be secured with a minimum base of not less than 60 pounds. Outdoor heaters, amplified music, or speakers shall be reviewed at the time of application for a conditional use permit.

e. No additional signing shall be allowed on or above public sidewalk at any outdoor cafe except for the name of the establishment on an awning or umbrella valance.

f. A sidewalk cafe may serve only food and beverages prepared or stocked for sale at the adjoining indoor restaurant or delicatessen.

g. The service of beer or wine, or both, must be solely for on-premises consumption by customers and must be expressly authorized as part of a conditional use permit approval.

h. The area in which the sidewalk cafe is authorized is identified in a manner, as approved by the planning director, which will clearly separate and delineate it from the areas of the sidewalk that will remain open to pedestrian traffic.

i. Outdoor preparation of food and busing facilities are prohibited at sidewalk cafes. All exterior surfaces within the cafe shall be easily cleaned and shall be kept clean at all times by the permittee.

j. Trash and refuse storage for the sidewalk cafe shall not be permitted within the outdoor dining area or on adjacent sidewalk areas and the permittee shall remove all trash and litter as they accumulate. The permittee shall be responsible for maintaining the outdoor dining area, including the sidewalk surface and furniture and adjacent areas, in a clean and safe condition.

k. Hours of operation shall be no greater than those of the indoor restaurant or delicatessen.

l. The city shall have the right to prohibit the operation of a sidewalk cafe at any time because of anticipated or actual problems or conflicts in the use of the sidewalk area. Such problems and conflicts may arise from, but are not limited to, scheduled festivals and similar events, parades, repairs to the street or sidewalk, or emergencies occurring in the area. To the extent possible, the permittee will be given prior written notice of any time period during which the city will prohibit the operation of the sidewalk cafe.

m. No off-street parking is required for a sidewalk cafe.

4. Approval Authority. For purposes of a sidewalk cafe conditional use permit, the planning director may exercise the authority of the planning commission under Chapter 17.60 LCMC.

5. Findings and Conditions. In connection with approval of a conditional use permit, the planning director shall make findings that the proposed operation meets the limitations of this section. The planning director may impose such conditions in granting approval as deemed necessary to assure that the proposed operation will meet the operating requirements and conditions set forth in this section and to assure that the general public health, safety and welfare will be protected.

6. Term and Renewal. The planning director may approve a conditional use permit for a sidewalk cafe for a maximum period of one year in accordance with Chapter 17.60 LCMC. Thereafter, the planning director, if an extension application is filed prior to any expiration date of the conditional use permit, may extend the permit for additional periods, with the same or modified conditions of approval, not to exceed one year for each extension, following his/her review and approval of the sidewalk cafe’s operations. Alternatively, the planning director may decide not to extend the permit. The planning director must find that the conditions of the permit have not been violated in order to extend the permit.

7. Revocation. A conditional use permit may be revoked by the planning commission, following notice to the permittee and a public hearing, upon a finding that any of the following are true:

a. That one or more conditions of the permit have been violated;

b. That one or more conditions of this section have been violated;

c. That the sidewalk cafe is being operated in a manner which constitutes a nuisance; or

d. That the operation of the sidewalk cafe unduly impedes or restricts the movement of pedestrians past the sidewalk cafe.

L. Repealed by Ord. 2008-21. (Ord. 2008-21 § 2; Ord. 2000-09 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.105(6))


17.45.070 Signs.

Signs are allowed within the TVC zone in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 17.72 LCMC, except that:

A. Freestanding pole signs and internally illuminated signs are prohibited.

B. Sign Area.

1. Attached Signs. The total cumulative square footage allowable for attached signs per commercial establishment in the TVC zone is 32 square feet. There is no limit to the number of attached signs.

2. Freestanding Signs. The total cumulative square footage allowable for freestanding signs per commercial establishment in the TVC zone is 32 square feet. The maximum number of freestanding signs is one per lot. The maximum height is six feet.

C. Sign Area Bonus. For commercial establishments that do not have an on-site freestanding sign, the maximum allowable sign area for attached signs can be increased to 64 square feet.

D. Pedestrian-Oriented Sign Bonus. The maximum size for any one bonus pedestrian sign shall be six square feet, up to a total of 12 square feet for all such signs. Pedestrian-oriented signs include: window signs, small wall-mounted or projecting signs located not more than 10 feet above grade, signs placed on awning valances, and signs suspended under canopies and awnings. Signs that are suspended above pedestrian walkways shall provide a minimum of seven and one-half feet of clearance. (Ord. 2019-14 § 4; Ord. 2000-09 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.105(7))


17.45.080 Parking.

Off-street parking and loading for uses within the TVC zone shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.56 LCMC with the following modifications:

A. Number of Parking Spaces. 

1. Commercial and Mixed Use. The TVC has no minimum off-street parking requirement for any commercial or mixed use building.

2. Residential. Multifamily dwellings, duplexes, and attached single-family dwellings in the TVC zone must have one and one-half spaces per dwelling unit.

3. Any other uses must provide the number of spaces required by LCMC 17.56.050. 

B. Location of Parking. 

1. All Properties. Except for one-family and two-family dwellings, new surface parking must be parallel on-street parking spaces, parking bays abutting the street, parking areas located behind or to the side of a building, or a combination of the above. Paved parking spaces for standard-sized vehicles in a public street or alley that abuts a parcel are eligible to meet part or all of the parking requirements for the development on that parcel. 

2. Properties on Highway 101. For parcels fronting on Highway 101, the number of on-street parking spaces for standard-sized vehicles within 200 feet of a parcel may be counted toward the required number of parking spaces. (Ord. 2019-04 § 1; Ord. 2000-09 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.105(8))


17.45.090 Development incentives.

In order to achieve the type and quality of development and revitalization envisioned for Taft, certain development incentives may be allowed to encourage developers and property owners to participate in the various programs described below. Incentive bonuses may be granted at the discretion of the planning director and nothing contained herein shall obligate the planning director to provide any of the following bonuses or give an applicant any right to any of the following bonuses.

A. Pedestrian Amenities Incentive. Within the TVC zone, it is desirable to encourage the provision of pedestrian amenities, which include linkages between adjacent uses, public plazas and other pedestrian-oriented areas that encourage interaction between people and vitality to bayside environment.

1. Incentive Bonuses. For projects meeting the requirements for pedestrian linkage, public plazas or weather protection, the following development bonuses may be available:

a. Required parking may be reduced by 10 percent; provided, that a finding can be made that adequate parking will be available to the project.

b. Area of permitted signs may be increased by a maximum of 10 percent; provided, that a finding can be made that the increased sign area does not detract from the beautification and pedestrian-oriented objectives for Taft.

c. Through the development agreement process, the planning director may consider other incentive bonuses, such as reductions in processing fees, in-lieu fees, low interest loans or utility connection fees. The extent of such bonuses may vary on a case-by-case basis between the project applicant and the planning director.

For projects meeting all three requirements (pedestrian linkage, public plazas and weather protection) the above development bonuses plus up to one additional dwelling unit for each 5,000 square feet of lot size may be available.

2. Requirements for Incentive Bonuses.

a. Pedestrian Linkage. In order to qualify for the pedestrian linkage bonus, a proposed project must meet all of the following requirements, unless otherwise determined by the planning director:

i. Pedestrian linkages and pathways that run between buildings shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width; linkages and pathways longer than 50 feet shall be an average of 20 feet wide.

ii. Pedestrian linkages shall be designed to be an integral part of the overall project and shall be configured to provide straightforward access from the development to adjacent land uses. The incorporation of plazas into the design of pedestrian linkages is highly encouraged.

iii. Business entrances are encouraged to front onto a pedestrian linkage or pathway. If it is deemed that a ground floor business entrance cannot front onto a pedestrian linkage or pathway, a minimum of one display window per business shall be provided facing onto the pathway or linkage.

iv. The pedestrian linkage or pathway shall incorporate landscape features, lighting, shade, textured paving, or other design elements to enhance the overall pedestrian environment and provide a high level of security, attractiveness, and convenience.

v. The property owner shall be responsible for maintenance and other liabilities of the pedestrian linkages.


[IMAGE]
Pedestrian Linkages

b. Public Plaza. In order to qualify for the public plaza incentive bonus, a proposed project must meet all of the following requirements. Where inconsistent setbacks occur along the street, plazas shall be considered to compensate for the broken building edge.

i. Plazas shall be designed with unimpeded lines of sight to and from the public sidewalk and pedestrian linkages.

ii. Physical access shall be provided from the public sidewalk to plazas, via pedestrian linkages.

iii. Visual features, such as public art or a fountain, shall be incorporated in plazas to attract pedestrians.

iv. Shade trees or other elements providing relief from the sun, rain, and wind shall be incorporated within plazas. Landscaping shall provide special interest through unique foliage, color, and seasonal changes in plant habit, scent, or floral display.

v. Special paving and street furniture per the Taft streetscape furniture palette, as provided in Figure 17.45.090-A, shall be used in plazas to complement the streetscape elements in the public right-of-way.

vi. The property owner shall be responsible for maintenance and other liabilities of the public plazas.

c. Weather Protection. In order to qualify for incentive bonuses, a weather protection structure shall be provided along all street frontages designed for edge treatment A. Weather protection structures shall be reviewed and approved by the planning director, city engineer and all affected public utility agencies. The weather protection structure shall incorporate the following design features:

i. The structure, e.g., canopies, porches, porticos, arcades, colonnades, verandas, balconies, building cantilevers, and building second stories, shall provide weather protection between the building face and curb line either within the existing public right-of-way or sidewalk easement.

ii. A minimum 10-foot clearance must be achieved between the bottom of the weather protection structure and the ground below.

iii. All-weather protection structure support features such as columns, posts, pillars, etc., must be located so as to align with the existing curb line. A minimum 10-foot separation shall be achieved between support features. In addition, a sidewalk with a minimum width of five feet shall be achieved between the building face and back of curb.

iv. Where existing weather protection structures exist on adjacent properties, proposed protection structures shall be fully attached and integrated with the existing structure so as to achieve continuous weather protection along the street frontage.

v. The design of the weather protection structure and materials utilized shall generally comply with the design theme guidelines adopted for the Taft Village core and will include property owner input into alternative designs.


[IMAGE]
Figure 17.45.090-A

(Ord. 2000-09 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.105(9))


17.45.100 Nonconforming uses and structures.

A. Continuation of Nonconforming Use. A use lawfully occupying a structure or site on November 6, 2000, that does not conform to the regulations for the Taft Village core zone shall be deemed to be a nonconforming use and may be continued, subject to the following regulations:

1. Routine maintenance and repairs may be performed on structures or sites the use of which is nonconforming.

2. Structures or sites, the use of which is nonconforming, may be altered, renovated, enlarged, replaced, or moved if, and only if:

a. As to any added area, at least the entire added area will be used for a use that conforms to the regulations for the Taft Village core zone; and

b. The area continuing to be used for the nonconforming use is not more than the area lawfully used for the nonconforming use immediately prior to the alteration, renovation, enlargement, replacement, or movement.

B. Continuation of Nonconforming Structure. A structure lawfully occupying a site on November 6, 2000, that does not conform to the regulations for the Taft Village core zone shall be deemed to be a nonconforming structure and may be continued or replaced, subject to the following regulations:

1. Routine maintenance and repairs may be performed on nonconforming structures.

2. Nonconforming structures may be altered, renovated, enlarged, replaced, or moved if, and only if, the alteration, renovation, enlargement, replacement, or movement does not cause the ultimate structure to further violate the regulation or regulations under which the structure was nonconforming.

C. Applicability of Chapter 17.64 LCMC (Nonconforming Uses). LCMC 17.64.020(A) and 17.64.030(A) shall not apply to nonconforming uses and structures in the Taft Village core zone. Except as so limited, Chapter 17.64 LCMC shall apply to nonconforming uses and structures in the Taft Village core zone. (Ord. 2010-05 § 4; Ord. 2000-09 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.105(10))


Chapter 17.46 NATURAL RESOURCE OVERLAY (NR) ZONE

Sections:

17.46.010    Purpose.

17.46.020    Definitions.

17.46.030    Application.

17.46.040    Uses allowed.

17.46.050    Natural resources development review.

17.46.060    Natural resources development variance.

17.46.070    Existing structures and uses.

17.46.080    Lot creation.

17.46.090    Claims of map error.

17.46.100    Plan amendment option (ESEE).


17.46.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the natural resources overlay zone (NR) is to conserve, protect, where appropriate develop, and where appropriate restore the resources and benefits of coastal shorelands, natural resources, and scenic areas, recognizing their value for protection and maintenance of water quality, fish and wildlife habitat, water-dependent uses, economic resources, recreation and aesthetics. (Ord. 2000-11 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 3.111(1))


17.46.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following words are defined as follows:

“Buildable area” means the area of a lot or parcel exclusive of all applicable setbacks or areas within restrictive overlay zones.

“Goal 17 planning area” means all lands west of the Oregon Coast Highway (Highway 101), all lands within 500 feet of the ordinary high water mark of Devils Lake or Spring Lake, and all lands within 1,000 feet of the mean higher high water elevation of the Schooner Creek, Drift Creek, and Siletz Bay estuaries.

“Native riparian vegetation” means plants historically found in wet and streamside areas of the Pacific Northwest. “Flora of the Pacific Northwest” (1973) by Hitchcock and Cronquist is a primary reference for native plant determinations.

“Ordinary high water mark” means a line delineating the highest water level that has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, such as a clear, natural line impressed upon the bank, shelving, changes in the character of the soil, change from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial vegetation, or the presence of organic litter or debris.

“Qualified professional” means an individual who has proven expertise and experience in a given natural resource field. A qualified professional conducting a wetland delineation must have the delineation approved by the Oregon Division of State Lands.

“Responsible party” means the property owner and any party acting on behalf of or for the benefit of the property owner including construction contractors and subcontractors.

“Riparian area” means the area adjacent to a river, lake, or stream, consisting of the area of transition from an aquatic ecosystem to a terrestrial ecosystem.

“Riparian area, significant” means a riparian area that is shown as significant on the significant natural resources maps in the comprehensive plan.

“Significant natural resource” means wetlands, riparian areas, and wildlife areas within the urban growth boundary and shown on the significant natural resources maps in the comprehensive plan.

“Stream” means a channel such as a river or creek that carries flowing surface water, including perennial streams and intermittent streams with defined channels, and excluding artificial irrigation and drainage channels.

“Water area” means the area between the banks of a lake, pond, river, perennial or fish-bearing intermittent stream, excluding artificial farm ponds.

“Water-dependent use” means a use or activity which can be carried out only on, in, or adjacent to water areas because the use requires access to the water body for waterborne transportation, recreation, or energy production, or as a source of water.

“Water-oriented use” means a use whose attraction to the public is enhanced by a view of or access to coastal waters.

“Water-related use” means a use which is not a water-dependent use, but which provides goods or services that are directly associated with a water-dependent use or waterway use, and which, if not located adjacent to water, would result in a loss of quality in the goods or services offered, affecting a significant proportion of the public.

“Wetland” means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands are mapped in the city’s Local Wetland Inventory (January 12, 1996).

“Wetland, significant” means a wetland shown on the significant natural resources maps in the comprehensive plan.

“Wildlife area” means an area upon which wildlife depend in order to meet their requirements for food, water, shelter, and reproduction. Examples include wildlife migration corridors, big game winter range, and nesting and roosting sites.

“Wildlife area, significant” means a wildlife area shown on the significant natural resources maps in the comprehensive plan. Where a significant wildlife area includes a significant riparian area, the extent of the significant wildlife area is the same as the extent of the significant riparian area. (Ord. 2004-05 § 3; Ord. 2000-11 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 3.111(2))


17.46.030 Application.

A. The natural resource overlay zone consists of the land identified in the city comprehensive plan as “significant natural resource areas,” including significant riparian areas, significant wetlands, and significant wildlife areas.

B. These provisions are to be applied in conjunction with the provisions of the underlying zone. Where the provisions of the NR overlay zone conflict with those of the underlying zone, the more restrictive provisions must be applied.

C. Limitation on Extent of Significant Riparian Areas. The significant riparian area extends a certain distance upland from the ordinary high water mark and includes everything within the area between the ordinary high water mark and the upper edge of the significant riparian area, to a maximum distance of 50 feet. If the area of transition extends less than 50 feet from the ordinary high water mark, then the significant riparian area will be less than 50 feet in width. The significant riparian area may be more than 50 feet if the significant riparian area is adjacent to a significant wetland, in which case the maximum 50-foot distance is to be measured from the upland edge of the wetland. If it is necessary, for purposes of an application, to determine the extent of a significant riparian area, the property owner is responsible for having a qualified professional conduct a delineation to determine the significant riparian area boundaries. (Ord. 2004-05 § 3; Ord. 2000-11 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 3.111(3))


17.46.040 Uses allowed.

A. By Underlying Zoning. Except as limited below, the uses allowed in the natural resource overlay zone are the same as, and only, those allowed by the underlying zoning.

B. In the Natural Resource Overlay Zone. All development is excluded from the natural resource overlay zone, with the following exceptions:

1. Structures and uses for which the natural resource exclusion has been reduced through the provisions of LCMC 17.46.060.

2. The following uses are allowed outright:

a. Uses not involving a structure and which do not impede vegetation growth, result in removal of vegetation, alter hydrology, introduce sediment, lead to erosion, or involve ground disturbance or impervious surfaces.

b. Mowing of lawns existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter (but not expansion of lawns into significant natural resources), and other cutting necessary for hazard prevention.

c. Pedestrian footbridge, provided installation and maintenance do not disturb the natural resource function and do not involve removal of riparian vegetation, require development below the ordinary high water mark, or result in sedimentation or erosion.

d. Riparian restoration activities limited to the planting of native riparian vegetation and the removal of non-native understory species. Removal of non-native understory species must be accompanied by replanting with native riparian vegetation or maintenance of remaining vegetation such that bare soil is not exposed and non-native species are not allowed to establish themselves.

e. Trimming and pruning of willows and similar vegetation in a way that does not reduce the survivability or root strength of the vegetation.

3. The following uses are allowed subject to compliance with the following activity standards. Failure to comply with the activity standards may result in fines and mandatory mitigation requirements.

a. Activity Standards.

i. For in-water work the responsible party must follow the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife guidelines for in-water work.

ii. The responsible party may not remove native vegetation except for that in the space occupied by the use.

iii. Within six months of vegetation removal, the responsible party must replant areas from which vegetation is removed with native vegetation at densities at least equaling those of the removed vegetation, unless vegetation would not allow the use to function.

iv. The responsible party must keep sediment from entering the water area.

v. The responsible party must obtain all required federal and state permits (e.g., U.S. Army Corps of Engineers permit, Oregon Water Resources Department permit, Division of State Lands fill/removal permit).

b. Uses.

i. Replacement drainage facilities, utility facilities, domestic and irrigation water pumps, and minor facilities authorized by the Oregon Water Resources Department (such as stream gauges).

ii. Vegetation removal for maintenance of existing bridges, roads, clear-vision areas as described in LCMC 17.52.060, drainage facilities, domestic or irrigation pumps, utility facilities, and facilities approved by the Oregon Water Resources Department; provided, that trees are not trimmed in a manner that causes them to die (unless complete removal of the tree is necessary to avoid imminent hazard to the use).

iii. Replacement of a stream crossing (bridge or culvert) or expansion of an existing land transportation facility within an existing right-of-way, provided all applicable Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife fish passage guidelines are followed.

iv. Dock or moorage.

v. Water-dependent uses, where permitted in the underlying zone. (Ord. 2004-05 § 3; Ord. 2000-11 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 3.111(4))


17.46.050 Natural resources development review.

A. A property owner must apply for a natural resources development (NRD) review prior to the commencement of any development on property within the NR overlay zone. For purposes of this section, “development” means any construction, alteration of landforms, or removal of vegetation. If the NR overlay zone applies to a portion of a parcel, an NRD review is required only for that portion of a development located inside the NR overlay zone. No development may take place until the director completes the NRD review and authorizes the development.

B. The director will review all reports submitted, including but not limited to delineations and environmental reviews, to determine if the development complies with the requirements of this chapter. Within 10 days of the filing of the reports, the director must prepare a written statement with findings authorizing, denying, or conditionally approving the development. Findings must be consistent with the provisions of this chapter, the comprehensive plan and statewide planning goals.

C. The written statement of the director must be published in the next available edition of the newspaper. Notices of the action must be mailed to all property owners within 250 feet of the exterior boundary of the property where the development is to take place. Required notices must be mailed by regular first class mail and must be postmarked no later than the date of publication in the newspaper. The director also must mail a notice of the action to the following public agencies, as appropriate: the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, Oregon Division of State Lands, Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Environmental Protection Agency, and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.

D. All permit applications for development on parcels located within or adjacent to the NR overlay zone must identify the location of each significant natural resource area on the site plan. The director must review all development permit applications to verify compliance with the requirements of the NR overlay zone. Development permit applications not in compliance with the requirements of the NR overlay zone must be denied.

E. Emergency Waivers. The director may waive the NRD review if he or she determines that there is an immediate threat to life or property. Emergency waivers must be conditioned on the property owner applying for NRD review for all work performed under the emergency authorization within five days of issuance of the waiver. Emergency waivers must be further conditioned on the property owner, if the application for NRD review is not approved, restoring the site to its original condition within 30 days of final action on the NRD review. Waivers must be in writing and a record of waivers must be kept on file at the department. (Ord. 2000-11 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 3.111(5))


17.46.060 Natural resources development variance.

A. A variance must be granted per the provisions of Chapter 17.68 LCMC for all permitted uses not specified in LCMC 17.46.040, prior to any development occurring within the natural resource overlay zone. The planning commission must determine that the variance request meets all the following criteria in addition to those found in LCMC 17.68.020:

1. Strict adherence to the natural resource overlay zone standards would effectively preclude a use of the lot or parcel that reasonably could be expected to occur in the zone, and that the property owner would be precluded a substantial property right enjoyed by the majority of the landowners in the vicinity; and

2. The variance requested, of the possible variances necessary to create a buildable area outside of the natural resource overlay zone, has the least impact to the natural resource functions; and

3. The proposed development, including actions to mitigate impacts to natural resource functions, can be accommodated without substantial negative impact to the applicable natural resource functions.

B. Development Guidelines. Variances for proposed development within the natural resource overlay zone will be considered only when the following development guidelines are met:

1. The yard setback opposite the natural resource area may be reduced by up to one-half of the standard setback, but not to less than three feet.

2. The allowed reduction must be the minimum necessary to site the proposed use. At most, exclusions may be reduced to create a buildable area of no more than 1,750 square feet. (Ord. 2004-05 § 3; Ord. 84-2 § 3.111(6))


17.46.070 Existing structures and uses.

Existing structures and uses that are not allowed in the natural resource overlay zone may be continued at the size and intensity at which they were legally established. These existing structures and uses may be expanded in area or intensity within the significant natural resource only with approval under LCMC 17.46.060. Expansion (in size or intensity) of structures or uses where the expansion occurs entirely outside of the significant natural resource is allowed to the extent allowed by the underlying zoning. (Ord. 2004-05 § 3; Ord. 2000-11 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 3.111(7))


17.46.080 Lot creation.

Any lot or parcel created must contain sufficient building area outside the natural resource overlay zone to allow for development without requiring reduction of the natural resource area. Lots or parcels created or modified after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter so as to no longer contain sufficient buildable area outside the natural resource overlay zone to allow for development without requiring reduction of the natural resource area are not eligible for the small lot exclusion reduction or variance provided for in LCMC 17.46.060. (Ord. 2004-05 § 3; Ord. 2000-11 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 3.111(8))


17.46.090 Claims of map error.

A responsible party may request to be excused from compliance with the requirements of this chapter if the proposed development area was mapped as a significant natural resource in error. If the request is approved, then the significant natural resources map will be amended to remove the proposed development area from the map. In the case of wetlands, the claim of map error must be confirmed by the Oregon Division of State Lands. (Ord. 2000-11 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 3.111(9))


17.46.100 Plan amendment option (ESEE).

Any owner of property on which development otherwise would be limited by the natural resource overlay zone may apply for a quasi-judicial comprehensive plan amendment. The amendment must be based on a specific development proposal. The effect of the amendment would be to remove the natural resource overlay zone from all or a portion of the property. The applicant must demonstrate that an amendment is justified by completing an environmental, social, economic, and energy (ESEE) consequences analysis in accordance with Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development administrative rules (OAR 660-23-040). If the application is approved, then the ESEE analysis will be incorporated by reference into the city comprehensive plan and the significant natural resources map will be amended to remove the significant natural resource overlay zone from the inventory. If the application is approved, the city at its discretion may impose conditions on any resulting development approval in order to ensure that the development is consistent with the ESEE analysis. The ESEE analysis must comply with the following requirements:

A. The ESEE analysis must demonstrate that the adverse economic consequences of not allowing the conflicting use are sufficient to justify the loss, or partial loss, of the resource.

B. The ESEE analysis must demonstrate why the use cannot be located on buildable land outside of the significant natural resource and that no other sites within the city can meet the specific needs of the proposed use.

C. For resources located within the Goal 17 planning area, in addition to the above requirements, the ESEE analysis also must address the Goal 2 exception process as set out in OAR Chapter 660, Division 004. (Ord. 2000-11 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 3.111(10))


Chapter 17.47 NATURAL HAZARDS, BEACHES AND DUNES

Sections:

17.47.010    Purpose.

17.47.020    Development in identified hazard areas.

17.47.030    Development in ocean beaches and dune areas.


17.47.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this section is to protect the public safety and welfare through recognition that different geological formations and landforms have different hazard characteristics with respect to suitability for development. These differences are caused by faults, flood potential, landslide potential, high groundwater, stream bank erosion, bluff erosion, beach erosion, ocean flooding, storm waves, and other factors. The intent is to reduce the losses resulting from these hazards. (Ord. 2000-11 § 7; Ord. 84-2 § 3.112(1))


17.47.020 Development in identified hazard areas.

A. Hazards Identified and Applicability of Standards. Specific natural hazard areas have been identified in Environmental Geology of Lincoln County, Oregon, Bulletin 81 (State of Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries, 1973) and Environmental Hazard Inventory (RNKR Associates, 1978), and other sources. They are depicted on the comprehensive plan natural hazards map, as supplemented by Priest, G.R., and Allan, J.C., 2004.1 For purposes of this chapter, in cases of conflict between a cited source and the map, as supplemented by the 2004 Priest and Allan report, the map, as so supplemented, will prevail.

Natural hazard areas identified in Environmental Geology of Lincoln County, Oregon, Bulletin 81 (State of Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries, 1973) and Environmental Hazard Inventory (RNKR Associates, 1978) are advisory only. The city does not require analysis or mitigation for property identified as being in these hazard areas, but recommends that developers seek professional advice.

Development of property identified by Priest, G.R., and Allan, J.C., 2004, as subject to coastal erosion must meet the requirements of this chapter; however, the following activities are exempt:

1. Maintenance, repair, or alterations to existing structures that do not alter the building footprint or foundation;

2. New construction or maintenance, repair, or alterations to existing structures on a portion of the lot that lies outside the coastal erosion zones;

3. Exploratory excavations under the direction of a registered engineering geologist or geotechnical engineer;

4. Construction for which a building permit is not required;

5. Maintenance and reconstruction of public and private roads, streets, parking lots, driveways, and utility lines, provided the work does not extend outside the previously disturbed area;

6. Activities of emergency responders intended to reduce or eliminate an immediate danger to life or property.

B. Required Geotechnical Analysis. Development of all types, except beach front protective structures and natural means of beach protection, in coastal erosion hazard areas identified by Priest, G.R., and Allan, J.C., 2004, may not occur until an engineering geologist, certified to practice in Oregon, completes a review of the project site. To the extent the engineering geologist deems necessary, the review shall incorporate analysis and recommendations of an Oregon-certified coastal engineer and of technical experts from other fields outside of engineering geology. The review shall be prepared at the applicant’s expense. The geologist must submit (electronically) the review to the city as a written report that, if written or last updated more than a year prior to the first building inspection, must be updated to reflect current conditions. In reviewing the submitted geotechnical report, the city may consult with, among others, the Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries, the Department of Land Conservation and Development, and a certified engineering geologist. The city assumes no responsibility for the quality or accuracy of a geotechnical report.

Report Contents. Any geotechnical report must follow professional guidelines established by the Oregon State Board of Geologist Examiners, and include an explanation of the degree the hazard affects the property use in question, an explanation of the measures to be employed to minimize losses associated with the hazard, including, but not necessarily limited to, erosion control, vegetation removal, and slope stabilization, and an explanation of the hazard-associated consequences the development and the loss-minimizing measures will have on the surrounding properties.

For development activities of all types on a property in the coast erosion hazard zones, defined by Priest and Allan, 2004, except for beach front protective structures and natural means of ocean beach protection, the geotechnical report must include, but is not limited to, the following items:

1. Site Description.

a. The history of the site and surrounding areas, such as previous riprap or dune grading permits, erosion events, exposed trees on the beach, or other relevant local knowledge of the site.

b. Topography, including elevations and slopes on the property.

c. Vegetation cover.

d. Subsurface materials – the nature of the rocks and soils.

e. Conditions of the seaward front of the property, particularly for sites having a sea cliff.

f. Presence of drift logs or other flotsam on or within the property.

g. Description of streams or other drainage that might influence erosion or locally reduce the level of the beach.

h. Proximity of nearby headlands that might block the long shore movement of beach sediments, thereby affecting the level of the beach in front of the property.

i. Description of any shore protection structures that may exist on the property or on nearby properties.

j. Presence of pathways or stairs from the property to the beach.

k. Existing human impacts on the site, particularly those that might alter the resistance to wave attack.

2. Description of the Fronting Beach.

a. Average widths of the beach during the summer and winter.

b. Median grain size of beach sediment.

c. Average beach slopes during the summer and winter.

d. Elevations above mean sea level of the beach at the seaward edge of the property during summer and winter.

e. Presence of rip currents and rip embayment that can locally reduce the elevation of the fronting beach.

f. Presence of rock outcrops and sea stacks, both offshore and within the beach zone.

g. Information regarding the depth of beach sand down to bedrock at the seaward edge of the property.

3. Analyses of Erosion and Flooding Potential.

a. Analysis of DOGAMI beach monitoring data available for the site.

b. Analysis of human activities affecting shoreline erosion.

c. Analysis of possible mass wasting, including weathering processes, land sliding or slumping.

d. Calculation of wave runup beyond mean water elevation that might result in erosion of the sea cliff or foredune (see Stockdon, 20062).

e. Evaluation of frequency that erosion-inducing processes could occur, considering the most extreme potential conditions of unusually high water levels together with severe storm wave energy.

f. For dune-backed shoreline, use an appropriate foredune erosion (Komar et al. 19993) or time-dependent erosion model (e.g., Kriebel and Dean, 19934) to assess the potential distance of property erosion, and compare the results with direct evidence obtained during site visit, aerial photo analysis, or analysis of DOGAMI beach monitoring data.

g. For bluff-backed shorelines, use a combination of published reports, such as DOGAMI bluff and dune hazard risk zone studies, aerial photo analysis, and field work, to assess the potential distance of property erosion.

h. Description of potential for sea level rise, estimated for local area by combining local tectonic subsidence or uplift with global rates of predicted sea level rise.

i. An estimation of the annual erosion rate at the site.

4. Assessment of Potential Reactions to Erosion Episodes.

a. Determination of legal restrictions of shoreline protective structures (Goal 18 prohibition, local conditional use requirements, priority for nonstructural erosion control methods).

b. Assessment of potential reactions to erosion events, addressing the need for future erosion control measures, building relocation, or building foundation and utility repairs.

c. An annual erosion rate for the property.

5. Recommendations.

a. Based on results from the above analyses, recommended setbacks, building techniques, or other mitigation to ensure an acceptable level of safety and compliance with all local requirements.

b. A plan for preservation of vegetation and existing grade within the setback area, if appropriate.

c. Consideration of a local variance process to reduce the building setback on the side of the property opposite the ocean, if this reduction helps to lessen the risk of erosion, bluff failure or other hazard.

d. Methods to control and direct water drainage away from the ocean (e.g., to an approved storm water system), or, if not possible, to direct water in such a way so as to not cause erosion or visual impacts.

C. Compliance. Permitted development shall comply with the recommendations in any required geotechnical report and any report required by the building code.

At the time of footing inspection, or, if no footing inspection is required, at the time of the first building inspection, the author of the geotechnical report must certify that the development was constructed in accordance with the report’s recommendations.

D. Bluff Setback. No bluff setback is required for public infrastructure, beach front protective structures, or natural means of beach protection. The footprint of any other new structure or any horizontal addition requiring at least one footing in ocean bluff areas must be set back from the bluff a distance of at least 60 times the annual erosion rate (determined by the geotechnical analysis) plus five feet. The bluff, for this purpose, shall be determined by the city through inspection of aerial photos, the most recent LIDAR data, and the dividing line between the active and the high-risk erosion zones identified in the 2004 Priest maps referenced above. If the planning director cannot determine the location of a bluff, the geotechnical analysis, provided at the applicant’s expense, shall determine an appropriate site for the structure, if one exists.

If damaged, an existing structure that does not conform to the setback may be rebuilt in conformance with Chapter 17.64 LCMC, Nonconforming Situations. Reconstruction shall comply with recommendations provided in a report from an engineering geologist, a registered engineer, or both, as determined necessary by the building official.

E. Other Policies That Apply. If structures to protect shorelands, beaches and dunes, or flood areas are proposed, comprehensive plan “Shorelands, Beaches, Dunes, Estuaries, and Ocean Resources” Policies 7, 8, 9, 21 and 22 also apply. (Ord. 2012-09 § 1; Ord. 2011-16 § 1; Ord. 2004-05 § 4; Ord. 2000-11 § 7; Ord. 84-2 § 3.112(2))


17.47.030 Development in ocean beaches and dune areas.

This section ensures compliance with Statewide Goal 18.

A. Use Permitted/Prohibited. Residential development and commercial and industrial buildings are prohibited on active foredunes, conditionally stable foredunes that are subject to ocean undercutting or wave overtopping, and deflation plains that are subject to ocean flooding.

Other development that does not disturb the dune and dune vegetation significantly (e.g., fences that do not affect sand erosion or migration, a boardwalk) may be permitted in these areas, only if:

1. A geotechnical review, as described in LCMC 17.47.020(B), is completed for development activities of all types, except beach front protective structures and natural means of ocean beach protection. The written geotechnical report for this purpose must include the following information, in addition to other stated requirements:

a. The type of proposed use and the adverse effects it might have on the site and the surrounding area. As used in this subsection, “adverse effects” are those that create a hazard to life, public or private property, or the natural environment;

b. The measures to be employed to protect the site and the surrounding area from adverse effects created by the use; and

c. An explanation of the hazard-associated consequences the development and the loss-minimizing measures will have on the surrounding properties;

2. The geotechnical review concludes that the development as approved, with any conditions and measures to be employed to minimize losses associated with ocean undercutting, wave overtopping, and ocean flooding, is not likely to be subject to significant losses associated with these hazards during the design life of the development, or is of nominal value; and

3. The geotechnical review concludes that the development as approved, with any conditions and measures to be employed to minimize losses associated with ocean undercutting, wave overtopping, and ocean flooding, will not have significant adverse consequences associated with these hazards on surrounding properties.

B. Limit on Permitted Development. Development, except for beach front protective structures and natural means of ocean beach protection, in ocean beach and dune areas will be permitted only if the development predictably can be designed so that there will be no significant adverse impacts on the site and on adjacent properties from geologic hazards, wind erosion, and water erosion caused by ocean flooding, storm waves, or other causes, and is consistent with the requirements of Shoreland Policy 8.

C. Grading and Breaching of Foredunes. Grading and breaching of foredunes is prohibited.

D. Protective Structures. The city will rely on the State of Oregon Parks and Recreation Department (OPRD) to control the development of beach front protective structures and natural means of protection; however, the state will not issue a permit until the city has had an opportunity to determine that such protection complies with the applicable provisions of this chapter, including this subsection. Protective structures must be kept in good repair and are subject to additional compliance standards as well as enforcement under Chapter 8.10 LCMC.

E. Protection Project Permits. Shoreland (other than ocean beach front) protection projects, such as groins, bulkheads and sea walls, may not begin until a permit is obtained from the city. No approval to the state or city permit for a shoreland protection project will be issued until the developer has supplied to the city a plan, prepared by a certified engineering geologist or by a registered professional engineer qualified to practice geotechnical engineering, which indicates the nature and scope of the proposed protective activity. Nonstructural means of protection that will be effective to control erosion must be the first order of consideration in protecting shorelands. The use of structures, such as groins, bulkheads or sea walls, will not be allowed unless nonstructural means cannot protect the property and the adverse consequences created by such structures, both erosion-related and aesthetic, will be insignificant.

F. Vegetation. If vegetation is to be removed because of the development of any protection structure, a revegetation plan must be submitted. The plan must illustrate how vegetation removal will be minimized to prevent dune form alteration and exposure to erosion. The plan must provide for revegetation as extensive as or greater than exists prior to disruption. The protection structure will be approved by the state or permitted by the city only if the vegetation removal and the revegetation will be conducted so as to prevent dune form alteration and exposure to erosion resulting from the removal and revegetation.

G. Groundwater. No development in ocean beach and dune areas may use existing groundwater sources as a primary domestic water source. Developments may use existing groundwater sources for limited irrigation purposes, after securing all necessary state permits, and the submission to and approval by the city of written findings, prepared by a certified engineering geologist or by a registered professional engineer qualified to practice geotechnical engineering, that the irrigation will not cause groundwater drawdown to levels which would lead to loss of stabilizing vegetation or intrusion of salt water into the groundwater supply. (Ord. 2012-09 § 1; Ord. 2011-16 § 1; Ord. 2004-05 § 4; Ord. 2000-11 § 7; Ord. 84-2 § 3.112(3))

1

Priest, G.R., and Allan, J.C., 2004, Evaluation of coastal erosion hazard zones along dune and bluff backed shorelines in Lincoln County, Oregon: Cascade Head to Seal Rock, Technical Report to Lincoln County (Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries, Open-File Report O-04-09). 2

Stockdon, H.F., Holman, R.A., Howd, P.A., and Sallenger, A.H., 2006, Empirical parameterization of setup, swash, and runup: Coastal Engineering, v. 53, no. 7, p. 573-588. 3

Komar, P.D., McDougal, W.G., Marra, J.J., and Ruggiero, P., 1999, The rational analysis of setback distances: Applications to the Oregon Coast: Shore & Beach, v. 67, p. 41-49. 4

Kriebel, D.L., and Dean, R.G., 1993, Convolution method for time-dependent beach-profile response: Journal of Waterway, Port, Coastal and Ocean Engineering, v. 119, no. 2, p. 206-226. 


Chapter 17.48 AESTHETIC, HISTORIC AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES

Sections:

17.48.010    Purpose.

17.48.020    Development in areas of aesthetic resources.

17.48.030    Development on historic or archaeological sites.


17.48.010 Purpose.

The aesthetic, historical, and archaeological resources of the city make it a desirable place to live and visit. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public welfare through recognition of the social and economic benefits that the public enjoys in these resources and through protecting the resources for future generations. (Ord. 2000-11 § 8; Ord. 84-2 § 3.113(1))


17.48.020 Development in areas of aesthetic resources.

A. Application. This chapter applies to all areas identified on the city comprehensive plan as “significant aesthetic resources.”

B. Development in areas of significant aesthetic resources must not reduce the scenic character of the area.

C. Development in areas of significant aesthetic resources must not substantially alter the natural vegetative cover. (Ord. 2000-11 § 8; Ord. 84‑2 § 3.113(2))


17.48.030 Development on historic or archaeological sites.

A. Application. This subsection applies to all areas identified in the city comprehensive plan as historic or archaeological sites.

B. Development on identified archeological sites must be conducted in accordance with ORS 97.740 and 390.235.

C. Development on historic sites, as identified in the comprehensive plan inventory, shall not diminish the value of such sites as historic resources.

D. Alterations to identified historic structures shall be conducted in such a manner so as to maintain the historic value of the structures.

E. The demolition and the extensive alteration of the exterior facade of a structure identified as historical under state statutes shall not occur without a public hearing to encourage the protection of the structure. No demolition or alteration shall occur until 120 days after the conclusion of the hearing. During the 120-day period, the city shall, through public and private efforts, seek to save the structure. At the termination of the 120-day period, if the public or private efforts are not successful in saving the structure, demolition and alteration can occur without further notice. (Ord. 2004-05 § 5; Ord. 2000-11 § 8; Ord. 84-2 § 3.113(3))


Chapter 17.50 OCEANLAKE PLAN (OP) DISTRICT

Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

17.50.005    Definitions.

17.50.010    Purpose and overall guiding principles.

17.50.020    Oceanlake district overlay zones.

17.50.030    Applicability of municipal code regulations.

17.50.040    Administration of design standards.

Article II. Land Use Standards

17.50.050    Permitted uses.

17.50.060    General development standards.

Article III. Design Standards

17.50.070    Purpose.

17.50.080    Block layout, alleys and connections to public parking facilities.

17.50.090    Buildings and structures.

17.50.100    Streetscapes.

17.50.110    Pedestrian spaces.

17.50.120    Off-street parking and circulation.

17.50.130    Pedestrian access.

17.50.140    Landscaping.

17.50.150    Signs.

17.50.160    Exterior lighting.

Article I. General Provisions


17.50.005 Definitions.

The following definitions are informational. Where conflicts occur between the definitions below and an adopted building code, the adopted building code shall apply. For terms that are not defined below and are not defined in the building code, the reviewing authority will use its discretion in selecting from professional source materials that are most relevant to the question at hand.

“Accessibility” means the locational and design characteristics of a use, structure, or facility that permit it to be reached by one with a disability, as prescribed under the Americans with Disabilities Act and associated building codes and guidelines.

“Alcove” means a recessed section of a building’s exterior wall; may provide weather protection, outdoor seating or other pedestrian amenities.

“Basement” means the lowest story of a building where 50 percent or more of the floor is located below the grade plane.

“Belt course” means a horizontal course in a masonry wall that is of a different color, texture, size, or material and which is compatible with the overall form and architectural composition.

“Bollard” means a post of metal, wood or masonry, or a combination thereof, that is used to separate or direct traffic (vehicles, pedestrians or both). Bollards may contain sidewalk or pathway lighting.

“Clerestory” means a window that extends from the ground floor of a building to near the top of an outside wall.

“Corbel” means a projection of a building out from a masonry wall, sometimes to support a load and sometimes for decorative effect.

“Cornice” means the exterior trim of a structure at the meeting of the roof and wall.

“Facade” means the front or principal face of a building, or any side of a building that faces a street, way, or pedestrian space.

“False-front” means a front wall that extends beyond the sidewalls or rooftop of a building to create a more imposing facade. (See also “Parapet.”)

“Fenestration” means the arrangement and design of windows and doors in a building.

“Grade” means the surface elevation of the ground.

“Guideline” means a recommended approach, parameter, example, and/or rationale for interpreting, applying, and/or modifying a standard through the site plan review process. For the purpose of site plan review, the photographs, illustrations, and diagrams contained in this chapter are intended to be used as guidelines, except where an illustration contains a specific dimensional requirement or is accompanied by the words “shall” or “must,” then the illustration is intended as a standard.

“Island alley” means an alley that does not connect to any street but is designed to allow for future extension through abutting properties and connection to a street or public parking facility. Island alleys serving one or more parcels may be approved through site plan review.

“Lintel” means a heavy horizontal beam of wood or stone over an opening of a door or window to support the weight above it.

“Medallion” means a small decorative detail used to accent a building’s exterior.

“Mezzanine” means an intermediate level between a ground floor and the upper story(ies) occupying a partial area of floor space.

“Parapet” means a low protective wall at the edge of a roof.

“Pedestrian-scale lighting” means lighting that is designed and located to illuminate a sidewalk, pathway or other area that is used principally by pedestrians. Bollards, wall-mounted lights and step lights are typical of pedestrian-scale lighting.

“Pedestrian space” means a public gathering space, such as a plaza, square, outdoor seating area, alcove, sculpture garden, or similar space, oriented to pedestrians and connecting one or more developments to the adjacent streetscape.

“Pediment” means a low-pitched gable over a portico, door or window; may be used to reduce the scale of a building facade.

“Pier” means a portion of a wall between windows, doors or other openings.

“Pilaster” means a shallow pier used to buttress a wall; or a rectangular column with a capital and base, projecting only slightly from a wall as an ornamental motif.

“Pocket park” means a small plaza or landscaped pedestrian space, typically less than one-quarter acre and not for recreational use.

“Portico” means a porch or entrance to a building consisting of a covered and often columned area; may be used to address building orientation standards where redeveloping a building to meet the front property line is not feasible.

“Public art” means artwork in the public realm, regardless of whether it is on public or private property, or whether it is acquired through public or private funding. Public art can be a sculpture, mural, manhole cover, paving pattern, lighting, seating, kiosk, gate, fountain, engraving, carving, fresco or similar artwork which is approved through design review. In evaluating public art proposals, the reviewing authority may refer to guidelines and inventories prepared by the arts committee, the National Trust for Historic Preservation and/or other references it deems appropriate.

“Spandrel” means the blank space between windows and successive stories; or the area between the top of a column or pier and the apex of the arch springing from it.

“Split-barrel roof” means a rounded roof that resembles a barrel split in half and resting rounded side up.

“Standard” means a requirement for the purposes of design review approval. Dimensional requirements and provisions containing the words “shall,” “must,” “not permitted,” “prohibited,” “required/requirement,” or similar prescriptive or proscriptive terms indicate the presence of a standard.

“Streetscape” means the interface between development and a public street along the development’s street frontage; it typically includes storefronts, building entrances, weather protective canopies or awnings, pedestrian spaces such as plazas and curb extensions at intersections, a building front zone along the sidewalk where outdoor seating may occur, a through zone for pedestrians, a street furnishings zone for lights, trees, and other furnishings, and on-street parking where applicable.

“Transom” means a window immediately above a window or door; may or may not be hinged to a transom.

“Transparency (windows)” means nonreflective glass with a visible transmittance rating of 0.50 or greater, per the National Fenestration Rating Council.

“Turret” means a small tower extending above a building.

“Wayfinding sign” means a directional sign that is part of an overall sign program for a district, neighborhood, or other city-recognized area as approved through design review. (Ord. 2007-08 § 1 (Exh. B, Appx. A))


17.50.010 Purpose and overall guiding principles.

The Oceanlake plan (OP) district is established to provide for the integration of residential, commercial, and recreational uses in a well-planned, pedestrian-oriented, mixed use environment. The purpose of the district is to provide maximum flexibility in land use where a proposed development meets the design requirements of this chapter; the land use approvals process should be as predictable and efficient as possible while striving for excellence in design. The OP land use and design standards in Articles II and III of this chapter, respectively, are intended to ensure that projects support the following objectives:

•    Integration and functionality of land uses,

•    Connecting Oceanlake to the ocean,

•    Respecting neighborhood transitions,

•    Designing for the climate,

•    Aesthetics and context-sensitive design,

•    Balancing durability and affordability.

A. Integration and Functionality of Land Uses. Connections between building entrances, sidewalks and associated pedestrian areas should be made to encourage visual and physical integration with a strong sense of place. Due to the small parcel sizes and limited right-of-way widths within Oceanlake, developments should maximize the opportunity to consolidate and share parking, for example, by extending alleys or shared driveways, particularly those connecting to public parking facilities. Where such connections are not practicable, site plans should maximize the opportunity to provide shared parking serving multiple developments.

B. Connecting Oceanlake to the Ocean. Oceanlake has a well developed network of east-west (numbered) streets providing visual and, in some cases, physical access to the beach. The skyline is not defined by skyscrapers but village-scale storefronts, beach cottages and hotels nestled between rolling hills, shore pines, and ocean bluffs. While the city recognizes that it is not possible or practical to preserve all views of the ocean, new projects should be designed to take advantage of ocean views while maintaining view corridors from adjacent rights-of-way and pedestrian spaces to the greatest extent practicable. Building stories above 35 feet are required to step back away from the street to maintain a village scale along the street, and to allow for sunlight and ocean views.

C. Respecting Neighborhood Transitions. Developments on the edge of the Oceanlake plan district should be made compatible with abutting single-family residential uses outside the plan district, particularly the single-story bungalows and cottages in the R-1-5 zone north of NW 19th Street. The design standards for Oceanlake are intended to address compatibility through height, mass, scale, materials, detailing, setbacks and other elements.

D. Designing for the Climate. Temperatures in Lincoln City vary widely and it can rain any day of the year. People like being outside and will often walk from place to place even when it’s raining. Oceanlake has many visitors in the summer and more people are making it their home, or second home. Therefore, buildings should be designed to withstand high winds, as storms can generate winds of 100 miles per hour. Rooflines should not be overly complex and should have proper drainage for rainwater. Roofs should shed and drain water away from building openings, parking, refuse storage areas and other such areas. Buildings should incorporate canopies, awnings, porticos or similar weather protection features. Pedestrian amenities such as plazas and outdoor seating areas should take advantage of southern exposures and be protected from the wind, to the greatest extent practical.

E. Aesthetics and Context-Sensitive Design. Oceanlake’s aesthetic is rooted in the area’s eclectic mix of beach cottages, hotels, and main street storefronts nestled between rolling hills, shore pines, and ocean bluffs. The Oceanlake plan district encourages new development and redevelopment that honors the past while providing a contemporary interpretation of the area’s architecture and history. The predominant building materials are painted or natural-stain wood siding (shingle, lap, or board-and-batten), masonry block, brick and stone. Detailing may include any of these materials, as well as limited use of metal or vinyl for canopies, building detailing (e.g., flashing, roof gutters, drains, etc.), signs, art, and other detailing.

While each project is unique, the Oceanlake design standards (Article III of this chapter) are intended to provide clear and consistent standards. The standards discourage overly thematic, “formula” architecture, or designs used by retailers, national chain stores, franchises and other companies with stores or offices in multiple locations; provided, that corporate logos, art and similar commercial speech are not restricted.

F. Balancing Durability and Affordability. “Balancing durability and affordability” means that the city is practical in administering its codes. Great design does not have to be expensive. Sound design principles, quality workmanship, long-lasting materials, and routine maintenance are all important. Historically, development in Oceanlake has been characterized by relatively simple building forms with moderate detailing and ornamentation. Traditional materials such as wood, stone, and brick are preferred, but other materials, such as architectural-grade composite boards, shingles and trim, may be used when it is demonstrated that the material is durable and fits the overall composition of the proposed design. Project designs should respect the past, while being practical and durable for the future. (Ord. 2007-08 § 1 (Exh. B § 1(A))


17.50.020 Oceanlake district overlay zones.

The OP district consists of three design subdistricts or overlay zones, as shown on the zoning map in Appendix B to the ordinance codified in this chapter.

A. Main Street/Highway 101 Area. The main street area extends approximately one-half block deep on both sides of the highway between 21st Street and 12th Street. The district is anchored by the Lincoln City Community Center at the north end of Highway 101, and a church at the south end. The approximate center of Oceanlake is Northwest 17th Street and Highway 101. This part of Oceanlake is characterized by a traditional street grid with sidewalks, street lights, storefront commercial uses, and proximity to walkable neighborhoods. The street grid contains 200-foot by 400-foot blocks spaced evenly along the highway. Pedestrian connections and plazas are provided where 16th and 18th Streets end at Highway 101.

B. Interior Area. Land use west of the highway consists of a mix of commercial and residential uses, some in new structures and others in older cottages and houses. The area is walkable and easily accessible to adjoining neighborhoods and main street businesses, though the sidewalk network is incomplete. Proximity to Highway 101 and the ocean, both less than two blocks away, makes the area attractive for retail, overnight accommodations, and tourist-related mixed use development. The OP district allows commercial uses (e.g., retail, commercial services and office uses) on the ground floor with dwellings above or behind storefronts. Upper building stories exceeding 35 feet in height are required to be recessed, or stepped back, from numbered (east-west axis) streets west of Highway 101 to maintain view corridors toward the ocean, and to provide solar access. Front yards are minimal and parking is to be provided in public parking facilities, pullout bays along the street, and/or private facilities behind or beside buildings. The code encourages the extension of alleys and driveways through the block interiors to accommodate shared parking.

C. Oceanfront Area. The oceanfront is largely built-out with hotels, condominiums and other residential uses. As infill occurs and some parcels redevelop, the OP district encourages the retention of ocean view corridors and existing beach access, installation of sidewalks, and landscape screening of off-street parking along Harbor Avenue. Development adjacent to existing public beach access ways must maintain beach access and ocean views from the adjacent right-of-way. (Ord. 2007-08 § 1 (Exh. B § 1(B))


17.50.030 Applicability of municipal code regulations.

A. Applicability. The provisions of the Oceanlake plan district, in addition to all other applicable regulations of this title and other city ordinances, shall apply to all uses of land and development within the OP district.

B. Redevelopment and Remodels. Where an existing use or development is proposed to be modified through redevelopment or exterior remodeling, the standards shall apply only to that portion of the use or development that is to be modified; where more than 50 percent of the use or development is to be modified, the reviewing body may require the entire development to conform to the provisions of this chapter, as provided in subsection (E) of this section.

C. Burden of Proof. The applicant has the burden of proof of demonstrating conformity with the standards and criteria of this chapter.

D. Ordinance Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between the design standards and other municipal code regulations, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.

E. Nonconforming Situations. Existing uses and/or developments that do not conform to the provisions of this chapter, but were established lawfully prior to the city adopting this chapter, shall be allowed to continue, as provided in Chapter 17.64 LCMC, Nonconforming Situations. (Ord. 2007-08 § 1 (Exh. B § 1(C))


17.50.040 Administration of design standards.

A. Site Plan Review. The design standards will be applied to commercial development (including mixed use and multifamily dwellings, but not including single-family or two-family dwellings) that must receive approval through the city’s site plan review process during that process and prior to issuance of building permits. Single-family or two-family dwellings are subject to the design standards requirements relating to block layout, alleys, and connections to public parking facilities (LCMC 17.50.080) and must receive approval through the building permit review process. The planning director may refer any site plan review application to the planning commission for a public hearing when:

1. The applicant has requested an adjustment or modification to one or more Oceanlake code standard(s), as provided in subsection (C) of this section; or

2. The applicant requests a hearing; or

3. The planning director determines that the size or scale of the development (vis-a-vis its appearance, traffic generation, parking, or other characteristics) warrants a public hearing.

B. Design Standards Versus Guidelines. The code sections that follow provide intent statements, followed by standards and guidelines. Most sections contain objective standards and approval criteria; however, some criteria require the reviewing body to apply discretion. Where discretion is involved, the code provides guidelines to assist the reviewing body in evaluating a proposal. The following further explains the relationship between intent statements, standards and guidelines:

1. Intent statements are not applicable approval criteria, except requests for adjustments or variance must demonstrate how the proposal conforms to the code’s intent.

2. Standards use the words “shall” or “must” and are mandatory.

3. Guidelines use the words “should,” “may,” “preferred,” and “discouraged,” and are advisory. Guidelines supplement the standards and provide examples of acceptable or unacceptable design. Guidelines also assist in reviewing requests for adjustments and variances and may serve as the basis for approval, denial, or approval with modifications in such instances.

4. Graphics are used to illustrate standards and guidelines. They are not intended to prescribe a particular design but serve as examples of acceptable or unacceptable design solutions.

5. Standards and guidelines both serve as approval criteria, but the reviewing body is afforded greater latitude in applying guidelines. Where the word “should” is used, the applicant must demonstrate that the proposal is consistent with the guideline, or that applying an alternate design solution is consistent with the code’s stated intent. Where a guideline conflicts with any code standard, the standard shall prevail.

6. In the case of a proposed variance or adjustment to a code standard, the applicant must demonstrate how the variance or adjustment results in equal or greater conformity to the intent of the code and all other applicable standards and guidelines.

7. Nullification of one standard or guideline by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not cause any other standard or guideline to be nullified.

C. Adjustments/Modifications to the Standards. The standards contained in this chapter may be adjusted or modified without the need for a variance if the applicant demonstrates that:

1. The chapter’s guiding principles and the intent statement(s) under the applicable standard to be adjusted can be better met through a proposed alternative design solution; or

2. There are practical difficulties in meeting a standard based on the necessary characteristics of an allowed use. In such cases the design must provide other features that tend to meet the goal of the standard (such as a trellis with vines, a sculpture, or a pergola).

Where the code language suggests more than one way to meet a particular standard, the applicant is encouraged to be creative and propose the most appropriate design solution given the site’s context and the purpose of the code. The decision-making body shall refer to the guiding principles in LCMC 17.50.010, the purpose in LCMC 17.50.070, and the intent under each standard, in making its decision; the purpose, guiding principles and intent statements shall serve as the approval criteria for adjustments.

D. Incentives for Design Excellence. The city encourages excellence in design. Projects that provide superior pedestrian spaces, pedestrian amenities, public art, alleys, shared parking, or superior architecture may be rewarded, for example, with reduced off-street parking requirements, reduced lot sizes, increased allowable building coverage, and/or assistance from the city’s urban renewal program. These incentives are in addition to the adjustments provided in Article III of this chapter. In granting incentives, the hearing body shall find that the incentive results in a design that is superior to what is required under the base standard(s), and is consistent with one or more of the following guidelines:

1. Integration and Functionality of Land Uses. Mixed use projects combining upper-story residential uses with ground floor commercial or civic uses are preferred over single-use developments.

2. Connecting Oceanlake to the Ocean. Oceanfront projects that provide physical beach access to the public are preferred over those that provide only visual access or no access at all. Non-oceanfront projects should maintain views of the ocean from public rights-of-way where such views currently exist. Where a project results in diminished ocean views, the decision body may consider other mitigating circumstances in approving an incentive, such as the provision of pedestrian spaces (e.g., plaza) or public parking facilities in the vicinity that enable to the public to more easily access the shoreline.

3. Respecting Neighborhood Transitions. Where an applicant requests an exception to the maximum building height standards abutting a residential zone, the project must incorporate mitigating design features, such as additional open space or buffering adjacent to residential uses. Applicants are encouraged to do neighborhood outreach prior to submitting site plans to the city for review. The applicant’s efforts to engage the public (e.g., through a design charrette) prior to submitting a site plan application may influence the decision body in approving or denying incentives.

4. Designing for the Climate. Incentives may be appropriate for projects incorporating green building practices, such as the preservation of existing mature vegetation, use of water quality treatment in parking lots, rooftops, and landscapes, use of renewable energy, and energy conservation in construction. Projects eligible for green certification through a nationally recognized program (e.g., Leadership through Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) or similar program approved by the city) are preferred over those that do not meet such criteria.

5. Aesthetics and Context-Sensitive Design. Architecture that goes beyond base code requirements and achieves the vision contained in the Oceanlake redevelopment plan is preferred over architecture that merely conforms to the base code requirements. For example, corner properties along Highway 101, particularly those in gateway locations, should reach the 35-foot allowable height by incorporating a third building story, tower, or other signature architectural feature. Oceanfront designs should be superior in both their street-fronting elevation, as well as their ocean-fronting elevation.

6. Balancing Durability and Affordability. In granting incentives, preference may be given to projects providing affordable workforce housing or affordable commercial space to small businesses (except overnight accommodations). “Affordable housing” means households earning less than the area median income pay no more than 30 percent of their income toward housing costs. Where incentives are provided, the reviewing authority may require the applicant/owner to record deed restrictions or provide other assurances that the subject housing remains affordable for not less than 10 years. (Ord. 2010-06 § 7; Ord. 2007-08 § 1 (Exh. B § 1(D))

Article II. Land Use Standards


17.50.050 Permitted uses.

Table 17.50.050 identifies the land uses allowed in each of the three Oceanlake subdistricts. Uses permitted subject to site plan review are identified with “P”; those that are allowed subject to conditional use permit are identified with “CU”; prohibited uses are identified with “N.” If a use is not listed, the planning commission may interpret the code and make a similar use ruling following the procedure for authorization of similar uses found in LCMC 17.52.020.

 

Table 17.50.050 – Land Uses Allowed in Oceanlake  

	Uses	Status of Use in District

	Use Categories	Main Street Area	Interior Area	Oceanfront Area

	Residential Categories	 	 	 

	Household Living	 	 	 

	All residential uses allowed, if:	 	 	 

	Lawfully existing as of July 25, 2007	P	P	P

	New dwelling(s) – ground floor	N	P	P

	Dwelling(s) above a ground floor commercial use	P	P	P

	Four-flat dwellings, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.140	P	P	P

	Manufactured homes when developed in accordance with the standards set forth in LCMC 17.52.250	 	 	P

	Commercial Categories	 	 	 

	Drive-up/drive-in/drive-through (drive-up windows, kiosks, ATMs, similar uses/facilities)	 	 	 

	Lawfully existing as of July 25, 2007	P	N	N

	New or expanded use	N	N	N

	Bed and breakfast inn, per LCMC 17.80.060	P	P	P

	Educational services, not a school (e.g., tutoring or similar services)	P	P	P

	Entertainment, major event	CU	CU	CU

	Overnight accommodations, except bed and breakfast inns	CU	CU	P

	Offices	P	P	P

	Outdoor recreation, commercial	CU	CU	CU

	Surface parking lot, except for public facilities and parking as an accessory use	N	CU	N

	Vehicle servicing or vehicle repair	N	N	N

	Retail sales and service, excluding drive-up	P	P	P

	Retail marijuana facility, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.130	P	N	N

	Self-service storage	N	N	N

	Vacation rental dwelling, subject to LCMC 17.80.050 and to the license requirements of Chapter 5.14 LCMC	P	P	P

	Industrial Categories	 	 	 

	Industrial service, excluding drive-up	 	 	 

	Fully enclosed (e.g., office)	CU	CU	N

	Not enclosed	N	N	N

	Manufacturing and production in conjunction with an allowed commercial use	 	 	 

	Fully enclosed	CU	CU	CU

	Not enclosed	N	N	N

	Warehouse and freight movement	N	N	N

	Waste-related, except as accessory to a primary permitted use	N	N	N

	Wholesale sales	 	 	 

	Fully enclosed	CU	CU	N

	Not enclosed	N	N	N

	Institutional Categories	 	 	 

	Basic utilities	P	P	P

	Colleges	CU	N	N

	Community service, including government use (public or nonprofit)	P	CU	CU

	Day care, adult or child day care; does not include family day care (16 or fewer children) under ORS 657A.440	CU	P	CU

	Parks and open space	 	 	 

	Pedestrian amenities	P	P	P

	Parks and recreation facilities	P	P	P

	Other open space	P	P	P

	Places of worship1	 	 	 

	Lawfully existing as of July 25, 2007	P	P	P

	New	CU	CU	CU

	Schools	CU	CU	CU

	Other Categories	 	 	 

	Accessory structures (with a permitted use)	P	P	P

	Commercial radio frequency transmission facilities such as mini-cell antennas and wi-fi antennas	CU	CU	CU

	Stand-alone wireless communications facilities	N	N	N

	Essential emergency communications, early warning and associated emergency facilities	P	P	P

	Community gardens and market gardens not larger than 12,500 square feet, in accordance with the standards of LCMC 17.80.080	P	P	P

	Gardens and animals, accessory to a permitted use and subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.080	P	P	P

	Accessory dwelling units, accessory to single-family dwelling or duplex, subject to the provisions of LCMC 17.80.110	P	P	P

	Transportation facilities (operation, maintenance, preservation, and construction in accordance with the city’s transportation system plan)	P	P	P

Key:

P = Permitted, subject to site/development review

CU = Conditional use permit required (Chapter 17.60 LCMC)

N = Not permitted

1.    Together with accessory uses as specified in LCMC 17.80.160.

(Ord. 2019-29 § 2; Ord. 2019-24 § 17; Ord. 2019-21 § 9; Ord. 2019-02 § 7; Ord. 2016-20 § 8; Ord. 2016-05 § 4; Ord. 2014-29 § 4; Ord. 2014-08 § 7; Ord. 2009-05 § 17; Ord. 2007-08 § 1 (Exh. B § 2(A))


17.50.060 General development standards.

Except as modified through the procedures in LCMC 17.50.040(C), the development standards in Table 17.50.060 apply to all Oceanlake uses and development.

Table 17.50.060 – Development Standards  

	Standard	Main Street/Hwy 101 Area	Interior Area	Oceanfront Area

	Minimum lot area* (square feet)	 	 	 

	*Development must conform to lot width, depth, yard setback and coverage standards.	 	 	 

	Detached single-family dwelling	Not applicable	5,000 sf	5,000 sf

	Attached single-family dwelling	Not applicable	2,000 sf (alley required)	5,000 sf

	Other structures	5,000 sf	5,000 sf	5,000 sf

	Minimum lot width	50 ft	20 ft w/alley access; or 50 ft w/out alley	50 ft

	Minimum lot depth	50 ft	50 ft	50 ft

	Building/structure height, per LCMC 17.50.090(B)(1)	 	 	 

	Maximum height (see exceptions in LCMC 17.50.090(B)(1))	35 ft	35 ft	35 ft

	Minimum height	18 ft	 	 

	Fences, retaining/garden walls	 	 	 

	Maximum height – front and street yards	3.5 ft	3.5 ft	3.5 ft

	Maximum height – interior side and rear yards	6 ft	6 ft	6 ft, except as may be prohibited in coastal zone

	Building coverage	 	 	 

	Maximum building coverage (foundation plane as % of site area)	90%	80% where alley access or on-street parking provided

 

60% where no alley access or on-street parking provided	80%

	Minimum landscape area (% site area)

except does not apply to single-family dwellings. Landscape area may include plant areas and approved pedestrian spaces. Street trees and other street frontage landscaping included. Single-family and duplex development is subject to landscaping standards in LCMC 17.52.100.	10%	10%

(may be reduced to 5% where at least one significant shore pine is preserved on site, subject to site plan review)	10%

(may be reduced to 5% where at least one significant shore pine is preserved on site, subject to site plan review)

	Minimum setbacks (feet):

(See also LCMC 17.50.090(B)(8)(b), Height Step-Back.)	 	 	 

	Front, street, side, and rear property lines, except garage or carport, and subject to building code	0 ft, except as required for utility easements	0 ft, except as required for utility easements	10 ft

	Garage/carport entry, setback from street	20 ft	20 ft	20 ft

	Alley, building setback from alley	3 ft	3 ft	Not Applicable

	Build-to line (feet):	 	 	 

	New buildings only: At least one primary building entrance shall be built no farther from the street right-of-way than the build-to line; except where a greater setback is required for a planned street improvement, then the build-to line increases accordingly. The build-to line may also be increased through site plan review when pedestrian amenities are provided between a primary building entrance and the street right-of-way.	10 ft	Not Applicable	Not Applicable

	Special setback for planned street improvements	30 feet from the street centerline where the ultimate right-of-way width is 60 feet;

	24 feet from the street centerline where the ultimate right-of-way width is 48 feet;

	15 feet from the street centerline where the ultimate right-of-way width is 30 feet.

(Ord. 2010-06 §§ 7, 8; Ord. 2007-08 § 1 (Exh. B § 2(B))

Article III. Design Standards


17.50.070 Purpose.

The Oceanlake design standards are intended to implement the redevelopment plan and vision for Oceanlake. The standards reflect the following values and objectives:

A. Retain Oceanlake’s compact, walkable main street character and improve the Highway 101 commercial area as the district’s main working, shopping and entertainment district.

B. Support the formation of a mixed use, pedestrian-oriented district drawing visitors from Highway 101 to the ocean.

C. Encourage architectural variety, consistent with the eclectic character of Oceanlake; provided, that new development creates a close, intimate human scale and architectural design addresses all four sides of a building.

D. Encourage the use of contextually appropriate materials, textures and colors.

E. Provide a continuous system of alleys and mid-block lanes with central public parking and encourage the provision of shared private off-street parking.

F. Create vibrant pedestrian spaces (e.g., plazas, public art, cafe seating areas, etc.); pedestrian spaces should help identify Oceanlake, create intrigue, and offer weather protection and comfort to pedestrians while adding value to the district.

G. Break down large building masses and provide visual interest along the street.

H. Balance rhythm and continuity; encourage creativity in the design of building elevations, rooflines and facade elements.

I. Treat corner lots as focal points with vertical elements, public art, seating, and other features.

J. Provide weather protection where buildings abut the street. (Ord. 2007-08 § 1 (Exh. B § 3(A))


17.50.080 Block layout, alleys and connections to public parking facilities.

A. Intent. New development and redevelopment projects should reinforce the historic street grid of Oceanlake and contribute to the development of central parking facilities interconnected by a system of alleys. Buildings should be placed at or near the sidewalk edge and parking should be set back behind or beside buildings. Parking should be provided on street where shoulders are approved to accommodate parking spaces or bays, and shared parking areas internal to each block. By maintaining the integrity of Oceanlake’s historic urban form, land is used efficiently, traffic is distributed evenly, and new development contributes to a cohesive, pedestrian-friendly district.

B. Standards.

1. Rights-of-Way.

a. New development and redevelopment projects that are projected to generate additional vehicle and/or pedestrian traffic may be required to dedicate right-of-way and/or improve abutting streets and alleys. See Figure 17.50.080-1.

b. Street right-of-way shall not be vacated, except where it is demonstrated that the vacation is necessary to facilitate development of shared parking facilities and the development will improve the pedestrian environment.

Dedicating right-of-way for the creation of internal public parking facilities and/or pedestrian ways are examples of improving the pedestrian environment.
[IMAGE]


Figure 17.50.080-1: Typical local street.

2. Street/Alley Access.

a. New vehicle access to/from Highway 101 is discouraged; the city or ODOT may require vehicle access be provided from side street or alley, and existing highway approaches be consolidated as a condition of development approval.

b. The alignment of streets and alleys shall be maintained in new development to ensure connectivity from block to block. The city may require the extension and improvement of an alley as a condition of development approval. Where a block contains no alley, development may be required to configure off-street parking such that an alley can be extended through it in the future. Alleys shall be 12 to 16 feet in width, subject to site plan review. See example in Figure 17.50.080-2.

c. Where a development receives credit toward off-street parking requirements based on its proximity to a public parking facility and/or abutting on-street parking, the city may require the owner to dedicate and improve an alley.

d. Alleys should be continuous through a block to facilitate property access and full utilization of internal parking areas, except where existing development or the highway precludes the continuation of an alley.

e. Alleys shall be contained in a public right-of-way or public access easement improved to city standards.

f. Where an interior lot or parcel is unable to connect to an existing alley and the proposed site plan provides a parking facility oriented to the rear of the property, the reviewing authority may allow the creation of a temporary island alley. Island alleys must allow for future extension(s) to abutting vacant and/or redevelopable properties.
[IMAGE]


Figure 17.50.080-2: Typical parking lot configuration allowing for future alley.

3. Buildings Abutting Interior Parking Areas. Where a block is planned to contain an interior parking area (i.e., served by an alley or shared access drive), buildings abutting the parking area shall provide entrance(s) opening onto it or be connected to the street by a continuous pedestrian walkway (e.g., between buildings). Buildings and development shall not be configured in a way that precludes public access to such public parking facilities. (See also LCMC 17.50.090 through 17.50.130.) (Ord. 2007-08 § 1 (Exh. B § 3(B))


17.50.090 Buildings and structures.

A. Intent. While many communities attempt to create or re-create an urban downtown of their own, Oceanlake already has a main street with a mixture of older and contemporary buildings. The interior area of Oceanlake, between the highway and ocean, also has the potential to become a vibrant, mixed use neighborhood, as envisioned by the Oceanlake redevelopment plan.

The eclectic group of buildings existing along the highway loosely follows the ageless rhythm of a traditional main street. Therefore building design standards draw on traditional main street elements while allowing for design variety. It is not the city’s intent to create an architectural theme or to freeze time. The design standards are not meant to halt progress or restrict property rights, but rather to ensure that new buildings and remodels fit within the context of their surroundings and support a compact, pedestrian-oriented district. In this way, the city can ensure that Oceanlake retains its sense of place, its vitality and economic base.

The key elements of the building design standards are:

1. Eclectic coastal architecture, including residential, commercial, and mixed use development.

2. Building height and articulated facades that create a sense of street enclosure at a human scale.

3. Contextually appropriate materials, textures and colors.

4. Storefront character (windows, pedestrian shelter, furnishings, etc.).

5. Adaptable building styles that comfortably accommodate commercial, residential and mixed land uses.

6. A diversity of building facades and rooflines that fall into a consistent rhythm.

7. Corner lots as focal points with vertical elements, furnishings and public art.

B. Standards.

1. Height.

a. Maximum Height. The maximum allowable height is 35 feet, except that chimneys, spires, towers, and other architectural projections with an area of no more than 150 square feet may be allowed through site plan review. Building projections exceeding 35 feet in height within an ocean view corridor must be recessed behind lower building stories by not less than six feet. For the purpose of the OP district, ocean view corridors are all rights-of-way and parcels abutting 14th, 15th, 16th, 17th, 18th, and 19th Streets west of Highway 101, including rights-of-way and parcels extending west of NW Harbor Street to the ocean. (See Figures 17.50.090-1, 17.50.090-2 and 17.50.090-3.)

b. Minimum Height. Buildings fronting onto Highway 101 shall be built to a height of not less than 18 feet to maintain a sense of enclosure and a human scale relative to the street. Single-story buildings shall incorporate parapets, towers or other design elements that reach the minimum height. Single-story structures of less than 18 feet in height and fronting onto Highway 101 may be approved by the reviewing authority where the proposed building is replacing an automobile-oriented use as defined in LCMC 17.32.030.

2. Building Form.

a. Overall Form. Architectural designs shall address all four sides of a building. The predominant form abutting Highway 101 is a generally flat elevation with any recesses, projections, or rounded edges (“articulations”) appearing subordinate to the dominant rectangular form. New buildings should reflect the predominant form while expressing individuality; for example, with vertical elements such as cupolas, turrets or towers on corner properties. New buildings should not mimic any other building in their form or detailing.

b. Stepped Rooflines. Height shall vary from building to building to avoid a homogenous appearance. This standard is met by using either stepped parapets or slightly dissimilar overall height (i.e., building-to-building). Abrupt changes in height between buildings can be managed by having the taller building follow the horizontal lines of the shorter building along the first two floors and reference elements or detailing of the shorter building(s) on its upper stories. See also subsection (B)(3) of this section, Storefront Character.

c. Sloping Roof. Front-facing gables as a primary roof form are not allowed in the Highway 101 area, unless visually screened from the right-of-way by a parapet. Where a building in the Highway 101 area has a roof sloping to the rear of the site, it should have side parapets that screen the roof and step down toward the rear of the building. Front gables, split-barrel roofs, rounded parapets, turrets and similar forms may be used as secondary building elements or accents but not primary roof forms in the Highway 101 area. Front-facing gables are allowed as a primary roof form in the interior and oceanfront areas. Mansard roofs, including false mansards (applied forms without windows), are discouraged and A-frame buildings and other nontraditional Oceanlake forms are prohibited.

d. False Fronts. False fronts (e.g., boards, panels, flashing, etc.) covering historic masonry facades are not permitted. Exterior remodeling is encouraged where it would remove the false front(s) and restore or replace historically appropriate materials.

3. Storefront Character.

a. Fenestration (Windows and Doors).

i. Applicability. The window transparency requirement does not apply to the auditorium portion of a theater (but does apply to the lobby and concession area), to the guestroom portion of a motel, hotel, or resort (but does apply to the lobby and other portions), or to multiple-family dwellings (but does apply to the commercial parts of mixed use buildings incorporating multiple-family dwellings).

ii. Standard. Consistent with the desired storefront character in the Highway 101 area, buildings shall provide large display windows, windowed doors and transom windows. The ground floor, street-facing elevation of all buildings shall contain at least 60 percent transparent windows, measured as a section extending the width of the street-facing elevation between the building base (or 30 inches above the sidewalk grade, whichever is less) and a plane 80 inches above the sidewalk grade. Upper floors may have less window area, but should follow the vertical lines of the lower level piers and the horizontal definition of spandrels and any cornices. Buildings without a street-facing elevation, such as those that are set back behind another building and those that are oriented to a pedestrian space (e.g., side plaza or court), shall meet the 60 percent transparency standard on all elevations abutting pedestrian spaces(s) and on elevations containing a primary entrance. (Recommended: Figures 17.50.090-1 and 17.50.090-2.)

4. Building Orientation. New buildings shall conform to the build-to line requirements in LCMC 17.50.060. Primary building entrances shall be oriented to a front yard or a side yard, consistent with the build-to line requirement.

5. Primary Entrances. Buildings shall have clearly defined primary entrances. Primary entrances for buildings fronting onto Main Street/Highway 101 shall be oriented to the highway or a corner where the highway and a side street meet. Buildings on other streets shall have primary entrances oriented to a street, court or alley, as described in subsection (B)(2) of this section. All primary entrances shall be covered for a depth of not less than five feet, either by recess, overhang, canopy, portico and/or awning extending at least five feet over the entrance. See also subsection (B)(14) of this section, Pedestrian Shelters.

6. Secondary Entrances. Buildings with more than 90 feet of frontage on a street shall have a second entrance oriented to that street. Buildings adjacent to an internal parking area shall provide a secondary entrance in conformance with subsection (B)(5) of this section. (See also this section and LCMC 17.50.100, Streetscapes.)

7. Armature of the Block. The width of all buildings fronting Highway 101 shall extend from side lot line to side lot line to maintain continuity of the storefront character. Exceptions to this standard may be granted where the applicant demonstrates that the provision of side yards contributes positively to the pedestrian environment, for example, by providing a pedestrian space, a pedestrian access way to a parking facility, or an access to residences located on an upper building story or behind a commercial use.

8. Building Mass.

a. Traditional Building Pattern. Buildings shall incorporate offsets or divisions in the facade to express the traditional lot pattern and building width of Oceanlake. Changes in facade material, window design, facade height or decorative details are examples of techniques that should be used. These variations should be expressed throughout the width of the structure such that the composition appears to be a collection of smaller buildings or storefronts. See also subsection (B)(11) of this section, Horizontal Rhythms. (Recommended: Figures 17.50.090-1, 17.50.090-2, and 17.50.090-3.)


[IMAGE]


Figure 17.50.090-1: Example of acceptable building elements (35 feet).

b. Height Step-Back. For properties fronting Highway 101, portions of a building exceeding two stories shall be set back on the street sides of each successive story of the building above the second story a minimum of six feet from the next immediate lower story. The purpose of the height step-back is to maintain the appearance of a shorter building from the street and to provide for light filtering down to the street. Note: Height step-backs also apply along the east-west (numbered) streets for the purpose of protecting coastal views and solar access, per subsection (B)(1) of this section. (Recommended: Figures 17.50.090-1 and 17.50.090-2.) The planning and community development director may approve an adjustment waiving the above standard for a portion of a building incorporating a signature vertical element (e.g., clock tower) on a street corner, as recommended in subsection (B)(12) of this section. Any projection exceeding 35 feet shall be ornamental only and not contain habitable floor space. (See Figure 17.50.090-3.)

c. Street Level/Upper Floor. The distinction between street level and upper floors shall be established, for example, through the use of awnings, canopies, belt course, or similar detailing, materials and/or fenestration. (Recommended: Figures 17.50.090-1, 17.50.090-2, and 17.50.090-3.)

9. Accessibility. Accessibility shall be provided consistent with applicable building codes. Where wheelchair ramps are required, the ramp design shall incorporate materials and detailing similar to the base of the building.

10. Openings.

a. Ground Floor Windows. Ground floor elevations shall conform to subsection (B)(3)(a) of this section and should contain windows that are framed by piers or pilasters (sides); awnings, canopies or trim/hoods (tops); and kick plates or bulkheads (base). Decorative detailing and ornamentation around windows (e.g., sills, corbels, medallions, pediments, or similar features) is encouraged. (Recommended: Figures 17.50.090-1, 17.50.090-2, and 17.50.090-3.)

b. Upper Floor Windows. Upper floor window orientation should primarily be vertical, or have a width that is no greater than the width of the ground floor windows. (Recommended: Figures 17.50.090-1, 17.50.090-2, and 17.50.090-3.)

c. Projecting Windows, Display Cases. Where windows, flower boxes or display cases break the front plane of the building on its ground floor, such windows shall not encroach into a required sidewalk clear zone. For durability and aesthetic reasons, display cases, when provided, shall be part of the building (not affixed to the exterior) and integrated into the building with trim or other detailing.

d. Entrances. Ground level entrances shall be recessed behind the front facade not less than three feet and be at least partly transparent, except transparency is not required on entrances to residences. This standard may be met by providing a door with a window(s), a transom window above the door, or sidelights beside the door.

e. ATMs and Service Windows. Where ATMs or service windows are proposed on any street-facing elevation, they shall be visible from the street for security and have a canopy, awning, or other weather protection shelter.

f. Corner Entrances. Buildings on corner lots should have corner entrances. Such entrances are not required to be recessed, but shall have an awning or canopy for weather protection. Where a corner entrance is not provided, the building plan shall provide for a corner plaza consistent with LCMC 17.50.110, or the building shall provide architectural features that honor the corner as a pedestrian space; such features may include but are not limited to an alcove with seating, public art (e.g., sculpture or fountain), a vertical building element such as a tower (e.g., clock tower), or other feature approved through site plan review. (See also LCMC 17.50.110, Pedestrian spaces.)

g. Remodels. The scale and proportion of altered or added building elements, such as the size and relationship of new windows, doors, entrances, columns, weather protection shelters, and other features shall be visually compatible with the overall composition of the building (i.e., including building materials, color, detailing, etc.).

11. Horizontal Rhythms.

a. Traditional Lot and Building Pattern. Front elevations shall be articulated not less than once every 25 feet to maintain a pedestrian scale and to avoid blank walls. Articulation should be subtle. For example, slight offsets in a building elevation or roofline, and/or the rhythmic placement of windows, pilasters, awnings, trim, art/medallions, or other detailing and ornamentation are preferred. Abrupt divisions, such as changes in cladding materials, or offsets greater than eight feet, should be avoided. Side and rear elevations may be articulated less frequently but should complement the overall building design. The approving authority may require detailing on a zero-lot line elevation to reduce the apparent scale and avoid blank walls, i.e., until an abutting property develops. (Recommended: Figures 17.50.090-1 and 17.50.090-2.)

b. Horizontal Lines. New building designs and exterior remodels shall establish prominent horizontal lines and avoid blank walls. Examples of such horizontal lines include: base materials and detailing below a series of storefront windows, awning or canopy line, belt course between building stories, and cornice or parapet lines. It is not necessary for new lines to match existing lines. (Recommended: Figures 17.50.090-1 and 17.50.090-2.)

c. Ground Floor/Upper Floor Division. A clear visual division shall be maintained between the ground level floor and upper floors, for example, through the placement of windows, transoms, canopies, awnings, and signage. The majority of signage should be placed on the ground floor elevation (e.g., sign bands, canopy signs, or blade signs). (Recommended: Figures 17.50.090-1 and 17.50.090-2.)

d. Building Base. Buildings shall have a foundation or base, typically from ground to the bottom of the lower windowsills, with changes in volume or material, to give a sense of strength and symmetry. (Recommended: Figures 17.50.090-1 and 17.50.090-2.)


[IMAGE]


Figure 17.50.090-2: Rhythm, massing, and building openings.

12. Vertical Lines. New construction or front elevation remodels should reflect a vertical orientation, either through breaks in volume or the use of surface details, to divide large walls and create a pedestrian scale. Building massing for corner properties on Highway 101 should accentuate the corner location with a vertical element. See also subsection (B)(11)(a) of this section, Traditional Lot and Building Pattern. (Recommended: Figures 17.50.090-1, 17.50.090-2, and 17.50.090-3.)
[IMAGE]


Figure 17.50.090-3: Example of vertical element and desirable building height for corner property on Highway 101. Note: building step-back not required on east side of Highway 101.

13. Materials and Color.

a. Primary Materials. Exterior building materials shall predominantly consist of painted or natural stain wood, stone, brick, rusticated concrete block (warm earth tones) or comparable cladding. Rough-hewn wood, timbers and metals may be used as accents but not as the primary exterior cladding. See also subsections (B)(13)(c), Secondary Materials, and (B)(13)(d), Substitute Materials, of this section.

b. Change in Materials. Elevations shall incorporate changes in material that define a building’s base, middle and top and create visual interest and relief. Side and rear elevations that do not face a street, public parking area, pedestrian access way or plaza may utilize changes in texture and/or color of materials in the interest of affordability; provided, that the design is consistent with the overall composition of the building.

c. Secondary Materials. Any of the primary materials listed above may also be used as secondary materials or accents. Metals such as copper, steel, iron, bronze and similar appearance metals may be used as trims or accents (e.g., flashing, weather protection features, ornamentation, etc.) when compatible with the overall building design, and subject to review and approval through site plan review.

d. Substitute Materials. Substitute materials that are equal in appearance and durability to those in subsection (B)(13)(a) of this section may be approved at the discretion of the reviewing authority through site plan review. The applicant will be required to provide specifications from the manufacturer.

e. Color. Color schemes should be simple and coordinated over the entire building to establish a sense of overall composition. Color schemes should tie together signs, ornamentation, awnings, canopies and entrances. There shall be no more than one base color for each 25 horizontal feet of the front elevation; one base color for the entire front elevation is preferred. Using only one or two accent colors is also preferred, except where precedent exists for using more than two colors with some architectural styles (e.g., arts and crafts). Natural wood finishes are appropriate for doors, window sashes and trim, signs, canopies and other architectural accents. Luminescent, sparkling, neon and “day-glow” colors are not allowed (e.g., outlining building), except that neon signs are allowed subject to applicable sign codes. Metals shall be brushed finish or painted in mute or earth tones to minimize glare.

f. Contemporary Designs. Materials that provide a contemporary interpretation of local architecture styles, including arts and crafts, art deco, and vernacular (beach cottage) styles are encouraged. Buildings that resemble suburban strip malls (e.g., picture windows extending to near grade level) and those that use highly reflective glass, clerestory windows and/or similar nontraditional features are discouraged.

g. Restoration and Rehabilitation. Restoration and rehabilitation projects should incorporate original materials and design elements (e.g., previously covered over), to the extent practicable.

14. Pedestrian Shelters. Awnings, canopies, recesses or similar pedestrian shelters shall be provided along at least 60 percent of a building’s ground floor elevation(s) where the building abuts a sidewalk, plaza, pedestrian access way, or outdoor seating area. Pedestrian shelters used to meet the above standard shall extend at least five feet over the pedestrian area, shed rain away from building entrance(s), be proportionate to the building in its dimensions, and not obscure the building’s architectural details. If mezzanine or transom windows exist, the shelter shall be below such windows where feasible.

Exception: The reviewing authority may reduce the minimum shelter depth to four feet upon finding that existing right-of-way dimensions or building code requirements preclude a larger shelter.
[IMAGE]


Pedestrian shelters may come in a variety of forms, materials, and colors, provided they fit the overall composition of the building. Actual designs should address the location and function of the shelter, building codes, architecture, durability, and right-of-way constraints, if any.

15. Mechanical Equipment.

a. Screening. When mechanical equipment, such as utility vaults, air compressors, generators, antennas, satellite dishes, or similar equipment, is adjacent to a street, sidewalk or pedestrian space, it shall be screened from view on all streets. Where such equipment is installed on a side or rear building elevation and is adjacent to an alley, access way, or pedestrian space, its appearance shall be minimized or screened using materials and/or colors that are similar to those used on the subject building. Standpipes, meters, vaults and similar equipment should not be placed on a front elevation when other alternative locations exist; such equipment shall be placed on a side or rear elevation when practicable.

b. Rooftops. Rooftop mechanical units shall not be visible from any street and shall not exceed the allowable building height.

c. Ground-Mounted Units. Ground-mounted mechanical units shall be limited to side or rear yards and screened with fences or walls constructed of materials similar to those on adjacent buildings. Hedges may also be used as screens where there is adequate sunlight and irrigation to ensure their successful growth. (Ord. 2007-08 § 1 (Exh. B § 3(C))


17.50.100 Streetscapes.

A. Intent. The relationship between the local street system, Highway 101 and adjoining properties is important from both a transportation planning and a land use perspective. Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) is the permitting authority for all access onto Highway 101. As the permitting agency for land use, the city works cooperatively with ODOT to manage development adjacent to the highway. The city’s design standards are intended to implement the community’s vision of a cohesive streetscape, with on-street parking, wide sidewalks, weather protection (pedestrian) shelters, benches, pedestrian-scaled lighting, public art, opportunities for cafe seating, and other amenities. A safe, inviting and comfortable pedestrian environment benefits businesses, highway users and the community as a whole.

B. Standards. In addition to standards for block layout, alleys and parking lot access provided in LCMC 17.50.080, the following provisions apply to all new development:

1. Transportation Plan Conformity. New development shall conform to the policies, standards, specifications and design details (e.g., street sections) contained in the city’s transportation system plan (TSP) and the requirements of this chapter, specifically LCMC 17.50.080 (Block layout, alleys and connections to public parking facilities) and 17.50.110 (Pedestrian spaces). When streetscape improvements are required of new development, such improvements shall conform to the TSP. Additionally, street furnishing shall conform to the specifications contained in the Oceanlake redevelopment plan.

2. Local Streets and Alleys. LCMC 17.50.080 provides standards for extending alleys through blocks and local street improvements.

3. Pedestrian Amenities. LCMC 17.50.110 provides standards for pedestrian spaces and pedestrian amenities. Additionally, the Oceanlake redevelopment plan provides specifications for street furnishings such as benches, trash receptacles, wayfinding signs, and streetlights. (Ord. 2007-08 § 1 (Exh. B § 3(D))


17.50.110 Pedestrian spaces.

A. Intent. The increased development intensity, mixture of uses, pedestrian activity, close building orientation and minimal private open space envisioned for Oceanlake require that pedestrian space be provided along building frontages and in breaks between buildings. Pedestrian space, such as plazas, extra-wide sidewalks, outdoor seating areas, pedestrian access ways between buildings, alcoves and pocket parks, provides visual relief, pedestrian resting areas and opportunities for socialization. Pedestrian spaces do not have to be publicly owned or maintained. Public or private, they are as important as building design and central parking to the success of Oceanlake. Therefore, the city requires that all new developments and redevelopment projects contribute their proportionate share of pedestrian space.

B. Standards.

1. Pedestrian Space Standard. At least three percent of every development site, except for residential developments, shall be designated and improved as pedestrian space. The highest priority locations for pedestrian space are those areas with the highest pedestrian activity (e.g., street corners and mid-block pedestrian access ways) that have a western or southern exposure (within 45 degrees of true south or west). Where no such area exists, then pedestrian space should be provided as an extended sidewalk or walkway connecting multiple developments. See photo examples in subsection (B)(2) of this section.

2. Dimensions. All pedestrian spaces shall have dimensions of not less than eight feet across and have a surface area of not less than 64 square feet.


[IMAGE]


Pedestrian spaces should serve as focal points and gathering places, giving the downtown a unique identity and sense of place. Pedestrian amenities may include, but are not limited to, outdoor seating areas or cafes, pedestrian access ways, weather protection, plazas, benches, public art, and street furnishings such as bicycle racks and pedestrian lighting (e.g., bollards) at crossings.

3. Public Access. Such areas shall abut a public right-of-way or otherwise be connected to and visible from a public right-of-way by a sidewalk or pedestrian access way; access ways shall be identifiable with a change in paving materials (e.g., pavers inlaid in concrete or a change in pavement scoring patterns and/or texture). Where a right-of-way connection is not possible, the owner shall be required to provide a public access way easement to the pedestrian space. Pedestrian spaces shall not be gated or closed to public access, unless otherwise required by the city. (Recommended: Figures 17.50.110-1 and 17.50.110-2.)
[IMAGE]


Figure 17.50.110-1: Example of a small pedestrian space containing approximately 64 square feet.

4. Pedestrian Amenities Required. Where pedestrian space is required, it shall contain pedestrian amenities such as plaza space, extra-wide sidewalks (i.e., outdoor cafe space), benches, public art, pedestrian-scale lighting, wayfinding signs (as approved by the city) or similar pedestrian areas in an amount equal to or greater than one-half of one percent of the estimated construction cost of the subject building(s). Where a pedestrian space adjoins a building entrance, it should incorporate a canopy, awning, pergola, portico, or similar weather protection feature. Pedestrian amenities such as seating, planters, public art and pedestrian lighting (e.g., antique lamps or bollard lights) at street corners or pedestrian access ways may be counted in fulfilling the one-half percent requirement. (See Figure 17.50.110-2.) Cost estimates for pedestrian amenity improvements shall be prepared by a licensed architect, landscape architect, or other qualified professional, and shall be subject to review and approval by the administrator.


[IMAGE]


Figure 17.50.110-2: Example of preferred types of pedestrian amenities, shown with access way between buildings leading to an internal parking area or street end.

5. Mechanical Equipment and Garbage Storage Areas. Mechanical equipment and garbage storage areas are not permitted within pedestrian space(s). Such facilities shall be screened completely from view and set back 20 feet or more from a pedestrian space for aesthetic reasons and to minimize odors and noise. (Ord. 2007-08 § 1 (Exh. B § 3(E))


17.50.120 Off-street parking and circulation.

A. Intent. Parking is to be primarily in on-street parking spaces, parking bays abutting streets, garages, and in shared public or private parking areas internal to each block. Areas of surface parking must be behind or to the side of buildings. Surface parking may transition to structured parking over time as the market and public-private partnerships allow.

B. Standards. In addition to standards for block layout, alleys and parking lot access provided in LCMC 17.50.080, the following provisions apply to all new development and redevelopment:

1. Drive-Up and Drive-Through Uses. The Oceanlake plan district does not allow new drive-up/drive-through facilities. Where applicable, the reviewing authority may approve the relocation and improvement of existing drive-up facilities, subject to a conditional use permit.

2. Number of Required Parking Spaces. The Oceanlake plan district has no parking requirement for any commercial or mixed use building in the main street highway overlay zone or for the commercial component of any mixed use building in the interior-mixed use or oceanfront overlay zones; all other uses must conform to the minimum parking standards of the LCMC 17.56.050. 

3. Location of Required Parking. New surface parking must be parallel on-street parking spaces, parking bays abutting the street, parking areas located behind or to the side of a building, or a combination of the above. (Recommended: Figure 17.50.120-l.)


[IMAGE]


Figure 17.50.120-1: Parking is subordinate to storefront character. Parking must be buffered from adjacent streets and pedestrian ways. Drive-up/drive-through uses, where allowed, shall be oriented away from Main Street.

4. Parking Lot Design. Surface parking areas must be in bays of not more than 12 parking spaces. The minimum dimension for landscape areas is four feet in width and 24 square feet in area. Additionally, a landscape screen of not less than four feet in width and four feet in height must separate a parking area or access drive from an abutting street or pedestrian access way. Alternatively, and subject to site plan approval, the screen may be reduced to two feet in width where a masonry, wrought iron, brick or similar architectural-grade wall is provided. Landscaping must conform with LCMC 17.50.140. The planning commission may use its discretion to allow a greater number of consecutive parking spaces where the development preserves and protects one or more existing mature trees or exceeds the minimum pedestrian space requirement in LCMC 17.50.110. The commission may award more credit to projects that preserve the largest or most visible trees as viewed from public rights-of-way.

5. Redevelopment of Surface Parking Lots. Site plans for properties adjacent to city-owned parking lots must allow for conversion of such lots to structured parking in the future. Site plans must allow for the conversion of nonconforming, front yard parking lots to new building sites or pedestrian spaces as properties redevelop.

6. Parking in Front of Buildings. Due to the pedestrian orientation of this zone, surface parking is not allowed between any new building and the street to which it is oriented. Where such parking currently exists and the owner proposes to redevelop the site, the city may require the owner to install landscaping or other buffering between the parking area and the sidewalk.

7. Parking Structures. Parking structures (e.g., garages, decks, lids, etc.) may not open onto Highway 101, but must instead access a street, alley, or other access approved through site plan review. Structured parking must not directly abut Highway 101; it must instead be clad with commercial building(s) and/or pedestrian space a minimum of 10 feet in depth along the highway frontage.

8. Service and Loading Areas. Access to service areas and loading docks/bays must be from an alley and must be screened using architectural elements that are compatible with adjacent building(s). Where no alley exists, access to service areas must be from a street other than Highway 101. (Ord. 2019-04 § 2; Ord. 2010-06 § 7; Ord. 2007-08 § 1 (Exh. B § 3(F))




17.50.130 Pedestrian access.

A. Intent. In new development, the pedestrian circulation system shall provide a direct, convenient and comfortable means of accessing individual uses and connecting to other parts of Oceanlake. The pedestrian system includes sidewalks, pathways, mid-block access ways, and the ocean beach.

B. Standards. To ensure safe, direct and convenient pedestrian circulation, all developments shall provide a continuous pedestrian system conforming to city standards. (Ord. 2007-08 § 1 (Exh. B § 3(G))


17.50.140 Landscaping.

A. Intent. Oceanlake is identifiable, in part, by its shore pines and other coastal vegetation. While it is inevitable that some existing trees will be removed with new development, native vegetation should be preserved where practicable or otherwise replanted in required landscape areas. Trees and hedges serve as windbreaks and visual screens in an area that is otherwise being exposed to high winds. Grassy swales capture and cleanse surface water runoff before it infiltrates into the ground or seeps onto the beach. Mature vegetation also enhances real estate values. For these reasons, as well as for aesthetic reasons, the city requires that all new developments and redevelopment projects attempt to save mature vegetation that is not within building envelopes and provide landscaping in surface parking areas, as buffers between uses, within street planter strips, and to soften the appearance of large building elevations.

B. Standards.

1. Mature Landscaping. Site plans shall incorporate existing, mature vegetation that is not within building envelopes and not within areas that are required to be graded or excavated (e.g., for utilities, foundations, and driveways) into the project’s landscape design to the greatest extent practicable. Where mature tree removal is unavoidable (e.g., a tree’s location precludes reasonable development consistent with prescribed building envelopes, required building orientation, or public improvement requirements), mitigation shall be required as per subsection (B)(3)(g) of this section.

2. Volume Landscaping and Screening. Large trees and/or shrub planting may be required in quantities exceeding the base requirements of this code to mitigate adjustments to other standard or the loss of mature trees as described under subsection (B)(1) of this section.

3. Minimum Landscape Standards.

a. All off-street parking and vehicular use areas (including driveways and loading docks) shall have perimeter landscaping of not less than four feet in depth, and interior landscaping covering at least 10 percent of the entire vehicular use area. The planning commission authority may reduce the minimum landscape area to not less than five percent where the development preserves and protects one or more existing mature trees. The commission shall use its discretion in awarding credit; provided, that more credit may be awarded to projects that preserve the largest or most visible trees as viewed from public rights-of-way including the beach. Areas with preserved trees are counted toward the required parking lot landscaping.

b. Each separate landscape area shall be a minimum of 24 square feet with a minimum dimension of at least four feet and shall contain at least one tree. All remaining land in the landscape area shall be covered by a combination of shrubs, ground cover plants or other city-approved nonvegetative ground cover.

c. All required buffer strips, screens, and other required landscape areas shall be planted at a density to ensure the intended buffering or screening intent is met; in no case shall a landscape area have less than one tree per 200 square feet of surface or less than one shrub per 50 square feet of area.

d. Required trees and shrubs shall be noninvasive species that are known to thrive in the northern Oregon coastal environment.

e. The following guidelines apply:

i. Vegetation native to the Pacific Northwest coast is encouraged.

ii. Turf and grass is discouraged, except in residential developments and in water treatment swales.

iii. Species should be those contained in the Lincoln City Tree Planting Guide and List of Recommended Species, or species recommended by a licensed nurseryman as being suitable for the local climate, as approved by the planning director.

f. Trees shall be at least two-inch caliper at time of planting.

g. When tree mitigation is required, the number of mitigation trees required shall be equal to at least one-half the total number required to achieve the number of inches of mature tree(s) removed (diameter measured at four feet above grade). For instance, if a 12-inch diameter tree is removed, then two three-inch trees of the same or comparable species shall be planted.

h. Irrigation systems shall be provided for all planted areas for a period of at least two years, or until it is demonstrated that new plants have become naturalized.

i. Shrubs shall be at least three-gallon size when planted.

j. If hedges are planted for screening, plants shall be at least of an initial size so that the required screening will be achieved within two years.

k. Trees shall be planted so that encroachment below eight feet into a public right-of-way can be prevented without long-term detriment to the subject tree.

l. Landscaping shall preserve an adequate line of sight around vehicle accesses.

m. All landscaping materials shall be in vigorous and healthy growing condition and shall be installed according to common planting procedures, with consideration given to soil condition. The property owner is responsible for maintaining and replacing, as necessary, all approved landscape plants on his property and those within abutting rights-of-way (e.g., street trees).

4. Parking Area Landscaping. Surface parking areas shall contain landscaping as described under LCMC 17.50.120, Off-street parking and circulation.

5. Water Quality. Where a surface parking area incorporates water quality filters/swales and porous paving materials, such as pavers set in sand, concrete blocks allowing grass to grow through, and/or porous concrete (e.g., particularly along walkways and in parking areas that are used infrequently), the reviewing authority may allow additional building (lot) coverage, consistent with the standards in Table 17.50.060. Porous paving may also be used for small areas, such as the first four feet of a parking lot’s perimeter, where it would help reduce or slow surface water runoff. (Recommended: Figure 17.50.140.)


[IMAGE]

[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


Figure 17.50.140

(Ord. 2007-08 § 1 (Exh. B § 3(H))


17.50.150 Signs.

A. Intent. The number, size, configuration, placement, color, materials and illumination of signs all play a part in shaping the built environment. Signs in Oceanlake should function primarily as cues for pedestrian wayfinding and business identification. Business identification does not require that owners maximize the size or number of signs. The highway streetscape has built-in traffic calming features that, together with the building design standards, will enable motorists and pedestrians to notice signs at a relatively small scale. Signs designed to a highway scale are not necessary and are discouraged through the following standards.

B. Standards. Signs shall not be installed without a sign permit. Where a sign permit is required as part of a larger project, the sign package shall be reviewed with the site plan under the applicable provisions of Chapter 17.72 LCMC and the following guidelines and standards. Where a sign permit is requested apart from any other development application, it shall be processed administratively under the applicable provisions of the Lincoln City Municipal Code and the following guidelines and standards:

1. Building Signs. Building-mounted signs shall be positioned to emphasize established architectural elements such as entrances, windows, gables, etc. Signs should appear to fit within frames created by components of the facade design. Signs should not obscure building details. An individual building shall have no more than four building-mounted signs totaling not more than 48 square feet.

2. Freestanding Signs. New freestanding signs shall not exceed six feet in height, except that signs suspended from an awning, canopy or similar architectural feature may be approved subject to applicable building codes. Portable signs shall conform to LCMC 17.72.060(C)(4).

3. Contextual Design. Signs should complement Oceanlake’s natural surroundings. For example, signs engraved or sculpted from metal or wood (natural or painted wood) are preferred over those that are predominantly made of plastic, Plexiglas, or similar reflective materials. Pictographic symbols are encouraged, as they often communicate more than text and add visual interest to the street. Fluorescent (e.g., day-glow), sparkling, reflective, or similar colors or finishes are not permitted. Banner signs, streamers, moving signs, video or animated signs, flashing signs, and similar sign types are considered a nuisance and traffic safety hazard and are therefore not permitted.

4. Pedestrian Signs. Pedestrian-scale signs, such as blade signs, wood cutout signs, door signs and permanent stylized window signs (allowing at least 50 percent transparency throughout the window) are encouraged. Such signs are exempt from the overall sign area limitations.

5. Signs for buildings with multiple tenants should be designed to allow for new business names to be added or replaced easily.

6. Illuminated Signs. When signs are to be illuminated, external light sources shall be used. Light sources shall be placed close to and directed onto the sign they are intended to illuminate, and shielded to minimize glare into the street or onto adjacent properties. Where possible, lights should be incorporated into the sign bracket. Lights placed below any sign (up-lighting) shall be cut off to minimize spillover into the night sky. Lights in canisters and backlit signs, except for those existing prior to the effective date of the design standards, are prohibited. See also LCMC 17.50.160, Exterior lighting.


[IMAGE]


Figure 17.50.150-1: Examples of encouraged sign types (from top: mural, blade, wood cutout, hanging sign).

(Ord. 2019-14 § 5; Ord. 2007-08 § 1 (Exh. B § 3(I))


17.50.160 Exterior lighting.

A. Intent. The number, size, design and placement of lights all contribute to creating a safe and aesthetically pleasing development. Excessive lighting contributes to light pollution, glare and light trespass, and it diminishes views of the night sky. Lights in Oceanlake should function primarily as tools for pedestrian wayfinding and business visibility. Business visibility does not require that owners fully illuminate their building and parking areas. The urban renewal plan for Oceanlake includes sidewalk lighting (antique street lamps) that, together with modest on-site lighting in developments, will enable motorists and pedestrians to recognize businesses and safely walk to them. Lights designed to a highway scale or large urban commercial scale (e.g., cobra head standards, or car sales lot lighting) are not permitted.

B. Standards. Outdoor light fixtures shall not be installed without site plan review approval. Where a light fixture is required as part of a larger project, the lighting package shall be reviewed under the following guidelines and standards. Where an outdoor light fixture is to be installed apart from any other development application, it shall be processed administratively. Outdoor lighting that does not conform to current standards, but conformed to city standards prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, is allowed to continue as nonconforming until such time that the light fixture and/or building is remodeled or replaced.

1. Contextual Design. Exterior lights shall be designed to fit their particular location and function. They should be simple in character and similar in color and intensity to those used traditionally. High pressure sodium lights are appropriate, except where good color rendition is required; enhanced color rendition high pressure sodium lamps, or more uniform spectrum lamps, may also be used.

a. Pedestrian ways and entrances that are not otherwise illuminated by building-mounted lights or streetlights shall be illuminated using bollards, step lights, or other low-profile fixtures that are appropriate for walkways and plazas. Illumination between one and two foot-candles for such areas is required.

b. Building-mounted lights should complement the building background in style; using lights to draw attention to (wash) architectural elements is permitted; provided, that unshielded, high intensity light sources and sources that direct light upward without cut-offs are not permitted. (See subsection (B)(2) of this section.)

c. Antique-style lights are preferred over recessed can lights and globe fixtures. Contemporary light fixtures that draw on historic elements or provide a new interpretation of an historic style are encouraged.

d. Maximum initial luminance of outdoor sales areas, storage areas and service station canopies and similar areas shall not exceed 20 foot-candles, except as otherwise approved by the planning director.

e. Maximum initial luminance of parking lots shall not exceed four foot-candles, except as otherwise approved by the planning director.

2. Impacts of Lighting. The visual impacts of site and architectural lighting, such as overspray of lights onto adjacent residential properties and lights shining into the night sky, shall be avoided.

a. Light poles shall not exceed a height of 20 feet.

b. Only shielded lights are permitted. Shielding should be integral to the light fixture and direct light downward. Exception: Up-lighting of official flags may be allowed; provided, that the luminance level is minimized.

c. Lighting associated with service areas, parking lots and parking structures, as well as streetlights, shall be shielded or provide cut-offs to avoid glare, light pollution (night sky) and light spillover onto residential properties. Luminance at the property line, or no more than five feet over the property line, shall be zero.

d. The planning director may require the installation and use of timers or activity switches to prevent unnecessary sources of light by controlling the length of time that exterior lights are in use late at night.

e. Lights used to wash a building elevation (including any signs) shall not wash more than 75 percent of the facade. Interior lights (e.g., store displays, etc.) are exempt.

f. Up-lighting is prohibited. Where lighting is used to wash an exterior wall, the use of recessed eave lighting is preferred. The maximum illumination limits for wall washing are one foot-candle for dark-colored surfaces and one-half foot-candle for light-colored surfaces.

g. The manufacturer’s data or measurement shall be provided to demonstrate conformance with subsection (B)(1) of this section. Photometric plans are required with site plan review applications, unless waived by the planning director.


[IMAGE]


Figure 17.50.160-1: Examples of acceptable lights.

(Ord. 2007-08 § 1 (Exh. B § 3(J))


Chapter 17.52 SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS

Sections:

17.52.010    Accessory uses – General provisions.

17.52.020    Authorization of similar uses.

17.52.030    Access requirement.

17.52.050    Storage in front yard.

17.52.060    Clear-vision area requirement.

17.52.070    Repealed.

17.52.080    Maintenance of minimum requirements.

17.52.090    Dual use of required open space.

17.52.100    Landscaping.

17.52.110    Distance between buildings.

17.52.120    Utilities.

17.52.130    Repealed.

17.52.140    Repealed.

17.52.150    Lighting.

17.52.160    Required yards – Exceptions.

17.52.170    Trash receptacle enclosures.

17.52.180    Screening of mechanical equipment.

17.52.190    Building height limitations.

17.52.200    Building height limitations – General exception.

17.52.210    Planned unit development (PUD).

17.52.220    Tree protection and removal.

17.52.230    Public infrastructure improvement requirements.

17.52.240    Site plan review.

17.52.250    Standards for manufactured homes in residential zones.

17.52.260    Standards for attached single-family dwellings development.

17.52.270    Wireless communications facilities.

17.52.300    Traffic impact study (TIS) requirements.


17.52.010 Accessory uses – General provisions.

Accessory uses shall comply with all requirements for the principal use except where specifically modified by this title, and shall comply with the following limitations:

A. Repealed by Ord. 2010-04.

B. A greenhouse or hothouse may be maintained accessory to a dwelling, provided the activity does not exceed that which requires a license under ORS Chapter 571, Nurseries and Nurserymen.

C. A guest house may be maintained accessory to a dwelling, provided there are no cooking facilities in the guest house.

D. Repealed by Ord. 2010-04.

E. A home occupation shall not occupy more than one-quarter of the ground floor area of the dwelling. The residential character of the building shall be maintained and the activity shall not have the outward appearance of a business nor detract from the residential character of the neighborhood. There shall be no outside display or storage of merchandise, materials, signs or equipment on the premises. Noise, odor, smoke, gases, fallout, vibration, heat or glare resulting from the home occupation shall not be detectable beyond the limits of the property. (Ord. 2010-04 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 84-2 § 4.010)


17.52.020 Authorization of similar uses.

In response to an application in relation to a specific lot, the planning commission may rule by resolution that a use not specifically named in the allowed uses of a zoning district and not specified in any other zoning district shall be included among the allowed uses if the use is of the same general type and is similar to the allowed uses. Such ruling by resolution of the planning commission shall thereafter be presented to the city council for legislative enactment to amend this title to include such use. In addition, the ruling shall be entered in a registry available to the public that sets out the street address or other easily understood geographic reference to the lot, the date of the ruling, and a description of the ruling. (Ord. 2000-06-A § 1; Ord. 90-8 § 1; Ord. 84-2 § 4.020)


17.52.030 Access requirement.

Every lot shall abut a street, other than an alley, for at least 25 feet. (Ord. 84-2 § 4.030)


17.52.050 Storage in front yard.

Boats and trailers and house trailers shall not be stored in a required front yard. (Ord. 84-2 § 4.050)


17.52.060 Clear-vision area requirement.

A. Requirement to Provide Clear Vision. For public safety purposes, all properties shall have triangular clear-vision areas (aka clear-vision triangles) where streets (public or private) intersect with other streets, commercial alleys and commercial driveways. Clear-vision triangles shall also be provided for street intersections with commercial driveways as provided herein. Clear-vision areas at local intersections shall meet the requirements in this section, which are meant to be adequate to allow drivers and pedestrians who are stopped or approaching with caution to see intersecting traffic in time to avoid collisions. Clear-vision areas at intersections with Highway 101 must meet with Oregon Department of Transportation approval and comply with the requirements of this section.

B. Definition of a Clear-Vision Triangle. This section defines a clear-vision triangle differently for (1) controlled intersections, where at least one street has a stop sign or traffic control light; (2) for uncontrolled intersections; and (3) in commercial zones, for alleys and driveways. The definitions for clear-vision triangles at the intersections of two streets use “Point A,” which is the point of intersection of the lot lines (the property corner), or in the case of a curved lot line, the intersection of the tangents of the endpoints of the curve (Figure 17.52.060-1).


[IMAGE]


Figure 17.52.060-1: Point A for a curved lot line.

1. For intersections controlled by a stop sign or traffic light and for T intersections, two sides of the triangle are aligned with the property lines of the corner lot. The side of a triangle that abuts a controlled street or a street that does not continue on the other side of the intersection (ending in a T intersection) shall extend along the right-of-way of the controlled street 10 feet from point A. The side of the triangle abutting an uncontrolled street shall extend 50 feet from point A. The third side shall connect the endpoints of the other two sides. (Figure 17.52.060-2.)
[IMAGE]


Figure 17.52.060-2: Clear-vision triangle at controlled intersection.

2. For Uncontrolled Intersections. A corner lot that abuts two uncontrolled streets shall have a triangle for each abutting street, defined by the following sides: a side extending along the right-of-way of one street 10 feet from point A; a side extending along the right-of-way of the intersecting street 50 feet from point A; and a side connecting the endpoints of the other two sides. (Figure 17.52.060-3.)
[IMAGE]


Figure 17.52.060-3: Clear-vision triangles at uncontrolled intersection.

3. Alleys and Driveways in Commercial Zones. Property owners shall maintain a clear-vision triangle on each side of a commercial driveway. One side of the triangle shall be along the edge of the commercial driveway extending 10 feet from the point of intersection with the right-of-way line. A second side along the right-of-way line shall extend from the point of intersection with the edge of the commercial driveway 50 feet. The third side shall connect the endpoints of the other two sides. (Figure 17.52.060-4.)
[IMAGE]


Figure 17.52.060-4: Clear-vision triangles for commercial driveways.

4. Notwithstanding the definitions set forth above, the minimum clear-vision area (clear-vision triangle) may be modified by the city engineer, with the concurrence of the planning director, upon written finding that more or less sight distance is necessary (i.e., due to traffic speeds or roadway alignment).

C. Clear-Vision Requirements. Clear-vision triangles shall be free of obstructions (including but not limited to plantings, fencing, or other temporary or permanent obstruction) from two-and-one-half feet to eight feet above the grade of the street, except for obstructions specified in subsection (D) of this section.

D. Exceptions. The following obstructions to clear vision may be within the clear-vision areas required by this section, unless the obstruction is identified by the city engineer and planning director as creating an unacceptable hazard:

1. Trees existing in the location prior to May 28, 2014, if limbed to at least eight feet. Trees in the clear-vision area may not be replaced.

2. Topographical features (e.g., inclines, retaining walls) existing as of May 28, 2014, or, for newer development, as determined by the city engineer and planning director as necessary or unavoidable.

3. Principal buildings, accessory buildings, and structures existing as of April 24, 2014. Notwithstanding the above, a legally nonconforming principal building is not subject to removal based on the hazard exception.

4. Fences Existing as of May 28, 2014. New fences that are at least 75 percent open (e.g., wire or chain link) may be within clear-vision triangles.

5. Existing driveways and existing required parking spaces may be in the clear-vision area. New required parking spaces shall be outside the clear-vision triangle. New driveways should be outside the clear-vision areas. New garages to be accessed by driveways that cross over clear-vision areas must be set back at least 20 feet from the clear-vision area.

6. Utilities existing as of May 28, 2014.

7. Public traffic signs. (Ord. 2014-05 § 1; Ord. 84-2 § 4.060)


17.52.070 Measurement of clear-vision areas.

Repealed by Ord. 2014-05. (Ord. 84-2 § 4.070)


17.52.080 Maintenance of minimum requirements.

No lot area, yards, other open space, or off-street parking or loading area existing on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall be reduced below the minimum required for it by this title. (Ord. 84-2 § 4.080)


17.52.090 Dual use of required open space.

No lot area, yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading area which is required by this title for one use shall be utilized to satisfy requirements for lot area, yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading area for another use, except as provided in Chapter 17.56 LCMC. (Ord. 92-8 § 11; Ord. 84-2 § 4.090)


17.52.100 Landscaping.

A. Purpose. Landscaping is important to the community for its aesthetic value and environmental benefits, such as controlling erosion and functioning as part of the natural hydrologic cycle. By requiring landscaping for all new development and substantial improvements, the aim of this section is to maximize both benefits. Landscaping for each new development shall satisfy the following requirements.

B. Applicability. Landscaping requirements in this section apply to: 

1. Newly developed lots.

2. Previously developed lots whenever improved by 50 percent or more of the assessed value of the existing improvements. 

C. Landscape Plan. A landscape plan shall be submitted with any building permit for new construction, as applicable under this section. 

1. Single-Family Residences and Duplexes.

a. Preliminary Landscape Plan. The plan shall be drawn to scale and shall include the location of buildings, impervious surfaces, and pervious surfaces. Approved plans shall indicate the amount of minimum planted area required. 

b. Final Landscape Plan. Prior to a request for final inspection, a final landscape/site plan shall be submitted and shall indicate the following:

i. The location and number of proposed plantings. Materials in the plan shall not be installed until the plan has been approved.

ii. The degree and direction of finished slopes of all landscape areas. Degree of slope shall be measured and indicated by category as per subsection (F)(1)(a) of this section. 

2. Uses other than single-family homes and duplexes.

a. Landscape plan shall be submitted with the site plan and shall be drawn to scale and shall include the location of buildings, impervious surfaces, and pervious surfaces. Plans must indicate the location, species, and number of proposed plantings and how the landscaped area will be irrigated.

b. Landscaping shall be located in at least three separate and distinct areas of the lot, one of which must be located in the front and another in one of the side areas. In all developments, the areas between buildings on the lot must be landscaped.

c. Materials in the plan shall not be installed until the plan has been approved.

D. Impervious Surface Limits. The following limits on impervious surface apply to all lots:

1. Single-Family Dwellings and Duplexes. Maximum coverage of a lot in impervious surfaces shall be limited to a percentage of the lot, according to zone, as listed in the table below.

	R-1*	R-M	NCR	R-R	OPD I-M	OPD OF	NBMU	NBD

	55%	55%	55%	65%	75%	80%	90%	90%

*R-1 standards applicable in G-C, R-C, and TVC zones.

Exemptions and adjustments:

a. Flag lot access ways (i.e., the “flagpole”) shall not be included in the calculation for determining impervious surface limits.

b. Recorded, legal access easements shall not be included in the calculation for determining impervious surface limits.

c. Eco-roofs, installed or inspected and approved by a certified professional, shall not be included in the calculation for determining impervious surface limits.

d. For existing lots between 3,000 square feet and 4,000 square feet, maximum impervious surfaces shall be an additional five percent above the limit listed in the table above.

e. For existing lots less than 3,000 square feet, maximum impervious surfaces is an additional 15 percent above the limit listed in the table above or 100 percent, whichever is less.

2. All Development Other Than Single-Family Dwellings and Duplexes. Impervious surface shall be limited in accordance with Chapter 17.56 LCMC, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations, and subsection (E) of this section, and the applicable zoning designation. 

E. Planted Area – Minimum Requirements. For the purposes of this chapter, a planted area is any area designed to accommodate live vegetation. It includes the non-living ground cover that is distributed amongst and between the plants for erosion control, soil fertility, and beautification. 

1. Single-Family Dwellings and Duplexes. 

a. At a minimum, planted area shall be a percentage of single-family and duplex lots based on zone, as listed in the table below.

	R-1*	R-M	NCR	R-R	OPD I-M	OPD OF	NBMU	NBD

	20%	20%	20%	15%	10%	10%	10%	10%

*R-1 standards applicable in G-C, R-C, and TVC zones.



b. A minimum of 25 percent of the front yard shall consist of one or more planted areas, which shall count towards total required planted area for the lot.

2. All Development Other Than Single-Family Dwellings and Duplexes. Except as modified by other sections of the zoning ordinance, a minimum of 15 percent of the total lot area shall be landscaped with plants and groundcover, as described in this section. 

F. Groundcover Required. All exposed ground, such as soils, clay, sand, etc., shall be landscaped with groundcover, either living or non-living, as described in the following:

1. Living Groundcover. Living groundcover must be evenly distributed throughout areas required by subsection (F)(1)(a) of this section. 

a. Coverage of Living Groundcover. The slope of the planted area shall determine the required coverage of living groundcover. For the purposes of this section, slope is the ratio of vertical distance to horizontal distance on a surface. For example, a slope of one vertical foot (rise) over two horizontal feet equals a 1:2 ratio, as shown in the illustration below at right.
[IMAGE]


The minimum coverage of living groundcover shall be determined based on the maximum slope of an individual planted area in the following categories:

	Category 1:	For gradual slopes of 0 up to and including 1:6, living groundcover shall cover a minimum of 25% of the required planted area. 

	Category 2:	For slopes greater than 1:6 up to and including 1:3, groundcover shall cover a minimum of 50% of the required planted area.

	Category 3:	For slopes greater than 1:3 up to and including 1:2, groundcover shall cover a minimum of 75% of the required planted area.

	Category 4:	Steep slopes greater than 1:2 shall meet requirements set out in Chapter 12.08 LCMC, Grading and Erosion Control. 

b. Groundcover Size. Groundcover plants shall be sized and spaced so that they grow together to cover the minimum required area in subsection (E)(1)(a) of this section within three years of planting. Until new plants have grown to cover the required area, bare ground between plants shall be protected from erosion with non-living groundcover, as specified in subsection (F)(2) of this section. Wattle, bio-bags, or similar methods approved by the city engineer shall be used in conjunction with organic, non-living groundcover to prevent erosion on slopes greater than 1:6.

2. Non-Living Groundcover. Depth of mulch shall be the minimum necessary (i.e., a two- to three-inch-thick layer) to ensure effective erosion control and to avoid leaching of excessive nutrients. Mulch between plantings shall consist of any of the following materials:

a. Organic materials. Examples include wood mulch and wood nuggets that are a minimum diameter of one inch, straw, and well-aged compost and leaves. 

i. Mulch shall be weed-free.

ii. Mulching with manure that has not been composted or aged is prohibited.

b. Non-organic materials, such as loose (not compacted) small river gravel, river rock, and pumice.

G. Additional Required Vegetation. 

1. Single-Family Dwellings and Duplexes. For single-family dwellings and duplexes, one plant unit must be planted and maintained for every 500 square feet of required planted area. One plant unit equals 10 points in any combination according to the values listed below: 

	10 points:	one large tree (over 20 feet in height at maturity)

	5 points:	one small tree (20 feet in height or less when mature) 

	2 points:	one native species or drought-tolerant shrub 

	1 point:	one native species or drought-tolerant perennial

	Exception: If the percentage of living groundcover in a planted area is 100 percent, additional vegetation requirements may be reduced by 50 percent.

2. All Development Other Than Single-Family Dwellings and Duplexes. All areas to be landscaped and buffered shall be planted with a minimum of the following: 

a. One large tree or two small trees per 20 feet of lot perimeter; and

b. One deciduous or evergreen shrub per five feet of lot perimeter.

c. Plantings shall not be higher than five feet if they would block the view of any shoreline of the Pacific Ocean, Siletz Bay or Devils Lake.

H. Standards for Plant Materials. 

1. Size. 

a. Large trees shall be a minimum of one-inch caliper or six feet in height at time of planting.

b. Small trees shall be a minimum of one-gallon size or two years old at time of planting.

c. Shrubs shall be a minimum of one-gallon size when planted.

d. Perennials shall be a minimum of four-inch pot size. 

2. Species and Practices. 

a. Use of native and drought-tolerant species is advised generally, and required in subsection (G)(1) of this section for shrubs and perennials.

b. Invasive and noxious plants as defined in LCMC 8.12.010 or by the Oregon Department of Agriculture are prohibited.

c. For all development other than single-family dwellings and duplexes, plant materials shall achieve balance between low-lying and vertical shrubs and trees.

d. High fertilizer hydro-seeding is prohibited.

3. Condition. All selections must be healthy and disease-free. 

I. Additional Pervious Surface. For areas of a lot not covered with impervious surfaces or required planted areas, any of the following is permitted:

1. Pervious off-street parking surfaces.

2. Pervious hardscape features, i.e., patios, decks, sidewalks and pathways, etc.

3. Non-organic groundcover (e.g., rock) with or without vegetation.

4. Organic groundcover with vegetation as per subsection (F) of this section (i.e., additional planted areas).

J. Generally.

1. Time of Installation. All required landscaping shall be installed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or, in relation to development for which a certificate of occupancy is not required, prior to commencement of use. 

a. Agreement to Delay Installation. If all required landscaping has not been satisfactorily completed prior to application for issuance of a certificate of occupancy or prior to a proposed commencement of use, and if the director determines that a delay in completion of the landscaping is appropriate because there has not been a reasonable amount of time for the completion of the landscaping or for other reasons, then the director may require, as a condition of such issuance or use, a landscaping agreement signed by the owner, in a form satisfactory to the director. A landscaping agreement shall:

i. Identify all landscaping to be completed and establish a time period, not to exceed 120 days, within which the owner shall complete the landscaping;

ii. Provide that if the owner does not complete the identified landscaping within the established time period, then the city may complete the landscaping and recover the full cost and expense of completion from the owner;

iii. Require the owner to hold harmless, defend, and indemnify the city and its mayor and council members, officers, boards, commissioners, and employees from claims of any nature arising or resulting from the performance of any acts required to be done by the owner under the agreement.

b. Financial Security Required for Delayed Installation. An owner entering into a landscaping agreement under this subsection shall file with the city, as a condition to city acceptance of the agreement, financial security to assure the full and faithful performance of the agreement by the owner. The financial security shall be in an amount equal to 110 percent of the owner’s estimated cost to complete the landscaping, as approved by the director, which amount shall be subject to reduction from time to time in the sole discretion of the director as satisfactory installation of the landscaping is completed. The financial security required under this subsection shall be in a form approved by the director and may be one or more of the following:

i. A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state of Oregon;

ii. Cash; or

iii. An irrevocable standby letter of credit or similar financial security instrument.

2. Maintenance. The owner of a lot is responsible for continuous maintenance of the landscaping required by this chapter, including necessary irrigation, weeding, pruning and, if necessary, replacing, in a substantially similar manner as originally approved. The lot owner is responsible for keeping the required planted areas free from weeds and litter. Failure to maintain the landscaping in accordance with this chapter shall be considered a Class B violation. 

3. Landscaping shall be in conformance with the general visibility requirements set out in LCMC 17.52.260.

4. Any constructed earth berms shall be between three feet and four feet in height, and topped with ground cover and shrubbery.

5. Uses within a development that might provide objectionable views, such as garbage and trash collection stations, and laundry areas in multifamily developments, shall be landscaped with screen plantings, or landscaped masonry wall or fencing.

6. Drainage pipes and appurtenances located on an ocean front parcel shall be secured and screened with landscaping to the extent feasible, and the discharge shall be placed to limit erosion. (Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 2010-6 § 10)


17.52.110 Distance between buildings.

A minimum distance of 15 feet shall be maintained between buildings designed for dwelling purposes on the same lot. A minimum distance of 10 feet shall be maintained between a building designed for dwelling purposes and other buildings on the same lot. (Ord. 84-2 § 4.110)


17.52.120 Utilities.

A. In the single-family residential (R-1) zone, and the multiple-family residential (R-M) zone, when city services are not available or when only partial services are available, the minimum parcel size shall be five acres; except however, any existing lots of record less than five acres in area which do not front on a public sewer line but which will be connected to a public water line may be developed with a single-family dwelling utilizing an approved subsurface sewerage disposal system, provided a deferred improvement agreement is executed and recorded by the owner of record consenting to the establishment of a local improvement district to participate in future public sewer system extensions and connections.

B. In all zones, all electrical, telephone and cable television utility service installations or connections made as part of new construction of a building or structure shall be placed underground in accordance with city standards. (Ord. 95-15 § 11; Ord. 91-1 § 1; Ord. 84-2 § 4.120)


17.52.130 Projections from buildings.

Repealed by Ord. 2010-04. (Ord. 84-2 § 4.130)


17.52.140 Lot size requirements – General exceptions.

Repealed by Ord. 2011-03. (Ord. 84-2 § 4.140)


17.52.150 Lighting.

Artificial lighting shall not be designed to shine or create glares in any residential zone, adjacent dwelling unit or in a public right-of-way. (Ord. 84-2 § 4.150)


17.52.160 Required yards – Exceptions.

A. Architectural Features. Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, canopies, sunshades, gutters, chimneys, flues, and bay windows not more than four feet wide or high may project up to 18 inches into a required yard.

B. Accessory Buildings. A required side or rear yard may be reduced to three feet for an accessory building, provided the building is detached from other buildings by five feet or more and does not exceed a height of one story nor an area of 200 square feet.

C. Fences. Fences, which may be located within required yards up to the property line, may not exceed three and one-half feet from the grade of the street centerline in the front yard, and shall not exceed six feet in other yards nor conflict with requirements of a clear vision area as provided in LCMC 17.52.060 or the clear vision areas of adjacent private driveways.

D. Retaining Walls. Retaining walls may be constructed in required yards, subject to the following limitations:

1. One or more retaining walls, none of which individually exceeds four feet in height, may be used, provided each successive wall is set back or stepped from the next lowest wall at least one foot for each one foot of height for that wall;

2. Within side and rear building setbacks that are not adjacent to a street or right-of-way, the height of a retaining wall exposed toward the interior of the property may be allowed that is up to eight feet in height. Those exposed toward the exterior of the property shall be limited as in subsection (D)(1) of this section;

E. Handicapped Access Facilities. Handicapped access facilities may be constructed in required yards as additions to existing buildings if exclusive of railings they do not exceed the height of the building’s ground floor and do not conflict with the clear vision requirements of LCMC 17.52.060. For purposes of this section handicapped access facilities include ramps, sidewalks, curbing and entrances constructed for the purpose of making a building accessible to a physically handicapped person. Handicapped access facilities must be constructed in accordance with any applicable requirements of the building code in effect at the time of their construction. Handicapped access facilities constructed as additions to a nonconforming structure shall not be considered an alteration or extension of the nonconforming structure.

F. Bridges. Unenclosed and uncovered pedestrian or vehicular bridges for access to a dwelling may be constructed in a required yard. Such bridges may not have a slope up from the adjacent roadway exceeding the maximum allowed for driveways.

G. Porches, Decks, and Stairs. Unenclosed and uncovered porches, decks, and stairs may be constructed in a required yard, provided no part of the porch, deck, or stairs is more than 30 inches above the ground or otherwise requires a building permit.

H. Administrative Adjustment.

1. The planning and community development director is authorized to make a minor adjustment to the dimensional standards of the required yard for any zone, including the dimensional standards of this section, and including any county zoning standards applied in the city.

2. An administrative adjustment permits a minor encroachment into a required yard, not to exceed six inches or seven and one-half percent of the requirement, whichever is less, in addition to any other relief granted by the applicable code.

3. A property owner may not initiate a request for an administrative adjustment, and the planning and community development director may not grant an administrative adjustment, in advance of the initiation of construction of the building for which it is sought; instead, an administrative adjustment may be sought or approved only after the discovery of an unintentional situation such as a surveyor’s error after the start of construction.

4. An administrative adjustment is a discretionary decision that the planning and community development director may make as a director’s decision, subject to appeal under LCMC 17.76.040(A). The director shall not grant such relief unless the applicant demonstrates that: (a) the relief is minor in nature; (b) the relief will correct or avoid a noncompliance; (c) all reasonable efforts to rectify the situation have been exhausted and (d) the relief will not be materially detrimental to the purposes of the zone.

5. A property owner may initiate a request for an adjustment by filing an application with the planning department with the required application fee.

6. Denial of an administrative adjustment does not preclude an application for a variance under Chapter 17.68 LCMC.

7. The director may elect to refer a request for an adjustment to the planning commission for a public hearing. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1; Ord. 2010-04 § 4)


17.52.170 Trash receptacle enclosures.

In any R-M, PC, RC, GC and PI zone, all trash receptacles shall be located within a building or within an enclosure which screens the receptacle from the view of neighboring property or from a public right-of-way, except those trash receptacles accessory to a single-family dwelling. (Ord. 84-2 § 4.170)


17.52.180 Screening of mechanical equipment.

Any heating, air conditioning, or other special mechanical equipment installed on or near a building to be used to serve the building or a function performed therein, and any propane tanks, shall be screened from the ground level view from adjacent properties and from public streets. (Ord. 98-11 § 4; Ord. 84-2 § 4.180)


17.52.190 Building height limitations.

A. No structure used for human habitation that exceeds 45 feet in height shall be permitted in any zone unless consent is first approved by the voters of the city at a regular or special election. For the purpose of this section, “height” means the average vertical distance from the grade at the center of all walls of the building to the highest point of the roof, excluding those excepted in LCMC 17.52.200.

B. No structure that exceeds 35 feet in height shall be permitted in a residential zone within 500 feet of any shoreline without prior approval of the planning commission at a public hearing. 

C. No structure used for human occupancy shall be permitted to exceed the building height limitations of the zones in which they are located. To ensure that this standard is met the following rules apply:

1. Building permit applications must include elevations of all exterior walls of the proposed structure showing:



a. The line of the approved grade in the plane of the wall; and

b. The highest part of the structure. 

2. The grade may not rely on retaining walls, riprap, other artificial restraints, or berming to increase elevation at the point of height measurement.

3. For the purposes of this subsection, “approved grade” means:

a. The existing grade, meaning one of the following:

i. The ground level before any human disturbance as shown by survey or other reliable evidence; or 

ii. The ground level shown on the city’s 2009 LIDAR data (which is available from the planning and community development department); or

iii. If the proposed building site has existing structures or other disturbances to the land that existed lawfully prior to October 1, 2010, the ground level established when the structure or disturbance was created (which may be determined by any of the above means); or

iv. If there has been grading on the proposed building site, without a grading permit, the planning and community development director, in consultation with the city engineer, will determine the existing grade. 

b. The grade shown on a grading plan approved as a part of one of the following:

i. A final master plan for a planned unit development under LCMC 17.52.210; or

ii. A partition or subdivision under Chapter 16.08 LCMC; or

iii. A site plan under LCMC 17.52.240; or

iv. A conditional use permit under Chapter 17.60 LCMC; or

v. A grading plan under Chapter 12.08 LCMC; or

vi. A building permit for a structure not subject to any of approvals in subsections (C)(3)(b)(i) through (v) of this section.

4. If a lawfully established single-family or duplex dwelling that does not conform to the requirements of this section is destroyed by calamity to an extent exceeding 50 percent of the appraised value as determined by the records of the county assessor for the year preceding destruction it may be rebuilt within the same footprint and to the same height, subject to compliance with the flood damage prevention requirements of Chapter 15.16 LCMC. To the extent any such rebuilt residence is expanded, including a vertical expansion, the area of expansion must conform to this section. (Ord. 2010-04 § 5; Ord. 84-2 § 4.190)


17.52.200 Building height limitations – General exception.

Projections such as chimneys, spires, domes, elevator shaft housing, towers, aerials, flagpoles, and other similar objects not used for human occupancy are not subject to the building height restrictions of this title. (Ord. 2010-04 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 4.200)


17.52.210 Planned unit development (PUD).

A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to allow master planned developments in any residential or commercial zone, or any combination of them, and in doing so, to allow a more flexible approach to land development than that which is normally accomplished through the subdivision and zoning ordinances of the city. The planned unit development approach is intended to provide more desirable environments by encouraging creative site planning and building designs; to make possible greater diversification between buildings and open spaces; and to conserve land and minimize development costs. In addition to the uses allowed in residential zones, the planned unit development approach may allow certain commercial uses subject to the specific limitations of this section.

B. Planning Commission Authority. The planning commission shall have the authority to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove planned unit developments in any residential or commercial zone, or any combination of them, subject to the provisions of this section.

C. Pre-Application Conference. Prior to filing an application for a planned unit development, the applicant shall review the applicant’s preliminary master plan with the city manager or the city manager’s designated representative at a pre-application conference. The purpose of the pre-application conference is to inform the city of the nature of a likely PUD application at an early date and to provide the potential applicant with information on what will be needed to make an application complete.

D. Allowable Density. The allowable residential density in a PUD that meets only the minimum PUD standards is the “maximum base residential density” and shall be determined in the following manner:

1. Determine the gross square footage of the project site.

2. Subtract from the gross square footage the square footage of any areas proposed for nonresidential development, including commercial uses, places of worship, schools, and public buildings and their associated parking areas and grounds (including required yards and landscaping areas). The result is the “preliminary gross residential area.”

3. Subtract from the preliminary gross residential area the square footage of any areas of significant natural resources as identified in the comprehensive plan. The result is the “final gross residential area.”

4. Multiply the final gross residential area by 0.83. The result is the “final net residential area.”

5. Divide the final net residential area by the minimum lot size of the underlying zone. The result is the “maximum base residential density” expressed in dwelling units. Any number not a whole number shall be rounded down to a whole number.

E. Residential Density Bonuses.

1. Density in excess of the maximum base residential density for the underlying zone may be considered for projects that comply with the density bonus standards. The amount of density bonus shall be determined by the type of density bonus standards incorporated in the development proposal.

2. Except with respect to the “affordable housing bonus,” in no case shall the density bonus or bonuses cause the overall project density to exceed the maximum allowed residential density, which in the R-1-5 zone is 8.71 units per gross project acre, in the R-1-7.5 zone is 5.81 units per acre, in the R-1-10 zone is 4.36 units per acre, and in the R-M zone is the “low density” density as calculated in LCMC 17.20.050(A).

3. If an applicant requests one or more density bonuses the planning commission shall determine, based on evidence supplied by the applicant, any other person, or staff, whether the applicant has complied with the bonus density standards. If the planning commission determines that the applicant has complied with one or more bonus density standards it shall assign the applicable density bonus points and multiply the maximum base residential density by the applicable density bonus points. The result is the total number of additional residential units allowed for the project above the maximum base residential density.

4. Density Bonus Standards. If an applicant desires to be allowed to develop a number of residential units above the maximum base residential density the applicant shall comply with one or more of the following bonus density standards. The density bonus points for each density bonus standard are in parentheses at the end of each standard.

a. Floodplain.

i. Requirement. For projects where part(s) of the site is located within the 100-year floodplain as defined and mapped by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the portions in the floodplain must be developed according to the National Flood Insurance Program requirements.

ii. Density Bonus Standard. For projects where part(s) of the site is located within the 100-year floodplain as defined and mapped by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, develop only on portions of the site that are not in the 100-year floodplain or on portions that have been previously developed. (0.01 point.)

b. Steep Slopes.

i. Requirement. On portions of the project site with pre-project slopes greater than 15 percent that are not previously developed, do not disturb slopes greater than 40 percent and do not disturb portions of the project site within 50 feet of the top of such slopes, and 75 feet from the toe of such slopes.

ii. Density Bonus Standard. On portions of the project site with pre-project slopes greater than 15 percent that are not previously developed sites, limit development to no more than 40 percent of slopes between 25 percent and 40 percent, and to no more than 60 percent of slopes between 15 percent and 25 percent, and locate development such that the percentage of the development footprint that is on pre-project slopes less than 15 percent is greater than the project’s total percentage of buildable land that has pre-project slopes less than 15 percent. (0.01 point.)

c. Protected Species Habitat.

i. Requirement. If designated critical habitat for species that are listed or are candidates for listing under state or federal endangered species acts is found on or adjacent to the project site, do not disturb that critical habitat or portions of the site within an appropriate buffer around the critical habitat.

ii. Density Bonus Standard. If habitat for species that are listed or are candidates for listing under state or federal endangered species acts is found on the project site, do not disturb that habitat or portions of the site within an appropriate buffer around the habitat, with habitat connections or corridors (including connections to habitat on adjacent parcels) in mind. The geographic extent of the habitat and the appropriate buffer shall be identified by a qualified biologist (as determined by the planning and community development director) or the appropriate federal or state agency. Protect the habitat and its identified buffers from development in perpetuity by donating or selling the land or a conservation easement on the land to an accredited land trust or relevant public agency. (0.02 points.)

d. Public Transit.

i. Requirement. Design streets so that pullouts and public transit shelters may be added in the future without the need to acquire additional rights-of-way or relocate any sidewalks or utility lines.

ii. Density Bonus Standard. Provide covered and at least partially enclosed public transit shelters, adequate to buffer wind and rain, at appropriate locations within the project boundaries. If public transit does not serve the area of the project, provide pullouts at appropriate locations within the project boundaries so that public transit shelters may be added in the future. (0.01 point.)

e. Accessible Design.

i. Requirement. Design and build all buildings to comply with the minimum requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act.

ii. Density Bonus Standard. For each residential unit type developed, design 20 percent (and not less than one) of each type to comply with the accessible design provisions of the Fair Housing Amendments Act (FHAA) and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act (Rehabilitation Act), as applicable. Separate residential unit types include: single-family, duplex, triplex, multi-unit row or townhouses, and mixed use buildings that include residential units. All paths of travel between residential units and other buildings within the project shall comply with the accessible design provisions of the FHAA and Rehabilitation Act, as applicable; and facilities and rights-of-way shall comply with the accessible design provisions of the FHAA, the Rehabilitation Act, or the Americans with Disabilities Act, as applicable. (0.01 point.)

f. Energy Efficiency.

i. Requirement. None.

ii. Density Bonus Standard. (0.02 point).

(A) For new residential structures of three stories or fewer, build and equip the structures to qualify as an Energy Star Home by either a performance path (through a HERS Index rating) or a prescriptive path (Building Option Package or BOP); and

(B) For nonresidential structures and residential structures of more than three stories, demonstrate a minimum 10 percent improvement in the proposed building performance rating compared to the baseline building performance rating per ASHRAE/IESNA Standard 90.1-2007 (without addenda) by a whole building project simulation using the Building Performance Rating Method in Appendix G of the Standard. Appendix G requires that this energy analysis include all of the energy costs within and associated with the building project. The proposed design must comply with the mandatory provisions (Sections 5.4, 6.4, 7.4, 8.4, 9.4 and 10.4) in Standard 90.1-2007 (without addenda), must include all the energy costs within and associated with the building project, and must be compared against a baseline building that complies with Appendix G to Standard 90.1-2007 (without addenda).

The default process energy cost is 25 percent of the total energy cost for the baseline building. For buildings where the process energy cost is less than 25 percent of the baseline building energy cost, the applicant must provide supporting documentation substantiating that process energy inputs are appropriate. For the purposes of this analysis, process energy is considered to include, but is not limited to, office and general miscellaneous equipment, computers, elevators and escalators, kitchen cooking and refrigeration, laundry washing and drying, lighting exempt from the lighting power allowance (e.g., lighting integral to medical equipment) and other (e.g., waterfall pumps). Regulated (nonprocess) energy includes lighting (such as for the interior, parking garage, surface parking, facade, or building grounds, except as noted above), HVAC (such as for space heating, space cooling, fans, pumps, toilet exhaust, parking garage ventilation, kitchen hood exhaust, etc.) and service water heating for domestic or space heating purposes.

g. Outdoor Water Conservation.

i. Requirement. For irrigation, design and install all irrigation systems in the project so that they do not spray onto or otherwise directly place irrigation water onto impervious surfaces such as roads, driveways, parking lots, and sidewalks.

ii. Density Bonus Standard. For irrigation, design and install all irrigation systems in the project that use only captured rainwater, recycled wastewater, recycled graywater, or install landscaping that does not require permanent irrigation systems. Temporary irrigation systems used for plant establishment are allowed only if removed within one year of installation. (0.01 point.)

h. Indoor Water Conservation.

i. Requirement. None.

ii. Density Bonus Standard. Design and construct at least 90 percent of all buildings in the project such that they meet one of the following requirements according to the appropriate category (0.01 point):

(A) For nonresidential buildings and residential buildings over three stories, employ strategies that in aggregate use 30 percent less water than the water use baseline calculated for the building (not including irrigation) after meeting the Energy Policy Act of 1992 fixture performance requirements. Calculations are based on estimated occupant usage and shall include only the following fixtures (as applicable to the building): water closets, urinals, lavatory faucets, showers, and kitchen faucets.

(B) For residential buildings three stories or fewer, install fixtures that comply with all of the following requirements:

(1) The average flow rate for all lavatory faucets must be no more than 2.0 gpm.

(2) The average flow rate for all shower heads must be no more than 2.0 gpm.

(3) The average flow rate for all toilets, including dual-flush toilets, must be no more than 1.3 gpf.

i. Tree Preservation.

i. Requirement. Comply with the requirements of LCMC 17.52.220.

ii. Density Bonus Standard. For each two percent of canopy cover provided by trees that are preserved and incorporated into a development plan, a 0.01 point density bonus may be granted. The bonus is not applicable to trees preserved in areas that would otherwise be precluded from development, including floodplains, slopes greater than 25 percent, drainage ways, or wetlands. No more than a 0.10 point density bonus may be granted for any one development.

F. Affordable Housing Bonus. An additional density bonus of 10 percent above the maximum base residential density shall be available for projects incorporating an affordable housing element. For the purposes of this section an affordable housing element must include the following components:

1. At least five percent of the total number of dwelling units in the project must be affordable units.

2. The affordable units must be incorporated into the overall project and not be clustered into a separate area of the project. This provision is not intended to prohibit “cottage clusters” of affordable units; provided, that such clusters are themselves incorporated into the overall project and not clustered into a separate area of the project.

To be considered “affordable” a unit must meet affordability standards as adopted by the city. Alternatively the developer may transfer title to individual lots dedicated to affordable housing to the Lincoln County Land Trust or other organization approved by the planning and community development director for development by that entity as affordable housing.

G. Large-Scale, Mixed Use PUDs. This subsection sets forth special provisions for large-scale, mixed use PUDs that provide additional amenities for residents, visitors, and the larger Lincoln City community while ensuring that impacts can be internalized and mitigated through master planning and coordinated on-site management.

1. Applicability. Subsection (H) of this section may be applied only to an existing or proposed PUD that is 100 acres or larger, has direct access to an arterial street, and designates at least 35 percent of the gross PUD site area as open space.

2. Limited Recreational Commercial Uses Permitted.

a. Uses Allowed. In addition to residential uses, the following recreational commercial uses may be permitted in large-scale, mixed use PUDs located in residential or commercial zones, subject to the limitations in subsection (G)(2)(b) of this section:

i. Motels, hotels, and resorts;

ii. Cabins and yurts used for overnight accommodations;

iii. Eating or drinking establishments without drive-up service facilities;

iv. Retail sales, exclusive of drive-up service facilities;

v. Day spas;

vi. Child day care facilities;

vii. Religious institutions and houses of worship;

viii. Convention centers and meeting facilities;

ix. Time-share units;

x. Bed and breakfast accommodations;

xi. Public use or public utility;

xii. Utility substation;

xiii. Outdoor commercial amusement establishments;

xiv. Essential emergency communications and warning facilities;

xv. Emergency shelters;

xvi. Mixed use incorporating one or more of the uses listed here.

b. Limitations. In addition to such conditions and restrictions as the planning commission may deem appropriate, the following limitations apply to commercial uses in large-scale, mixed use PUDs located in residential or commercial zones:

i. The combined area of commercial uses, including associated parking areas, may not exceed 15 percent of the gross site area;

ii. Commercial uses must be located a minimum of 100 feet from existing off-site residential buildings;

iii. No commercial or mixed use buildings may exceed 45 feet in height (unless approved by a vote of the people pursuant to the provisions of LCMC 17.52.190); and

iv. Recreational commercial uses are subject to the “pearl” Lincoln City commercial design standards.

3. Applications for large-scale, mixed use PUDs shall meet the requirements of OAR 660-012-0060, and be subject to the following:

a. A transportation impact analysis (TIA) shall be required at the time of application to determine if the proposed change would significantly affect an existing or planned transportation facility. The TIA shall demonstrate that the development does not significantly impact the transportation system as defined by OAR 660-012-0060(1); or the development shall be made consistent with the transportation system as allowed in OAR 660-012-0060(2). The TIA, findings of significant effect/no significant effect, and proposed mitigation measures shall be sent to the Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development and the Oregon Department of Transportation for acknowledgment (concurrence).

b. To be consistent with OAR 660-012-0060, the analysis as indicated in subsection (G)(3)(a) of this section shall include a review process that includes adequate public notice and a public hearing, with the right to appeal.

c. Where access to US-101 is proposed as part of a large-scale, mixed use PUD, a valid ODOT highway approach road permit must be provided to Lincoln City before development permits may be issued.

H. Preliminary Master Plan Application. Following a pre-application conference, an applicant may submit a preliminary master plan to the site plan committee established under LCMC 17.52.240 for review. The preliminary master plan, which must include a drawing showing the layout of the proposed planned unit development, must contain the following information:

1. Proposed name of the planned unit development;

2. Date, north point and scale of drawing;

3. Appropriate identification clearly stating that the drawing is a preliminary planned unit development master plan;

4. Location of the planned unit development by section, township and range; a legal description sufficient to define the location and boundaries of the proposed planned unit development tract; and the tract designation or other description according to the real estate records of the county assessor;

5. A vicinity sketch map at a scale of one inch equals 400 feet showing adjacent property boundaries and land uses;

6. The following:

a. Location, widths and names of all existing streets or other public ways within or abutting the planned unit development;

b. Contour lines having the following minimum intervals:

i. Two-foot contour intervals for ground slopes less than 10 percent; and

ii. Five-foot contour intervals for ground slopes 10 percent or greater. Contours shall be based on contour maps provided by the city or other data approved by the city engineer;

c. Location of at least one temporary benchmark within the planned unit development boundaries or the source of the contour line data shown. (Source and accuracy subject to city engineer’s approval);

d. Location and direction of all water courses and natural features such as rock outcroppings, marshes and wooded areas; and the approximate locations of trees or stands of trees having a trunk cross-sectional diameter of eight inches (approximately 25 inches in circumference) or more, measured at a point 54 inches above the base of the trunk on the uphill side. The plan must identify those water courses, natural features and areas of trees meeting the described criteria which are to remain and those which may be altered or removed;

e. Proposed streets, including location, widths and approximate radii or curves;

f. Location of existing and proposed easements on the site or abutting property, showing the width and purpose of each easement;

g. The types of housing proposed within the PUD, the approximate location or locations proposed for each type of housing, and the approximate housing density proposed at each location;

h. Sites, if any, allocated for:

i. Churches;

ii. Parks, schools, playgrounds;

iii. Public buildings;

iv. Open space;

v. Commercial uses, specifying the type of each.

i. Area coverage of existing and proposed structures, lots, streets or other development.

I. Supplemental Preliminary Master Plan Information. The applicant also shall submit the following information to supplement the preliminary master plan. This information can be submitted in separate statements accompanying the preliminary master plan:

1. Proposed restrictions to be filed in the county deed records, in outline form, such as deed restrictions, conditions, covenants and restrictions, and homeowners’ association agreements. The outline restrictions shall identify the time at which the restrictions will be filed in the county deed records; generally who will have authority to enforce the restrictions; specifically which restrictions, if any, are proposed to be enforceable by the city; the time at which the restrictions will become enforceable; and which restrictions, if any, will not be subject to amendment without the consent of the city;

2. Approximate locations and anticipated grades of all streets. Typical cross sections of the proposed streets showing widths of roadways, curbs, location and widths of sidewalks and the location and size of utility mains;

3. Approximate plan of proposed sanitary sewers, storm drains, storm water detention and drainage pretreatment facilities and the water distribution system;

4. A general description of property intended to be dedicated to the city or public, other than street rights-of-way, including proposed dedication restrictions;

5. A description of any residential density bonus the applicant is requesting, including evidence demonstrating compliance with applicable density bonus standards;

6. Proposed number of residential units;

7. An approximate tabulation of all dwelling units by type;

8. A narrative description of the planned unit development and the manner in which it meets the purpose set out in subsection (A) of this section;

9. A statement describing the present and proposed ownership;

10. A preliminary landscape plan, covering both areas to retain undisturbed their natural vegetation and areas to be relandscaped;

11. A circulation plan and traffic impact analysis identifying likely circulation patterns for and traffic impacts from traffic generated by the development including patterns and impacts within the development, in the area surrounding the development, and in other affected areas of the city;

12. A statement whether the applicant proposes to submit the final master plan for review as a single master plan or in phases; a statement of the date or dates by which the applicant proposes to submit the final master plan or final master plan phases for review; and a statement of the date or dates by which the applicant anticipates that the development and related improvements or each phase thereof will be substantially completed.

13. A tree maintenance and protection plan, which shall contain the following information:

a. An accurate topographical survey, subdivision map or plat map, that bears the signature of a qualified, registered surveyor or engineer, and which shows:

i. The shape and dimensions of the property, and the location of any existing and proposed structures or improvements;

ii. The location of the individual trees, with a diameter of eight inches or more, on the site, and indicating species, approximate height, d.b.h., canopy spread and common name;

iii. The location of unique trees or stands of trees as set out in the arborist report described below; and

iv. The location of existing and proposed easements, as well as setbacks required by existing zoning requirements.

b. In lieu of the map or survey, an applicant proposing to remove trees may provide aerial photographs with overlays, GIS documentation, or maps approved by the planning director, and clearly indicating the information required by this subsection.

c. Arborist Report. The report shall identify any unique or unusual trees or stands of trees and describe the health and condition of all trees subject to removal or transplanting, and shall include information on species, common name, d.b.h., and approximate height and age.

d. Tree Protection. Unless specifically exempted by the planning director, a statement describing how trees intended to remain will be protected during tree removal and how remaining trees will be maintained.

e. Tree Identification. Unless specifically exempted by the planning director, a statement that any trees proposed for removal will be identified by a method obvious to a site inspector, such as tagging, painting, or flagging, in addition to clear identification on construction documents.

f. Replacement Trees. A description of the proposed tree replacement program with a detailed explanation including the number, size, species, and cost. In lieu of replacing trees, the applicant may propose to pay into the city tree fund an amount equivalent to the value of the replacement trees after installation, as provided in this subsection.

g. Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (CC&Rs). Where the applicant is proposing to remove trees on common areas, the applicant shall provide a copy of the applicable CC&Rs, including any landscaping provisions.

h. Waiver of Documentation. The planning director may waive an application document where the required information has already been made available to the city, or where the director determines the information is not necessary to review the application.

J. Determination That Preliminary Master Plan Is Complete. Following submission or resubmission of a preliminary master plan, the site plan committee established by LCMC 17.52.240 shall determine whether the plan is complete pursuant to the submittal requirements of subsections (H) and (I) of this section. The determination of the committee shall be in writing and, if the application is determined to be incomplete, shall be provided to the applicant with a description of the additional material required to make the application complete.

K. Site Plan Committee Review of Complete Preliminary Master Plan. Following submission of a complete preliminary master plan, the site plan committee shall review the preliminary master plan, shall seek comments on the plan from potentially affected governmental units and agencies, and shall report to the planning commission the comments of the committee members and of those governmental units and agencies that submit comments.

L. Planning Commission Consideration of Preliminary Master Plan. Following receipt of comments on the preliminary master plan from the site plan committee, the planning commission shall review the plan and comments in public hearings and shall give approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval to the preliminary master plan. The planning commission shall state its decision and its reasons in writing. The applicant may appeal the decision to the city council in accordance with the provisions of LCMC 17.76.040. The planning commission shall issue its written decision in a timely manner so that the city’s final decision, inclusive of all appeals, can be made within 120 days after submission of a complete preliminary master plan. The planning commission’s consideration of the preliminary master plan shall be subject to the following:

1. The commission shall approve, or approve with conditions, the plan if it finds that the plan, either as submitted or with conditions, meets all of the following criteria. The commission shall disapprove the plan if it finds that the plan, either as submitted or with conditions, does not meet any one or more of the following criteria.

a. The proposed planned unit development will be substantially compatible with existing development in the surrounding area; and undeveloped land in the surrounding area can be developed in a manner substantially compatible with the proposed planned unit development.

b. The number of years proposed for completion of the development or each phase of the development is reasonable, taking into consideration the possibility of changing land use patterns in or requirements of the city over time. In order to ensure that the development will be compatible with land use patterns in and requirements of the city at the time of approval of a final master plan, the planning commission shall establish an expiration date for the preliminary master plan approval, not sooner than two years after approval of the preliminary master plan; may impose conditions requiring that a final master plan or phases thereof be submitted for commission review within a specified period or periods of time, not sooner than one year after approval of the preliminary master plan; or may impose conditions requiring commission reevaluation of as yet unbuilt portions of the development, for conformity with then-existing city zoning ordinance requirements in relation to then-existing conditions, not sooner than five years after approval of the preliminary master plan, and at such periodic intervals of not less than five years thereafter as the commission deems appropriate to ensure conformity.

c. Construction of the development can be accomplished in a manner that does not create unreasonable negative impacts on the area surrounding the development or in the city. In order to assure the avoidance or mitigation of negative construction impacts on the area surrounding the development or in the city, the planning commission may impose conditions including but not limited to:

i. Requirements that removal of existing landscaping during construction be limited to areas of the planned unit development to be constructed shortly following removal and to portions of those areas on which construction will occur;

ii. Prohibitions of open burning on the site during construction;

iii. Prohibitions or limitations on construction track-out;

iv. Restrictions on construction noise; and

v. Restrictions on construction traffic.

d. The development will not create unreasonable negative impacts on the area surrounding the development or in the city. In order to assure the avoidance or mitigation of negative impacts, the planning commission may require the filing of restrictions in the county deed records including but not limited to restrictions:

i. Prohibiting the removal of specified landscaping; and

ii. Prohibiting open burning during construction.

e. Street, water, sewer, drainage and drainage pretreatment, storm water detention, and other similar facilities in the area surrounding the development and in the city are or will be adequate to provide for the health, safety and welfare for the development’s population densities and the type of development proposed, taking into consideration existing and projected future demands on those facilities.

f. Street, water, sewer, drainage and drainage pretreatment, storm water detention and other similar facilities proposed to be constructed as part of the development are adequate to provide for the health, safety and welfare for the population densities and the type of development proposed.

g. The proposed number of residential units does not exceed the maximum permitted number of residential units; and at least 15 percent of the gross area is dedicated to landscaping. For purposes of computing area dedicated to landscaping, dedicated open space and protected resource areas may be treated as area dedicated to landscaping, but parking areas may not.

2. The planning commission, in approving a preliminary master plan, may attach conditions it finds are necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this title.

M. Extension of Approved Preliminary Master Plan. Prior to expiration of an approved preliminary master plan, the planning commission may, on receipt of an application applying to the as yet unbuilt portions of the development, extend the expiration date; provided, that the extension will be consistent with then-existing city zoning ordinance requirements, in relation to then-existing conditions. An application for an extension shall be subject to all of the procedures set out in subsections (C) through (H) of this section, including but not limited to the requirement of a hearing before the planning commission, except that the application materials required to be submitted shall be only such materials supplementing the original application as are needed to demonstrate that an extension will meet the criteria for an extension established by this subsection.

N. Modification of Approved Preliminary Master Plan. The planning commission may, on receipt of an application applying to the as yet unbuilt portions of the development, modify an approved preliminary master plan; provided, that the modifications will be consistent with the then-existing city zoning ordinance requirements, in relation to then-existing conditions. An application for modifications shall be subject to all of the procedures set out in subsections (C) through (L) of this section, including but not limited to the requirement of a hearing before the planning commission, except that the application materials required to be submitted shall be only such materials supplementing the original application as are needed to identify the proposed modifications and to demonstrate that the modifications will meet the criteria for modifications established by this subsection.

O. Procedure Following Expiration of Preliminary Master Plan. If an approved preliminary master plan expires, whether as to the entire area proposed for development or as to as yet unbuilt portions of the development, then a complete new application must be submitted prior to reconsideration. An application for reconsideration shall be treated as an original application and shall be subject to all of the procedures set out in subsections (C) through (H) of this section, including but not limited to the requirement of a hearing before the planning commission.

P. Submission of Tentative Subdivision Plan. If an approved preliminary planned unit development master plan provides for the subdivision of land within the planned unit development, then within such period or periods of time as required by the preliminary planned unit development master plan approval, an applicant shall file a tentative subdivision plan for the planned unit development or for phases of the development, if phasing is permitted. The submittal requirements, procedures and approval requirements for the tentative subdivision plan shall be as set out in LCMC Title 16.

Q. Planning Commission Consideration of Final Master Plan.

1. Following preliminary master plan approval, and prior to issuance of a development permit and commencement of development, a final master plan must be submitted to and approved by the planning commission. The final master plan may be submitted in development phases; provided, that:

a. Each phase can exist as a separate entity capable of independently meeting all requirements and standards of this section and of the underlying zones in which the PUD is located; or

b. Prior to the development of any phase that will not exist as such a separate entity capable of independently meeting the requirements and standards, restrictions enforceable by the city and in a form approved by the city have been filed in the county deed records, such as conditions, covenants and restrictions. The restrictions shall be applicable to other areas of the planned unit development not yet proposed for development, and shall be sufficient to assure that:

i. The area within the phase proposed for development, when combined with the area not yet proposed for development, as subject to the deed restrictions, can exist as a combined entity capable of independently meeting the requirements and standards;

ii. The phase has met any applicable reevaluation requirement imposed during the preliminary master plan approval process; and

iii. The separate development of phases will not be detrimental to the total development nor to the adjacent properties in the event the remainder of the development is not completed.

2. The final master plan must be in sufficient detail to allow the planning commission to determine whether the final master plan is consistent with the preliminary master plan and whether the final master plan meets all conditions applicable to the preliminary master plan. In addition, the final master plan shall include:

a. Detailed landscaping plans showing the type and size of all plant material and its location, the irrigation system, decorative materials, recreation equipment and special effects; and the schedule for removal and replanting of vegetation;

b. Detailed water, sewer, drainage and drainage pretreatment, storm water detention and street system plans, including:

i. Central line profiles showing finished grades of all streets;

ii. Cross sections of proposed streets showing widths of roadways, curbs, locations and widths of sidewalks and locations and sizes of utility mains;

iii. Profiles of sanitary sewer, street drainage, drainage pretreatment, storm water detention and water distribution systems, showing pipe size and location of valves and fire hydrants, all to conform to city standards;

iv. The estimated cost of street, sewer, drainage and drainage pretreatment, storm water detention, water, and other public infrastructure improvements within the planned unit development.

3. The planning commission shall approve, or approve with conditions, the final master plan if the planning commission determines that the plan meets all of the following criteria. The commission shall disapprove the final master plan if it finds that the plan, either as submitted or with conditions, does not meet one or more of the following criteria:

a. The plan is consistent with the preliminary master plan and all conditions applicable to it;

b. All utility systems and landscaping conform to city standards or are approved by the city engineer; and

c. If the final master plan is for a phase of the total planned unit development, the criteria for phasing stated in subsection (Q)(1) of this section will be met.

R. Requirements Following Final Master Plan Approval.

1. A certified print of the approved final planned unit development master plan shall be provided by the applicant without charge to the office of the city recorder.

2. Except as provided in subsection (R)(3) of this section, proposals to make changes in the final master plan after it has been approved shall be considered the same as a new PUD application and shall be permitted only in accordance with all of the procedures set out in this section, including but not limited to the requirement of a hearing before the planning commission, except that the application materials required to be submitted shall be only such materials supplementing the original application as are needed to identify the proposed changes and to demonstrate that the changed planned unit development will meet the criteria established by this section.

3. Proposals to make minor changes in the final master plan after it has been approved may be approved by the city manager or the city manager’s designated representative. Minor changes consist only of changes that will not have public visibility and that:

a. Do not increase densities;

b. Do not change boundaries;

c. Do not change any use, specific or general, described in the final master plan; and

d. Do not change the location or amount of land devoted to specific land uses.

4. A final PUD plat shall be filed with and approved by the city in accordance with the final platting requirements of LCMC Title 16 (Subdivisions) and recorded with Lincoln County, within one year of the approval of a final master plan. One extension of time may be granted, for good cause, by the planning commission if such extension is authorized by the commission prior to the expiration of the one-year period, and provided such extension not exceed one additional year. No additional extensions may be granted. If a final PUD plat is not filed, approved and recorded as required by this section, then the planned unit development approval shall become void as of the date the filing requirement no longer can be met.

5. Prior to commencement of development, the developer shall provide to the city an improvement agreement and financial security instrument as described in LCMC 17.52.240(L) and shall obtain a development permit. (Ord. 2012-06 § 10; Ord. 2008-14 § 2; Ord. 96-7 § 1; Ord. 91-13 § 1; Ord. 84-2 § 4.210)


17.52.220 Tree protection and removal.

A. Scope. This section applies to all trees within the city wherever located.

B. Purpose. This purpose statement provides a general philosophy to guide the specific enforcement and implementation of provisions and criteria in this section.

1. Value of Trees. The city benefits from trees. Trees of varied types add to the aesthetic beauty of the community and provide important environmental benefits including: help clean the air, help control erosion, maintain water quality and provide noise barriers.

2. Intent. The intent of this section is to protect trees where appropriate, including taking reasonable measures in development to avoid tree removal, and to prohibit damage, mutilation, and destruction of valuable trees. Protection of trees is preferred over replacement. This section aims to:

a. Establish regulations to protect trees;

b. Encourage the preservation of trees in the city; 

c. Require the preservation of trees on property subject to development approval; 

d. Set standards for removal of trees; 

e. Control problems of soil erosion, destruction of scenic values and wildlife habitats;

f. Improve air quality;

g. Protect water quality; and

h. Protect land from erosion.

3. Need for Exceptions. The city recognizes that, at the time of development, removing certain trees may be necessary to accommodate structures, streets, utilities, and other needed or required improvements within the development. The burden of proof is on the applicant to show removal is necessary, and that other alternatives are not feasible. Cost shall not be the sole factor in determining whether an alternative is feasible.

C. Definitions. The following definitions apply to regulations governing the preservation and removal of trees contained in this section exclusively:

“Arborist, certified” means a licensed tree care consultant, who is certified as an arborist by the International Society of Arboriculture, or other arborist approved by the city.

“Canopy cover” means the area above ground that is covered by the trunk and branches of the tree.

 “Commercial forestry” means the removal of 10 or more trees per acre per calendar year for sale. Tree removal undertaken by means of an approved tree removal plan under subsection (F) of this section is not considered commercial forestry under this definition.

“Cut” means to fell or remove a tree or to do anything that has the natural result of causing the death or substantial destruction of a tree, including girdling and topping.

“Development” means grading, excavation, fill, or construction on a site requiring site plan review, conditional use approval, subdivision approval, or planned unit development approval.

“Diameter” means diameter of tree measured at four and one-half feet above grade on the uphill side. In the case of multi-stemmed or trunked trees, the diameter shall be the sum of diameters of all individual stems or trunks, measured at a point no more than six inches above the surrounding grade or measured six inches from the point where the stems digress from the trunk, whichever produces the larger measurement. If a tree has been removed and only a stump shorter than four and one-half feet remains, diameter shall be measured as the diameter of the top of the stump.

“Girdling” means the cutting or removal of the outer bark and conducting tissues of a tree, potentially causing death by interrupting the circulation of water and nutrients.

“Hazardous tree” means a tree that by reason of emergency conditions, disease, infestation, age, or other condition presents a known and immediate hazard to persons or to public or private property.

“Pruning” means the cutting or trimming of a tree in a manner consistent with recognized tree maintenance practices.

“Removal” means cutting or removing 50 percent or more of the crown, trunk or root system of a tree, or any action that results in the loss of aesthetic or physiological viability or causes the tree to fall or be in immediate danger of falling. “Removal” includes topping, but shall not include pruning performed to applicable standards.

“Significant natural resource areas” means those lands described in Chapter 17.46 LCMC.

“Topping” means the severe cutting back of the tree’s crown limbs to stubs to such a degree so as to remove the natural canopy and disfigure the tree.

“Tree” means a perennial woody plant, typically of eight feet or more in height, with a single main stem (the trunk or bole), or in some cases, multiple trunks, from which branches and twigs extend to form a characteristic crown of foliage. 

“Large tree” includes any tree that has a trunk at least six inches in diameter (see definition of diameter).

“Mitigation tree” includes any tree required by this section as a replacement for a tree removed.

“Protected tree” includes any tree preserved in a tree protection or landscape plan, any tree planted as mitigation for removed trees, any tree planted to fulfill a requirement of the city code, and any tree planted to replace protected trees that died or were removed. 

D. Tree Removal Prohibitions. 

1. Tree removal is prohibited, except as allowed in this section. Violations of this section are enforceable as Class B violations.

2. Topping is prohibited, except where necessary for utility work or public safety, in which case it requires a tree removal permit. The burden of proof is on the applicant to demonstrate in the permit application that topping is necessary, the only means of accomplishing the task, and preferable to removal. The city will rely on the most recent version of the ANSI A300 Standards for Tree, Shrub, and Other Woody Plant Maintenance to distinguish topping from pruning, and will keep a copy of the publication at the planning and community development department for review.

3. Removal of protected trees is prohibited. Protected trees must be maintained according to applicable tree protection plans, CC&Rs (conditions, covenants and restrictions), and other recorded agreements.

4. Removal of trees in wetlands that fall under the jurisdiction of state or federal government removed without concurrence from those state and/or federal agencies that have jurisdiction is prohibited. 

5. Removal of trees as part of commercial forestry operations, as described in this section, is prohibited, and commercial forestry is not permitted, except as specifically allowed by this section.

E. When Tree Removal Is Allowed Without a Tree Removal Permit.

1. Generally. 

a. In all cases, removal of trees must be conducted in a manner consistent with LCMC 12.08.050(B), which regulates land-disturbing activities.

b. Removal of trees less than six inches in diameter is permitted without a tree removal permit, unless they are protected trees.

2. Single-Family Dwellings and Duplexes or Two-Family Dwellings, and Attached Single-Family Dwellings. Removal of trees is allowed without a permit on a lot developed with a single-family dwelling, duplex or two-family dwelling, or attached single-family dwelling, provided:

a. The lot is not capable of further land division due to size or configuration, or if the lot is capable of further division, trees to be removed are within 100 feet of the dwelling; and

b. No protected tree may be removed without a permit, except that any tree planted to fulfill the landscaping requirements in LCMC 17.52.100 for lots with single- and two-family dwellings may be removed, if replaced by a plant or plants with equal plant unit value, as described in LCMC 17.52.100(G)(1).

3. Public Utilities and Public Works.

a. Removal of trees is allowed without a permit if performed by utility or city public works personnel to remove vegetation and trees that present a danger to life or property, to restore utility services, or to reopen a public thoroughfare to traffic.

b. Removal of trees is allowed without a permit if performed by city public works personnel to remove trees that are deemed nuisances under Chapter 8.12 LCMC, Nuisances, or to remove trees necessary to install or maintain improvements on parklands, streets, sewers, or utilities within publicly owned and dedicated rights-of-way or public utility easements.

4. Dangerous and Nuisance Trees. Removal of a tree that is a hazard or a nuisance, affecting public safety as defined in LCMC 8.12.080, as demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director of planning and community development in consultation with the city engineer, as applicable to the circumstances.

F. When a Tree Removal Permit Is Required. Except as allowed in subsection (E) of this section, no person shall engage in or cause land clearance or tree removal without first having obtained a tree removal permit issued by the city. 

1. A tree removal permit may be issued only for:

a. Single-Family Dwellings, Duplexes, Two-Family Dwellings, and Attached Single-Family Dwellings. Removal of trees is allowed with a permit on a lot adjacent to a lot developed with a single-family dwelling, duplex or two-family dwelling, or attached single-family dwelling, provided:

i. The adjacent lot is owned by the owner of the developed lot or the owner of the developed lot has written permission from the owner of the adjacent lot, and the trees to be removed are within 100 feet of the dwelling; and

ii. No protected tree may be removed, except that any tree planted to fulfill the landscaping requirements in LCMC 17.52.100 for lots with single- and two-family dwellings may be removed, if replaced by a plant or plants with equal plant unit value, as described in LCMC 17.52.100(G)(1).

b. Multifamily Dwellings, Commercial or Industrial Sites, Undeveloped Sites, Trees More Than 100 Feet from Single-Family Dwellings and Duplexes or Two-Family Dwellings, and Attached Single-Family Dwellings on the same lot. Removal of trees is allowed with a permit for the following reasons only:

i. Diseased or Dead. Removal of dead trees or diseased tree(s) weakened by age, storm, fire or other injury. If a visual inspection by the city staff cannot establish that the tree is dead or diseased, the applicant shall, at the applicant’s cost, obtain the services of a certified arborist to make that determination. If the arborist determines that the tree is dead or diseased and cannot be saved, the director of planning and community development shall approve its removal;

ii. Solar Access. Removal of tree(s) to allow solar access to the south face of buildings during solar heating hours, taking into account latitude, topography, microclimate, existing development, existing vegetation, and planned uses and densities, which cannot be accomplished by pruning as demonstrated by an appropriate professional;

iii. Surveyor Access. Selective removal of tree(s) and vegetation to allow reconnaissance surveys, topographical determinations of a project site, coring to permit geotechnical evaluation and soil surveys, and similar efforts, to the extent the applicant demonstrates such removal is necessary to perform such surveys;

iv. Spread of Disease, Insects and Threat of Natural Hazard. Where removal is necessary to prevent the spread of disease or insects declared to be a nuisance by a government agency or certified arborist, or to correct or eliminate a verified natural hazard to the property owner, surrounding properties, or the community at large;

v. Selective Thinning on Open Space and Park Zoned Land. Where crowding is impairing the health and vigor of trees as determined by an appropriately qualified forester, after notice and hearing pursuant to LCMC 17.76.020 and 17.76.030 the city council may allow selective thinning on property zoned open space or park according to an acceptable maintenance plan to improve the health of the forest and using the lowest impact forestry methods practical;

vi. Development. Removal of tree(s) for the placement of structures and other improvements, in accordance with subsection (F)(9) of this section and provided:

(A) The city has approved a site plan, subdivision, planned unit development or building permit; and

(B) The city has approved a tree protection plan, if required by subsection (H) of this section.

2. Conditions. The city may place conditions on any tree removal permit as appropriate to assure that the tree removal is conducted in a manner consistent with this section and LCMC 12.08.050(B), which regulates land disturbing activities. Where conditions of a permit conflict with requirements of this section, the more restrictive shall apply. 

3. Review Process. If part of a project that requires subdivision review, site plan review, or a conditional use permit, the permit for tree removal shall be processed as part of development or conditional use permit review. Other tree removal applications shall be reviewed by the director of planning and community development, who may require an erosion control plan to determine conformance with Chapter 12.08 LCMC, Grading and Erosion Control, and rules issued by the public works department. 

Where a tree protection plan is required for development review, the city shall not issue a tree removal permit until the applicant has demonstrated compliance with all conditions of the development approval that are required to be met prior to the start of any land clearing, grading, or construction.

4. Fee. The city council may adopt by resolution a fee to cover the actual or average costs of reviewing or issuing a tree removal permit.

5. Authority. The city manager or the city manager’s designee, including the director of planning and community development in the case of development approval, or the public works director in the case of a public works permit, is authorized to issue, extend, enforce, and revoke a tree removal permit.

6. Permit Notice and Appeal.

a. The city shall provide notice of decision or hearing in conjunction with the required notice for subdivision, partition, site development review, planned development or conditional use and in accordance with Chapter 17.76 LCMC, Administrative Provisions. Notice shall not be required for other tree removal permits.

b. Appeals of a tree removal permit shall be as provided in this title for quasi-judicial land use decision. Administrative decisions by the director of planning and community development may be appealed to the planning commission, which shall be the final appeal. Decisions of the planning commission, not including appeals of administrative decisions, may be appealed to the city council in the same manner as provided for in Chapter 17.76 LCMC.

c. The city shall not issue a tree removal permit approved in conjunction with a development review until the time allowed for appeals has passed and no appeal has been filed, or after all appeals have been exhausted. The timely filing of an appeal shall have the effect of suspending the issuance of a permit pending the outcome of the appeal.

7. Display of Permit – Inspection. The tree removal permit shall be kept on site during permitted activities. The permit grantee shall allow city representatives to enter and inspect the premises at any reasonable time, and failure to allow inspection shall constitute a violation of this section.

8. Duration. A tree removal permit shall be effective for 18 months from the date of approval. Upon written request by the applicant prior to the expiration of the existing permit, a tree removal permit shall be extended for a period of up to one year if the approval authority finds that the applicant is in compliance with all prior conditions of permit approval and that no material facts stated in the original application have changed.

9. Tree Removal for Development. Removal of tree(s) for the placement of structures and other improvements shall comply with the following:

a. Timing of Permit Issuance. 

i. Building. A permit for tree removal from individual building lots shall be issued in conjunction with, and not prior to, issuance of the building permit.

ii. Infrastructure. A tree removal permit may not be issued under this subsection for removal for installation of street, gutter, curb, sidewalk, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and water system improvements until the city engineer has given final approval to the design of the improvements and to the grading and erosion control plans, and, to the extent otherwise required by this section or this code, the owner has entered into a public infrastructure improvement agreement for the improvements and provided financial security therefor, including for tree mitigation; and the director of planning and community development has approved a tree protection and mitigation plan, if required.

iii. Phased Developments. For phased developments, a separate tree removal permit is required for each phase of infrastructure development, which will not be issued until such time as public works approves commencement of grading for the phase. Tree removal permits issued for infrastructure development shall apply only to the minimum area necessary to accommodate the improvements. 

b. Tree removal shall conform to the approved tree protection and replacement plan, if required by subsection (H) of this section, and to subsection (I) of this section, Tree Protection and Replacement Plan Required.

c. Revegetation. Immediately following completion of the improvements, areas disturbed by tree removal shall be revegetated in accordance with the requirements of LCMC 17.52.100(F), (G), (H), and (I). 

d. Bond Required. Whenever trees are removed that according to this chapter require replacement, if removal is in conjunction with a development, the anticipated cost of replacement trees and vegetation required shall be covered by the bonding mechanism approved for the development, or a separate bond expressly for the purpose of required tree replacement. 

 G. Replacement of Trees Lawfully Removed.

1. Applicability. The standards of this section apply to trees removed with a permit required by subsection (F) of this section that are more than 100 feet from a building subject to site plan review, or conditional use approval, or that are removed to allow development of parking in excess of the amount of required parking, or that are removed for purposes other than compliance with a governmental requirement. If the tree being removed is dead, dying, diseased or dangerous to life or property, replacement is encouraged, but not required, unless the tree is a protected tree, in which case replacement is required.

2. Replacement Requirement. Removed trees six inches or more in diameter must be replaced on a one-for-one basis.

3. Pre-Development Tree Removal. Any trees that were located in the areas described in subsection (G)(1) of this section that were removed within one year prior to application for a tree permit shall be included among those required to be replaced under subsections (G)(1) and (G)(2) of this section.

4. Tree Replacement Specifications – Species, Size and Location. When replacement of a tree or trees legally removed is required by subsection (G)(2) of this section, the number, species and size shall be governed by all of the following: 

a. Species. The city prefers native trees, including conifers; however, the planning commission or director of planning and community development shall take into consideration site compatibility as well as the property owner’s preference, provided the species of replacement tree is expected to mature to approximately the same environmental and aesthetic value as the tree being removed.

b. Size. The minimum diameter of a replacement tree shall be one and one-half inches. The planning and community development director or planning commission may adjust the size requirement for tree species where the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director of planning and community development that the minimum size would be unreasonable or impractical in the circumstances.

c. Location. Trees shall be replaced according to a planting plan provided by the applicant and approved by the director of planning and community development, showing all preserved and replacement trees.

5. Planting Site. The preferred replacement site shall be on the property from which a tree is being removed. Provided one or more of the replacement trees cannot be located viably on the property from which a tree is removed, the director of planning and community development may either require that (a) the applicant pay an in-lieu payment into the city tree fund an amount equivalent to the value of the replacement trees after installation, as provided in this subsection, or that (b) the applicant plant one or more replacement trees on other private or public property within the city, with the consent of the owner and under a management plan approved by the city. The planting location of mitigation trees on city property shall be determined by the city council, whose authority is hereby delegated to the city manager. The city manager, in conjunction with staff, shall select an appropriate planting site on open space, a park, or other public land suitable for new trees.

6. In-Lieu Payment. The in-lieu payment amount shall be equivalent to the cost of the replacement trees, plus the cost of delivery, installation, and maintenance for a period of one year. The in-lieu payment approved and received shall be used by the city for planting and maintenance of mitigation trees on city-owned property. Any unspent funds shall be carried forward from year to year for the purpose of meeting the intent of this chapter to maintain the city’s urban forest. 

7. Responsibility to Replace Mitigation Trees. The planting of replacement trees shall take place in such a manner as to reasonably ensure that the trees grow to maturity. Any mitigation tree planted on private property dying within one year of the date of planting shall be replaced by the owner of the property.

8. Timing of Replacement. Replacement trees, including trees meant to replace a previously planted mitigation tree that has died within one year, shall be planted within six months of the date of issuance of a tree removal permit or death of a mitigation tree, unless the director of planning and community development has granted an extension of time no longer than six months due to season or unforeseen circumstances. Failure to complete mitigation within the allotted time frame shall be considered a violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties provided for in subsection (K) of this section.

H. Design Modifications for Tree Retention – Design Modifications of Public Improvements. The planning commission, with input from the city engineer, may adjust design specifications of public improvements to accommodate tree retention where possible and where it would not interfere with safety.

I. Tree Protection and Replacement Plan Required.

1. Applicability. Requirements of this subsection apply to any lot, parcel or combination of lots or parcels for which an application for a subdivision, site plan review, planned unit development or conditional use is filed if the proposed project will involve tree removal. 

2. Elements of a Tree Protection Plan. The owner of lots or parcels specified in subsection (I)(1) of this section shall provide a tree protection plan for the planting, maintenance, removal and protection of trees, prepared by a certified arborist to meet the approval of the director of planning and community development and the city engineer. The tree protection plan shall include all of the following items; however, the director of planning and community development and the city engineer may waive one or more of the items where the required information already has been made available to the city, or is not necessary to review the application.

a. Identification of the location, size and species of all existing, large trees and protected trees.

b. An accurate topographical survey, subdivision map or plat map that bears the signature of a qualified, registered surveyor or engineer, and showing:

i. The shape and dimensions of the property, and the location of any existing and proposed structures or improvements; 

ii. The location of the individual large trees and protected trees on the site, and indicating species, approximate height, diameter, canopy spread and common name; and

iii. The location of existing and proposed easements, as well as setbacks required by existing zoning requirements.

c. In lieu of the map or survey required in subsection (I)(2)(b) of this section, an applicant proposing to remove trees may provide aerial photographs with overlays, GIS documentation, or maps approved by the director of planning and community development, that clearly indicate the information required by this subsection.

d. Arborist Report. The report, prepared by a certified arborist, shall describe all large trees and all protected trees on the site and any large or protected trees removed within the period of one year prior to application for a tree permit. The report shall include the following:

i. Information on the health and condition of all large trees and protected trees; 

ii. Information on species, common name, diameter, and approximate height and age of all large trees and protected trees; and 

iii. Indication of those subject to removal or transplanting.

e. Tree Identification. Unless specifically exempted by the director of planning and community development and the city engineer, a statement that any trees proposed for removal will be identified by a method obvious to a site inspector, such as tagging, painting, or flagging, in addition to clear identification on construction documents.

f. Replacement Plan. A detailed description and map of the proposed tree replacement program, meeting the standards of subsection (I)(2) of this section and including the information on the number, size, species, and cost.

g. Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (CC&Rs). Where the applicant is proposing to remove trees on common areas in a recorded subdivision or planned unit development, the applicant shall provide a copy of the applicable CC&Rs, including any landscaping provisions. 

h. Tree Protection Program. A program describing how preserved trees will be protected during tree removal and construction that meets the requirements of subsection (I) of this section, unless specifically exempted by the director of planning and community development. The tree protection program shall commit the property owner to a maintenance plan that promotes the vitality of all protected trees.

3. Recording of Tree Protection Plan. Approved tree protection plans shall be recorded, either separately or included in development agreements required in LCMC Titles 16 and 17 for planned unit developments (PUDs) and subdivisions. The property owner shall record a deed restriction as a condition of approval of any development permit affected by this section to the effect that trees preserved and planted in accordance with an approved tree protection plan may be removed only with a permit and only for the reasons described in subsection (E) of this section, in which case the tree shall be replaced. The form of this deed restriction shall be subject to approval by the director of planning and community development and the city attorney. Except as provided in this subsection, removal of a tree designated for protection under a tree protection plan recorded as a condition of development approval shall constitute a Class B violation.

J. Protection Standards Related to Construction.

1. Applicability. These standards apply to all construction or development that requires a tree removal permit.

2. Standards. 

a. All trees required to be protected must be clearly labeled as such.

b. The property owner shall give notice to the city a minimum of two business days (at least 48 hours) in advance of any grading or clearing of the site.

c. The property owner shall permit the city to enter the site at any time to review compliance with the tree protection plan and tree removal permit.

d. No person may conduct any construction activity likely to be injurious to a tree designated to remain, including, but not limited to, placing solvents, building material, or construction equipment, or depositing soil, or placing irrigated landscaping, within the drip line, unless a plan for such construction activity has been approved by the director of planning and community development or the planning commission based upon the recommendation of an arborist.

e. No person shall attach any device or wire to any tree unless needed for tree labeling or protection.

f. Protective Barrier.

i. Before development, land clearing, excavation, filling, or any land alteration for which a tree removal permit is required, the developer shall delineate clearly the exterior property lines of the project. 

ii. The developer shall erect and maintain barriers adequate to prevent incursion of machinery within drip lines of trees the tree protection plan identifies to be preserved in and within drip lines of trees on adjoining properties. 

iii. Barriers must be sufficiently substantial to withstand nearby construction activities, and the most appropriate and protective barrier shall be utilized. Plastic tape or similar forms of markers do not constitute barriers. For street rights-of-way and utility easements, however, barriers may consist of stakes set a maximum of 50 feet apart along the outside perimeters of areas to be cleared and connected with ribbon, plastic tape, rope, or similar material used for demarcation. 

iv. Selection and installation of demarcations and barriers must be approved by the director of planning and community development or the city engineer prior to commencement of grading or tree removal. Protective barriers shall remain in place until the city authorizes their removal or issues a final certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first.

K. Violation – Enforcement.

1. Responsibility/Liability. The owner and the owner’s agents and contractors, including but not limited to an arborist, contractor, engineer or other person responsible for clearing, grading, construction or tree removal on a project, are responsible for meeting the requirements of this section and shall have joint and separate liability for any violation of this section.

2. Violations Defined. A violation of this section includes cutting, damaging, or removing a tree:

a. Without a valid tree removal permit; or

b. In noncompliance with, or breach of, any condition of approval of a tree removal permit, tree protection plan, or tree maintenance plan; or

c. In noncompliance with any condition of any city permit including but not limited to a building permit, public works permit, approved tree protection plan, covenants, codes and restrictions (CC&Rs) imposed by a condition of approval and required to be reviewed and approved by the city, or other development approval that results in damage to, or contributes to the decline or failure of, a tree or its root system; or

d. In noncompliance with any recorded covenant; or

e. In noncompliance with any other section of this title or code.

3. Remedies. If the city manager or the city manager’s designee has reason to believe that a violation of this chapter has occurred, then he or she may do any or all of the following:

a. Require the owner of the land on which the tree was located to submit sufficient documentation, which may include a written statement from a certified arborist, demonstrating that removal of the tree was authorized by law;

b. Issue a stop work order, as provided in subsection (K)(4) of this section;

c. Issue a citation pursuant to Chapter 1.16 LCMC with an expedited hearing;

d. File an action to temporarily restrain and/or permanently enjoin the owner from continuing to violate this section;

e. Take any other action allowed by law.

4. Authorization to Enforce Compliance. The director of planning and community development, the building official, and the public works director are each authorized to issue a stop work order, withhold approval of a final plat or public works permit, or withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy, permits or conduct of required inspections or acceptance of work until the provisions of this section, including any conditions attached to a public works permit, tree protection plan or tree removal permit, have been fully met.

a. Use of Stop Work Order. In the event any grading, clearing, excavation, filling, construction or land-disturbing activity on the property is about to occur, is occurring or has occurred in such a manner that preserved trees or trees required to be protected on the site are in imminent danger of damage or removal from such activities, any person authorized to enforce this chapter may order all work on the site to cease until adequate safeguards are in place as follows:

i. Notification. Based on sufficient evidence that activities on site are likely to cause or have caused harm to trees required to be protected, city staff shall immediately notify any responsible person on the project that a stop work order is imminent and that all work on the site shall cease. Staff shall make reasonable attempts to inform the owner and developer by any means, including, but not limited to, telephone, facsimile, or electronic communication;

ii. Written Form. The order shall be in written form, copied to the property owner, and include a brief description of the violations or imminent harm that are required to be immediately addressed;

iii. Posted Sign. A sign declaring the stop work order shall be posted on the site;

iv. Duration. The stop work order shall not be lifted until adequate safeguards, including any amendments to an agreement between the applicant and the city, a development approval, a tree protection plan, a tree removal permit, a public works permit, or other applicable permit, are reviewed and approved by the city;

v. Removal of Stop Work Order. The stop work order shall be removed after the city staff responsible for the matter has determined there is no longer a need for the order;

vi. Settlement. Whenever the city has issued a citation for violation of this code in connection with activities leading to issuance of a stop work order or order to cease and desist activities on land, the city and owner may agree to resolve the citations by means of settlement in lieu of further prosecution. Any monies paid in lieu of fines shall be deposited in the city tree fund. Any such settlement agreement shall be approved by the city council.

5. Violation – Penalties. A violation of this section shall be enforced as a Class B violation pursuant to Chapter 1.16 LCMC. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be subject to civil penalties including a fine up to the maximum amount provided by this code, with illegal removal of or damage to one tree constituting a single violation. In addition to the monetary fine, a person convicted of a violation under this section shall be required to remedy any damage caused by the violation. 

a. Upon conviction of a violation of this section, a person shall be required to mitigate the unlawful tree cutting or removal by replacing the removed trees with like kind trees. If the director of planning and community development makes a determination that one or more of the replacement trees cannot be located viably on the property from which a tree is removed, the municipal court judge shall impose as a penalty a forfeiture in the amount of money equivalent to the cost of the replacement trees, plus the cost of delivery, installation, and maintenance for a period of one year.

b. In the event replacement trees are required to be planted as mitigation for unlawfully removed or damaged trees, the replacement trees must be planted in accordance with the specifications for tree replacement in subsection (K)(7) of this section.

c. The municipal court judge is authorized to impose an enhanced penalty of twice the value of the unlawfully removed or damaged trees where the tree removal was conducted in violation of this section and in disregard of any Lincoln City permit or approval.

6. Alternative Sentence for Multiple Violations. In the event a person is convicted of more than one violation of this section, the following alternative sentence may be imposed:

If a person has gained money or property through the commission of an offense under this section, then upon conviction thereof, the municipal court judge may sentence the person to pay an amount, fixed by the court, not to exceed double the amount of the gain from the commission of the offense. “Gain” is defined as the amount of money or value of property derived from the commission of the violation, less the amount of money or value of property seized by or surrendered to the city. “Value” shall be the greater of the market value or replacement cost as determined by a licensed professional in the tree, nursery, or landscape field.

7. Specifications for Replacement of Unlawfully Removed Trees. Replacement of a tree removed in violation of this section shall be according to the following:

a. Species. A replacement tree shall be a substantially similar species, taking into consideration site characteristics. If a replacement tree of the species of the tree removed or damaged is not reasonably available, the director of planning and community development may allow replacement with a different species of equivalent or greater natural resource value; and

b. Size and Number. If a replacement tree of the size cut is not reasonably available on the local market or would not be viable, the director of planning and community development shall require replacement with more than one tree of the maximum size reasonably available and viable, so that the sum of the calipers is equal to or greater than the estimated caliper of the tree removed or damaged. If this number of trees cannot be located viably on the subject property, the director of planning and community development may require one or more replacement trees to be planted on other property within the city, either public property or, with the consent of the owner, private property, or may accept fees in lieu of planting as described in subsection (G)(6) of this section; and

c. Manner of Planting. The planting of a replacement tree shall take place in a manner reasonably calculated to allow growth to maturity.

8. Exclusivity. The remedies set out in this section shall not be exclusive, and the city may take any action authorized by law to enforce this section.

9. Any person designated to enforce violations of city ordinances may enforce this section.

L. Tree Board.

1. Purpose. An advisory board is hereby established to advise staff and city council on matters relating to trees.

a. The tree board shall make recommendations on a tree manual implementing the requirements of this section and that establishes guidelines for tree selection, installation, and maintenance, using best practices. The city council shall adopt the tree manual by resolution.

b. The tree board shall make recommendations on suggested tree species for use in planting and landscaping in Lincoln City, Oregon.

c. The tree board shall make reports from time to time as it deems advisable on ordinance revisions and enforcement, information concerning tree disease or infestation, and other matters related to trees.

2. Members. The city council by ordinance shall establish the number of members and any membership qualifications of the tree board. (Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 2011-04 § 1; Ord. 2010-03 § 1; Ord. 2008-16 § 1; Ord. 2002-09 § 2; Ord. 92-17 § 4; Ord. 84-2 § 4.220)


17.52.230 Public infrastructure improvement requirements.

A. Infrastructure Easement and Improvement Requirements. The issuance of a building permit for the addition, alteration, or repair, within any 12-month period, exceeding 50 percent of the assessed value or market value, whichever is greater, of an existing building or structure, or for a new building or structure in connection with any permitted or conditional use within any zone as described in this title, or of a site plan approval for development for which site plan review is required under LCMC 17.52.240, shall be subject to the following requirements:

1. The applicant shall submit, as part of a building permit application, a site plan drawn to scale showing the nature, size, and location of:

a. Proposed buildings and improvements,

b. Proposed access and off-street parking,

c. Proposed private and public utility lines, facilities, and easements,

d. Proposed curbs, gutters, pavement, and sidewalks, and related easements,

e. Proposed stormwater detention, treatment, and drainage features, facilities, and easements,

f. Existing private and public utility lines, facilities, and easements,

g. Existing stormwater detention, treatment, and drainage features, facilities, and easements,

h. Existing lot lines; and

2. Except as otherwise provided in subsections (B) and (C) of this section, the applicant shall agree to:

a. Install curbs and gutters along adjacent streets not having curbs and gutters, and also pave the roadways from the curbs to 12 feet beyond centerline of unpaved or partially unpaved streets contiguous to the property proposed for development, in accordance with applicable standards of this title, street design standards in the city’s transportation system plan, public works/engineering standards, and LCMC Title 16 (Subdivisions). If existing rights-of-way for streets contiguous to the property are not adequate in width to meet the standards of this title and LCMC Title 16 (Subdivisions), the applicant shall dedicate right-of-way to the city sufficient to allow streets that are adequate in width; and

b. Dedicate to the city utility easements five feet in width along rear lot lines, or along front lot lines, as required by the city; and

c. Dedicate easements for drainage purposes, and provide storm water detention, treatment, and drainage features and facilities, as approved by the city engineer, in order to accommodate expected runoffs as determined by a registered professional engineer licensed in Oregon, according to generally accepted drainage accommodation principles; and

d. Install sidewalks in accordance with street design standards in the city’s transportation system plan and public works/engineering standards along boundaries contiguous with streets, within existing right-of-way if adequate in width; and, if existing easements are not adequate in width, to deed easements to the city sufficient to allow sidewalks of required width;

Exceptions: In lieu of the sidewalks required by subsection (A)(2)(d) of this section, the applicant shall agree as follows:

i. For properties in a commercial zone east of Highway 101 that abut the D River, to install sidewalks five feet in width adjacent to the river, and to deed easements to the city sufficient to allow the city to add additional width to the riverfront sidewalks so that they can be a total of 10 feet in width.

ii. [Reserved]

iii. [Reserved]

and

e. Install and connect to the city systems water and sewer lines and appurtenances that conform to adopted city standards; and

f. Place underground all existing electrical, telephone, and cable television utility service installations or connections between any building or structure and the utility distribution system, in accord with city standards, in addition to meeting the requirements of LCMC 17.52.120; and

g. Develop the site and construct all buildings and improvements in strict conformity to the tendered site plan; and

h. Provide any of the following transit-related improvements, if development includes or is adjacent to existing or planned transit stops shown in the city transportation system plan or an adopted plan prepared by a transit provider, as determined by the city engineer or community development director:

i. Reasonably direct pedestrian connections between the transit stop and building entrances of the site. For the purpose of this section “reasonably direct” means a route that does not deviate unnecessarily from a straight line or a route that does not involve a significant amount of out-of-direction travel for users;

ii. An easement or dedication for a passenger shelter or bench, if such an improvement is in an adopted plan; and

i. Maintain the sidewalk, landscape strip, and curb adjacent to the property to standards in LCMC Title 12, Streets, Sidewalks, and Public Places.

In lieu of a required improvement, the city manager or a designated representative may accept a deferred improvement agreement, fee-in-lieu agreement, or other cost-allocation agreement, in a form approved by the city manager or designate, for installation of curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street paving, water and sewer lines and appurtenances, and storm water detention, treatment, and drainage features and facilities, if the city manager or designate determines that a delay is appropriate prior to the commencement of construction of these improvements. The cost to the developer shall equal the cost of installation, including engineering and design, as determined by the city engineer, based on the applicable city standards in effect at the time of application. The applicant shall pay the fee or sign an alternative agreement prior to approval of the final plat or issuance of a building or development permit. Property owners who pay a “fee in lieu” of constructing a required specific improvement shall not be responsible for any future additional costs associated with that same improvement. The city shall use all such fees for construction, repair, or maintenance of the public infrastructure improvements of the type identified above and located within the city which provide a benefit to the subject property; and

3. The city manager or a designated representative finds that the building site is not subject to natural hazards such as flooding, falling rock, landslides, or mass movement, and that the building site is capable of accommodating the proposed structure without danger to users of the site or to the citizens of the city; and

4. If no street is contiguous to the property from which safe and convenient access and egress can be obtained for pedestrians and vehicular traffic, the applicant shall agree, if required by the city manager or a designated representative, to dedicate a street right-of-way and to construct improvements to adopted city standards as provided in subsection (A)(2)(a) of this section.

5. As to applications for site plan approval, if the site consists of more than one lot and any lot does not conform to the minimum access or lot requirements for the zone in which the lot is located, the owner shall agree that, prior to issuance of a building permit, or commencement of development if a building permit is not required, the owner will either:

a. Provide to the city a covenant that the lots comprising the site, unless subsequently partitioned or subdivided, will be treated as a single lot for all purposes of the municipal code and this title and that the lots comprising the site will not be sold separately; or

b. Reconfigure the lots comprising the site, in accord with the applicable legal procedures, so that all lots comprising the site will conform to the minimum lot and access requirements for the zone in which the lots are located.

B. Limitations on Infrastructure Requirements. If the applicant asserts that it cannot legally be required, as a condition of building permit or site plan approval, to provide easements or improvements at the level otherwise required by this section, then:

1. The building permit or site plan review application shall include a rough proportionality report, prepared by a qualified civil or traffic engineer, as appropriate, showing:

a. The estimated extent, on a quantitative basis, to which the improvements will be used by persons served by the building or development, whether the use is for safety or for convenience;

b. The estimated level, on a quantitative basis, of improvements needed to meet the estimated extent of use by persons served by the building or development;

c. The estimated impact, on a quantitative basis, of the building or development on the public infrastructure system of which the improvements will be a part;

d. The estimated level, on a quantitative basis, of improvements needed to mitigate the estimated impact on the public infrastructure system; and

2. The applicant shall, instead, be required to provide easements and improvements that are roughly proportional to what is needed for the safety or convenience of persons served by the building or development, plus those additional easements and improvements that are roughly proportional to what is needed to mitigate the impact of the building or development on the public infrastructure system of which the improvements will be a part, if the impacts are not fully mitigated by the easements and improvements needed for the safety or convenience of persons served by the building or development.

C. Easements and Improvements Deferred from Land Divisions. If a prior land division approval under LCMC Title 16 affecting the building or development site has deferred, until submission of a building permit or site plan review application, the definition of the level of easements or public infrastructure improvements required to be provided in relation to the land division, based on an assertion that the level of easements or improvements required cannot be defined until actual development is proposed for the divided land, then the owner shall provide with the application a report as described in subsection (B) of this section and, as a condition of application approval, shall be required to dedicate easements and provide public infrastructure improvements required under LCMC Title 16, to the extent the easements and improvements meet the standards set out in subsection (B)(2) of this section.

D. Appeals.

1. Any person aggrieved by that person’s inability to obtain a building permit pursuant to this section or by the decision of any administrative officer or agency based upon or made in the course of the administration or enforcement of this section may appeal, which appeal must be in writing and filed pursuant to LCMC 17.76.040.

2. Notwithstanding subsection (D)(1) of this section, decisions of the city manager, public works director, city engineer, or designated representative in the enforcement of deferred improvement agreements entered into under subsection (A)(2) of this section shall not be subject to appeal under LCMC 17.76.040.

E. Limitations to Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the applicant has fulfilled all requirements of, and has executed the agreements required by, this section, and shall not be issued if there is any variance from the approved site plan.

F. Applicability. This section, except for subsection (C) of this section and proceedings under this section related thereto, shall not apply to building permit applications for building on land subdivided pursuant to a final subdivision plat approved or subdivision exemption granted by the planning commission and/or city council after November 1, 1989. (Ord. 2017-09 § 13; Ord. 2016-09 § 1; Ord. 2000-06-A §§ 2 – 8; Ord. 98-11 § 2; Ord. 91-1 § 7; Ord. 90-15 § 1; Ord. 84-2 § 4.300)


17.52.240 Site plan review.

A. Purpose. The purpose of site plan review is to establish a coordinated permit process to ensure that new development is in compliance with the requirements of this title. The result of approval of a site plan is the issuance of a permit to the applicant to develop the site in accord with the site plan and any conditions of site plan approval without further review of the site plan for compliance with the provisions of this title. The issuance of a site plan review permit under this section, however, does not excuse a developer or owner from obtaining any other permits or approvals required by this title, by the Lincoln City Municipal Code, or by any other local, state, or federal law or authority applicable to the proposed development, including but not limited to city sign, tree cutting, grading, sedimentation prevention, erosion control, conditional use, planned unit development, and land division permits.

B. Site Plan Review Criteria. A site plan review application shall demonstrate that:

1. The proposed development will comply with all of the applicable requirements of this title; and

2. The arrangement of all buildings and structures, access points, parking and loading facilities, landscaping, lighting, walls and fences, and stormwater detention, treatment, and drainage features and facilities will avoid traffic congestion and will provide for pedestrian and vehicular safety and welfare.

C. Site Plan Review Officials. Site plan review officials shall include, but need not be limited to, the director, fire marshal, public works director, police chief, and parks and recreation director, or their designates. These officials shall have the opportunity to review, for compliance with the requirements of this title, the site plans for all proposed nonexempt new buildings, outdoor storage areas, and parking lots, and for the expansion of existing nonexempt buildings, outdoor storage areas, and parking lots, in those zones where site plan review is required.

D. Site Plan Review Required.

1. Except as provided in subsection (D)(2) of this section, site plan review is required before any building permit is issued authorizing development and before any outdoor storage area or parking lot development commences, in the R-M, PC, RC, GC, PI, M-W, P, OS, TVC, NPD and OPD zones, and before any nonresidential building permit is issued authorizing development and before any nonresidential storage area or parking lot development commences in any other zone.

2. The following development is exempt from site plan review:

a. Single-family and duplex dwellings.

b. Development involving only modifications to the interior of a structure.

c. Development meeting all of the following criteria:

i. The development involves either no expansion of an existing building or expansion of an existing building by 800 square feet or less; and

ii. The development does not affect on-site traffic circulation patterns; and

iii. The development adds less than three additional parking spaces.

E. Application. An application for site plan review shall include:

1. The application form established by the department in order to have the information needed to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this title provided in a manner that will allow the site plan review officials to review the site plan in an organized and efficient manner;

2. The filing fee established by resolution of the city council;

3. A site plan covering all lots on which development will occur or whose area is needed within the development in order to meet requirements of this title. The site plan shall be drawn to scale and shall indicate the following, where applicable:

a. Dimensions and orientation of the site, and lot lines of, and within, the site.

b. Locations of buildings and structures, both existing and proposed, and an identification of buildings and structures proposed to be removed.

c. Location and layout of off-street parking and loading facilities.

d. Location and points of entry and exit for motor vehicles, and the internal circulation pattern.

e. Location of walls and fences and an indication of their height and materials of construction.

f. Location and type of exterior lighting standards and devices.

g. Location of areas of required landscaping and areas of existing vegetation proposed to be retained.

h. Grading (excavations and fills), by plotting existing and proposed contours and existing and proposed stormwater detention, treatment, and drainage features and facilities.

i. The height of buildings and structures.

j. The proposed use of buildings and structures.

k. Location and dimensions of existing and required utility, drainage and sidewalk easements.

l. Location of required sidewalk, curb, gutter, and pavement improvements.

m. Location of existing and proposed water and sewer lines and facilities.

n. General location of proposed private utility lines.

o. If environmental assessments or reports are required by Chapters 17.46, 17.47 and 17.48 LCMC, the location of any riparian vegetation, significant wildlife habitat and major marshes, exceptional aesthetic resources and related natural vegetation cover, historic and archaeological sites, natural hazards, and beaches and dunes that are subject to those sections;

4. Any environmental assessments or reports required by Chapters 17.46, 17.47 and 17.48 LCMC. If an application does not include the required environmental assessments or reports, the application shall be deemed not complete, but, on the request of the applicant, site plan review officials may review and comment on the site plan on a preliminary basis;

5. A traffic impact study at the request of the city engineer, if indicated by LCMC 17.52.300;

6. Any other architectural, civil or traffic engineering, or other information required to permit findings that the development will comply with the provisions of this title;

7. For a proposed expansion of an existing building, outdoor storage area, or parking lot, the site plan shall indicate the relationship of the proposed expansion to the existing development but need not include other data required in subsection (D) of this section, except as necessary to permit findings that the expanded development will comply with the provisions of this title; and

8. If an applicant intends to assert that it cannot legally be required, as a condition of site plan approval, to provide easements and improvements at the level otherwise required by LCMC 17.52.230, the application shall include the report described in LCMC 17.52.230(B).

F. Notice of Receipt of Application.

1. After receipt of a site plan application, the department shall provide written notice of the application to:

a. Owners of property within 250 feet of the site for which the application is submitted. The list of property owners shall be compiled from the most recent property tax assessment roll.

b. Any neighborhood association recognized by the city whose boundaries include the site.

2. The written notices of the application shall include the following information:

a. The date, time, and place where comments are due, if a person wishes to have the comments considered during the site plan review process. The due date shall be at least 14 days after the date of the notice.

b. A statement that the criteria governing the site plan review decision are those requirements of this section that are applicable to the particular development being proposed.

c. The street address or another easily understood geographical reference to the site.

d. A statement that the site plan review application and any other file materials are available for review at the department and that copies can be obtained at cost.

e. The name and phone number of a department contact person.

3. The written notice shall state that if tenants or lessees reside at the property, the city requests that the owner provide a copy of the notice to each tenant or lessee. The failure of an owner to honor this request shall not constitute a violation of this subsection.

G. Determination of Completeness. Not later than 30 days after the initial filing of the application, the site plan review officials shall have an initial opportunity to review the site plan review application. If the director determines following the initial review:

1. That the application is complete, then, not sooner than the due date for comments set out in the written notice of the application, the site plan review officials may proceed immediately to complete their review of the application.

2. That the application is not complete, then, not later than 30 days after the initial filing of the application, the department shall give written notice to the applicant that the application is not complete. The notice shall specify what information is missing, shall give the applicant the opportunity to submit the missing information, and shall indicate a date on and after which the city may proceed to complete its review of the application, with or without the missing information.

H. Review and Decision.

1. After the director has determined that the initial application is complete under subsection (G)(1) of this section, or on or after the date indicated to the applicant under subsection (G)(2) of this section, whichever is applicable, the director shall request that the site plan review officials review the application and any written comments received during the comment period, and that the officials provide their written comments and recommendations on the application to the director not later than the time set by the director for further consideration of the application.

2. Site plan review officials wishing to provide comments and recommendations on the application shall provide written comments and recommendations to the director not later than the time set by the director for further consideration of the application.

3. In reviewing the application and comments received during the comment period, and in making comments and recommendations on the application, site plan review officials shall base their review, and any resulting formal comments and recommendations, on whether the development will comply with the requirements of this title. Site plan review officials also may submit additional informal comments and recommendations that they wish to be provided to the applicant for informational purposes only.

4. On or after the time set by the director for further consideration of the application, after considering the application, comments received during the comment period, and comments and recommendations received from site plan review officials, the director shall prepare a written decision taking one of the following actions:

a. If the director finds that the development, as described in the application, will comply with all of the requirements of this title, the director shall approve the application.

b. If the director does not find that the development, as described in the application, will comply with all of the requirements of this title, the director, in the director’s discretion, shall either:

i. Disapprove the application; or

ii. Approve the application, subject to such conditions as are necessary so that the development, as conditioned, will comply with all of the requirements of this title.

The director’s decision shall identify each requirement of this title that is applicable to the site plan under review; shall include any findings that are necessary to a determination of whether the site plan complies with the requirement; shall state a conclusion, based on the findings, as to whether the site plan complies with the requirement and, if not self evident, the basis for the conclusion; and, if the decision is to approve the site plan subject to conditions, shall state any findings, conclusions, and basis for conclusions, to demonstrate that compliance with the conditions is necessary in order for the site plan to comply with the requirements of this title.

5. During review of a site plan application, an applicant may revise the site plan under consideration; provided, that the applicant, if required by the director as a condition to revision, signs a written statement in a form approved by the director agreeing that the 120-day period provided for in ORS 227.178 shall commence from the date the revision is filed with the department.

6. If a condition of approval of a site plan requires a future submittal to be filed for deferred or refined site plan review in relation to the development, then review of the future submittal shall be made pursuant to the procedures set out in this section for approval of the site plan itself, except that the review shall be limited to determining only whether the submittal complies with the requirements of this title applicable to the submittal.

7. A decision of the director under subsection (H)(4) of this section may include, but is not required to include, informal advice to the applicant about other permits or requirements of this title, of the Lincoln City Municipal Code, or of any other local, state, or federal law or authority that are or may be applicable to the proposed development but that are outside the scope of site plan review.

I. Notice of Decision. On approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval of a site plan review application under subsection (H)(4) of this section, the director shall publish, at the applicant’s expense, notice of the action in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. In addition, the director shall provide written notice of the decision to:

1. The applicant;

2. Owners of property within 250 feet of the site for which the application is submitted. The list of property owners shall be compiled from the most recent property tax assessment roll;

3. Any neighborhood association recognized by the city whose boundaries include the site; and

4. Any person who submitted written comments during the comment period.

The notices provided shall include an explanation of the means for appealing the action taken. In addition, the notices shall state that if tenants or lessees reside at the property, the city requests that the owner provide a copy of the notice to each tenant or lessee. The failure of an owner to honor this request shall not constitute a violation of this subsection.

J. Appeals. The applicant or any interested person may appeal a decision of the director under subsection (H)(4) of this section. The appeal shall be filed within 10 days of the mailing of the decision and must be filed in the manner set out in LCMC 17.76.040. The filing of an appeal of a site plan approval shall suspend any building permit issued based on the approval until the city appeal body, whether the commission or the city council, has decided the appeal.

K. Revisions to Approved Site Plans.

1. Major revisions proposed by the applicant to an approved site plan shall be made only pursuant to the procedures set out in this section for approval of the site plan itself. A major revision is a revision which:

a. Increases the density of development;

b. Enlarges any structure on the site by more than 800 square feet, or enlarges the area of the site;

c. Changes vehicular or pedestrian access to, or circulation patterns on, the site; or

d. Changes the location of, or amount of land devoted to, a specific use on the site.

2. Where a required site plan approval for a development has been granted, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit the construction, alteration, improvement, or use of the development in any manner except in compliance with the approved site plan, subject to any lawfully made non-major revisions.

L. Public Infrastructure Improvements Agreements.

1. If all the public infrastructure improvements required to be provided as part of a site plan approval have not been satisfactorily completed prior to application for issuance of a certificate of occupancy or prior to a proposed commencement of use, and if the city manager or a designated representative determines that a delay in completion of the improvements is appropriate, then the city manager or delegate may require, as a condition of such issuance or use, an improvement agreement signed by the owner, in a form satisfactory to the public works director. An improvement agreement shall:

a. Identify all public infrastructure improvements remaining to be completed and establish a time period within which the owner shall complete the improvements;

b. Provide that if the owner does not complete the identified improvements within the established time period, then the city may complete the improvements and recover the full cost and expense of completion from the owner;

c. Require the owner to reimburse the city for all costs of inspection by the city engineer of the public infrastructure improvements;

d. Require the owner to hold harmless, defend, and indemnify the city and its mayor and council members, officers, boards, commissioners, and employees from claims of any nature arising or resulting from the performance of any acts required to be done by the owner under the agreement;

e. Require the city to tentatively accept the public infrastructure improvements and the easements in which they are located at such time as the city engineer determines that the owner has fully complied with all terms and conditions of the improvement agreement related to the improvements and easements; and to finally accept the improvements and easements on satisfactory completion, as determined by the city engineer, of the one-year warranty period required under subsection (L)(3) of this section.

2. An owner entering into an improvement agreement under subsection (L)(1) of this section shall file with the city, as a condition to city acceptance of the agreement, financial security to assure the full and faithful performance of the agreement by the owner. The financial security shall be in an amount equal to 110 percent of the applicant’s estimated cost to complete the public infrastructure improvements, as approved by the city engineer, which amount shall be subject to reduction from time to time in the sole discretion of the city engineer as satisfactory construction of the public infrastructure improvements is completed.

3. At the time the owner completes construction of public infrastructure improvements required as part of a site plan approval, whether constructed prior to occupancy or use of the site or pursuant to an improvement agreement, as a condition of tentative acceptance of the improvements by the city, the owner shall warrant the materials and workmanship of the improvements for a period of one year from the date of tentative acceptance and shall provide financial security for the warranty in the amount of 20 percent of the applicant’s estimated cost to construct the public infrastructure improvements, as approved by the city engineer.

4. The financial security required under subsections (L)(2) and (3) of this section shall be in a form approved by the public works director and may be one or more of the following:

a. A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state of Oregon;

b. Cash; or

c. An irrevocable standby letter of credit or similar financial security instrument.

5. Decisions of the city manager, city engineer, or designated representatives in the enforcement of agreements entered into under this subsection shall not be subject to appeal under LCMC 17.76.040.

M. Time Limitations.

1. A site plan approval shall become void on the thirty-first day after approval unless the applicant and owner, within 30 days after approval, sign and file with the department an acceptance of the approval in the standard form provided by the director. The director may extend the time for signing the acceptance for good cause, whether before or after expiration of the 30-day period. The signing of an acceptance shall not waive any appeal rights of the applicant or owner, but merely shall acknowledge that, unless the approval is revised on appeal, the development must conform to all of the terms and conditions of the approval.

2. A site plan approval shall become void two years after approval unless within that time construction of the approved development has been commenced and thereafter diligently pursued toward completion. The director may extend a site plan approval for an additional period of one year and, if an extension is applied for, shall extend the approval, unless there have been changes in the applicable criteria or in circumstances relevant to the site that would justify re-review of the site plan in relation to the applicable criteria. No more than one extension may be granted.

3. Decisions of the director on whether to approve extensions under this subsection shall not be subject to appeal under LCMC 17.76.040. (Ord. 2016-21 § 11; Ord. 2010-05 §§ 5, 9, 10; Ord. 98-11 § 1; Ord. 97-10 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 95-15 §§ 12, 13; Ord. 93-3 § 1; Ord. 91-7 § 1; Ord. 84-2 § 4.310)


17.52.250 Standards for manufactured homes in residential zones.

All manufactured homes on individual lots in the R-1 and R-M zones shall:

A. Be multi-sectional (double-wide or wider) and enclose a floor area of not less than 1,000 square feet;

B. Have a backfill style foundation or skirting of pressure-treated wood, masonry, or continuous concrete footing wall construction, complying with the minimum set-up standards of the adopted State Administrative Rules for Manufactured Dwellings, Chapter 918;

C. Have a roof with nominal pitch of three feet in height for each 12 feet of width;

D. Be certified by the manufacturer to have exterior thermal envelopes meeting the performance standards specified in state law for single-family dwellings constructed under the State Building Code;

E. Not have bare metal siding or roofing; and

F. Not be sited adjacent to any structure listed on the Register of Historic Landmarks and Districts. (Ord. 95-15 § 14; Ord. 94-19 § 1; Ord. 91-4 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 4.320)


17.52.260 Standards for attached single-family dwellings development.

A. There are no minimum lot area or setback standards for individual lots in an attached single-family housing development; provided, that the attached housing development as a whole meets the density, parking, height and landscaping requirements for the underlying zone.

B. Perimeter Yard Requirements. The front, street side, side and rear yards around the perimeter of an attached single-family housing development are those of the underlying zone.

C. Land Coverage. The maximum land coverage by buildings and structures for an attached single-family housing development shall not exceed 45 percent of the total land area.

D. Special yards and distances between buildings shall be provided as follows:

1. The distance between a principal building and any accessory building shall be a minimum of 10 feet.

2. An inner court providing access to double row dwelling groups shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width.

3. The distance between principal buildings shall be at least one-half the sum of the height of both buildings; provided, however, that in no case shall the distance be less than 15 feet. This requirement shall also apply to portions of the same building separated from each other by a court or other open space.

4. The supplementary regulations and exceptions provisions of this chapter relating to yard requirements may also be applicable.

E. Maximum Building Height. Maximum building height shall be 35 feet except as provided in LCMC 17.52.200.

F. Recreation Area. A minimum of 250 square feet of recreation area shall be provided for each living unit. The recreation area may be in one or more locations in the attached single-family housing development. Recreation buildings may be considered as part of these requirements.

G. Storage Area. Storage space (for boats, campers, etc.) shall be provided at the rate of one 10-foot by 20-foot space in size for every four living units. Adequate maneuvering room shall be provided; storage space shall be fenced with a six-foot-high sight-obscuring fence, hedge or wall.

H. Restrictions. No development of attached single-family dwellings or attached single-family housing developments may occur unless all city services (sewer and water) are available to serve such development.

I. Design Features. All attached single-family dwellings shall utilize at least two of the following design features to provide visual relief along the front of the dwelling:

1. Dormers;

2. Gables;

3. Recessed entries;

4. Covered porch entries;

5. Cupolas;

6. Pillars or posts;

7. Bay or bow windows;

8. Eaves (minimum six inches projection);

9. Off-sets on building face or roof (minimum 16 inches). (Ord. 2011-09 § 3; Ord. 94-12 § 5; Ord. 84-2 § 4.330)


17.52.270 Wireless communications facilities.

A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the community while accommodating the communication needs of residents and businesses through facilitating the provision of wireless telecommunications services to the residents and businesses of the city, minimizing adverse visual effects of towers through careful design and siting standards, avoiding potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through structural standards and setback requirements, providing mechanisms for the mitigation of tower proliferation through tower sharing requirements for all new tower applicants and those existing towers that are physically capable of sharing.

B. Siting Preferences. Wireless communications facilities shall be sited in accordance with the following priorities, in order of their preference:

1. Co-location by placement of antennas or other transmission and reception devices on an existing tower, building, or other structure, such as a utility pole, water tank, or similar structure.

2. Use of mini-cell or other similar alternate technology whereby transmission and reception devices are placed on existing structures or placed on new structures that are consistent in height with and situated similarly to types normally found in the surrounding area, such as telephone, electrical, or light poles.

3. Siting of a new tower in a visually subordinate manner. In this context, “visually subordinate” refers to the relative visibility of a wireless communication facility where that facility does not noticeably contrast with the surrounding landscape. Visually subordinate facilities may be partially visible, but not visually dominant in relation to their surroundings.

4. Siting of a new tower in a visually dominant location, but employing concealment technology. In this context, “concealment technology” means technology through which a wireless communication facility is designed to resemble an object present in the natural environment or to resemble a building of a type typically and customarily found in the area.

5. Siting of a new tower in a visually dominant location, not employing concealment technology.

C. Standards. All commercial wireless communications facilities shall comply with the following requirements:

1. The maximum height shall be 80 feet.

2. Commercial wireless telecommunications service towers shall be of a monopole design unless the planning commission determines that an alternative design would better blend in to the surrounding environment.

3. The proposed facilities must not exceed or cause other facilities to exceed federal radio frequency emission standards or American National Standards Institute standards, whichever are stricter.

4. The proposed facilities must meet manufacturer’s specifications and plans must be certified by an engineer licensed in the state of Oregon.

5. The proposed facilities must meet the requirements of the Uniform Building Code and/or the Oregon Structural Specialty Code, including but not limited to the requirements relating to seismic and wind loads, and must be engineered so that, in the event they fall, the proposed facilities will collapse only within the property lines of the lot on which they are located.

6. The proposed facilities must meet the standards contained in the American National Standards Institute “Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Tower and Steel Supporting Structures” (ANSI EIA/TIA 222 E-1996).

7. All utility buildings and structures accessory to a tower shall be architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding environment and shall meet the minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning district. Ground mounted equipment shall be screened from view by suitable vegetation, except where a design of nonvegetative screening better reflects and complements the architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood.

8. Wireless communications facilities shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not display any lighting other than such lighting as is specifically required by the Federal Aviation Administration or the Oregon Department of Aviation. Flashing strobe lighting is not allowed. If flashing strobe lighting otherwise would be required by the Federal Aviation Administration or the Oregon Department of Aviation, the tower height must be reduced to a level at which flashing strobe lighting is not required.

9. Any lighting placed on a wireless communication facility pursuant to a requirement of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or the Oregon Department of Aviation (ODA) may not exceed the minimum required. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the applicant must submit documentation from the appropriate agency (i.e., the FAA or the ODA) that the lighting is the minimum required. Any required aviation lighting must be shielded to the maximum extent allowed by the Federal Aviation Administration or the Oregon Department of Aviation.

10. A commercial wireless communication facility shall be designed, structurally, electrically, and in all other respects, to accommodate antennas for at least three users, and must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights.

11. A finish (paint/surface) must be provided for the wireless communication facility that reduces the visibility of the facility, including the antenna arrays. In most circumstances this condition may be satisfied by painting the tower and antenna arrays with flat light haze gray paint. If the tower is unpainted it must be of a single color throughout its height. The owner must maintain the finish, painted or unpainted, so that no discoloration is allowed to occur.

12. Red and white or orange and white tower finish is not allowed. If red and white or orange and white tower finish would be required by the Federal Aviation Administration or the Oregon Department of Aviation, the tower height must be reduced to a level at which a red and white or orange and white tower finish is not required.

13. The use of any portion of a wireless communication facility for signs other than warning or equipment information signs is prohibited.

14. Wireless communications facilities, including any modifications to them, must not cause any interference with normal radio and television reception in the surrounding area nor with any public safety agency or organization (including but not limited to police, fire, ambulance, and Coast Guard) radio transmissions. The owner shall bear the costs of immediately eliminating any such interference should any occur, or must immediately shut down the antennas or other equipment or parts of the facility causing the interference.

15. The owner of the wireless communication facility may not deny a wireless provider the ability to co-locate on its wireless communication facility at a fair market rate or at another cost basis agreed to by the affected parties.

16. The wireless communication facility must be removed from the site if no facility on the tower has been in use for more than six months.

D. Application. In addition to the information required elsewhere in this section, development applications for wireless communications facilities shall include the following supplemental information:

1. A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which:

a. Describes the tower height and design, including a cross section and elevation;

b. Documents the height above grade for all potential mounting positions for co-located antennas and the minimum separation distances between antennas;

c. Describes the tower’s structural capacity to carry the antennas of at least three wireless carriers, including the number and type of antennas that it can accommodate;

d. Documents what steps the applicant will take to avoid interference with normal radio and television reception in the surrounding area and with any public safety agency or organization (including but not limited to police, fire, ambulance, and Coast Guard) radio transmissions and telecommunications;

e. Includes an engineer’s stamp and registration number;

f. Documents that the proposed facilities will not exceed or cause other facilities to exceed federal radio frequency emission standards or American National Standards Institute standards, whichever are stricter;

g. Includes elevations showing all facades, indicating exterior materials and color of the tower(s) on the proposed site; and

h. Includes other information necessary to evaluate the request.

2. For all commercial wireless telecommunications service towers, a letter of intent committing the tower owner and the owner’s successors to allow the shared use of the tower, if an additional user agrees in writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use.

3. Applicants proposing the siting of wireless communications facilities through means other than co-location shall demonstrate why higher priority alternatives for providing the specific, proposed wireless service are not feasible. In this context, “not feasible” means that the proposed wireless communication service cannot be provided in a reasonable, practicable, and cost effective manner. Factors that may render an alternative not feasible may include:

a. Existing buildings or towers are structurally inadequate to accommodate the proposed facility, and cannot reasonably be retrofitted;

b. The alternative would cause radio frequency interference that would materially impair the functioning of existing or planned equipment at the tower or site, and such interference cannot reasonably be mitigated;

c. The alternative cannot provide the radio frequency coverage required to provide the proposed service;

d. The alternative is precluded by law, rule, regulation, contract, or other legal authority.

4. At least two photo-simulations of the proposed tower, from different points of view and distances from the proposed tower.

5. Before the issuance of a building permit, the following supplemental information shall be submitted:

a. A copy of the FAA’s response to the submitted “Notice of Proposed Construction or Alteration” (FAA Form 7460-1);

b. Proof of compliance with applicable Federal Communications Commission regulations;

c. A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which demonstrates the tower’s compliance with the Uniform Building Code and/or the Oregon Structural Specialty Code, including but not limited to the requirements relating to seismic and wind loads, and that in the event it falls the tower will collapse only within the property lines of the lot on which it is located; and

d. A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which demonstrates that the tower meets the standards contained in the American National Standards Institute “Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Tower and Steel Supporting Structures” (ANSI EIA/TIA 222 E-1996).

E. Notice. When mailed notice of a public hearing or an administrative action relating to a wireless communication facility is required by LCMC 17.60.040, such notice shall be sent to the applicant and to owners of record of property on the most recent property tax assessment roll where such property is located within 250 feet from the exterior boundary of the subject property.

F. Administrative Approval of Co-Location Application. If an applicant wishes to co-locate by placing antennas or other transmission and reception devices on an existing tower, building, or other structure, the director may approve the co-location application, or approve it with conditions.

G. Planning Commission Action. In addition to the findings required by Chapter 17.60 LCMC, in order to grant approval, or approval with conditions, of a conditional use permit for a wireless communications facility, the planning commission must find, based upon evidence provided by the applicant, that:

1. For applications proposing the siting of wireless communications facilities through means other than co-location, that higher priority alternatives for providing the specific, proposed wireless service are not feasible.

2. The proposed facility/tower will not unreasonably interfere with the view from any public park, natural scenic vista, historic building or district, or significant aesthetic resource.

3. The height and mass of the facility/tower does not exceed that which is essential for its intended use and public safety.

4. The owner of the wireless communication facility has agreed to permit other persons/providers to attach antennas or other communications apparatus that do not interfere with the primary purpose of the facility.

5. The proposed facility/tower is not to be constructed in such a manner as to result in needless height or mass.

6. The finish of the proposed facility/tower will be of a tone or color that minimizes the tower’s visual impact. (Ord. 2003-08 § 1; Ord. 84-2 § 4.340)


17.52.300 Traffic impact study (TIS) requirements.

A. Purpose. The purpose of traffic impact study (TIS) requirements is to implement Sections 660-012-0045(2)(b) and (e) of the Oregon Transportation Planning Rule that require the city to adopt standards and a process to protect the future operations of roadways and transit corridors. This section establishes when a land use application requires a TIS and the city’s criteria for approval. This section establishes the TIS as a basis for requiring improvements to minimize impacts to transportation facilities and ensure adequate facilities for both motorized and nonmotorized modes of transportation, access, and circulation. The city will coordinate its traffic impact study requirements with ODOT, so that an applicant need complete only one such study to comply with the requirements of both agencies.

B. Applicability. A TIS shall accompany a land use application at the request of the city engineer, if the proposal involves one or more of the following:

1. An amendment to the Lincoln City comprehensive plan or zoning map;

2. A new direct property approach road to US 101;

3. Likely generation of 50 or more p.m. peak-hour trips on US 101, or 100 or more p.m. peak-hour trips on the local transportation system, according to the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual;

4. If use on any street or direct property approach road intersecting with US 101 increases by 10 vehicles or more per day that exceed 20,000 pounds gross vehicle weight;

5. An existing or proposed access driveway that does not meet minimum spacing or sight distance requirements, or a driveway located where vehicles entering or leaving the property are restricted, or such vehicles are likely to queue or hesitate at an approach or access connection, thereby creating a safety hazard; or

6. A change in internal traffic patterns that may cause safety problems, such as back-up onto the highway or traffic crashes in the approach area.

C. Preparation. The applicant shall retain an Oregon registered professional engineer qualified to perform traffic engineering analysis to prepare the TIS using best practices suggested by ODOT or another reputable professional source.

D. TIS Approval Criteria. The city shall evaluate the development proposal contents for completeness, and the analysis against reasonably expected outcome, before accepting submittal of the document. The city engineer, and ODOT staff, as appropriate, shall approve the TIS, if it meets the following criteria:

1. The study complies with the content requirements set forth by the city engineer and, if applicable, ODOT staff;

2. The study demonstrates that adequate transportation facilities exist to serve the proposed land use action or identifies mitigation measures that resolve identified traffic safety problems in a manner that is satisfactory to the city engineer and, if state facilities are affected, to ODOT;

3. The TIS demonstrates the project will meet applicable mobility standards established in the city’s adopted 2015 Transportation System Plan in Volume 1, pages 57 through 59, and will meet a level of service standard E or better, as defined by the plan;

4. Proposed design and construction of transportation improvements are in accordance with the street design standards specified in the Transportation System Plan, Volume 1, pages 43 through 60, and the access spacing standards in LCMC 16.12.170;

5. The TIS specifies timing of the proposed improvements; and

6. A TIS required for streets other than Highway 101 must include the estimated number of trips, impact on transit, compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, and must include crosswalk and sidewalk requirements in the 2015 Lincoln City Transportation System Plan, Volume 1, pages 43 through 60. (Ord. 2016-21 § 12)


Chapter 17.56 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS

Sections:

17.56.010    Generally.

17.56.020    Off-street parking plan.

17.56.030    Off-street loading.

17.56.040    Off-street parking.

17.56.050    Number of spaces required.

17.56.060    Joint use of facilities.

17.56.070    More than one use.

17.56.080    Use of parking facilities.

17.56.090    Location of parking facilities.

17.56.100    Parking – Front yard.

17.56.110    Development and maintenance standards for off-street parking areas.

17.56.120    Bicycle parking.


17.56.010 Generally.

No building, development, conditional use or other permit shall be issued until evidence and plans are presented in accordance with these provisions to show how the off-street parking and loading requirements are to be fulfilled and that property is and will be available for the exclusive use as off-street parking and loading space. The subsequent use of the property for which the permit is issued shall be conditional upon the unqualified continuance and availability of the amount of parking and loading space required by this section. (Ord. 92-8 § 13; Ord. 84-2 § 5.010)


17.56.020 Off-street parking plan.

A plan, drawn to scale, indicating how the off-street parking and loading requirement is to be fulfilled shall accompany the application for a development permit. The plan shall show all those elements necessary to indicate that these requirements are being fulfilled and shall include, but not be limited to:

A. Delineation of individual parking spaces, including disabled person parking spaces;

B. Circulation area necessary to serve spaces;

C. Access to streets, alleys and properties to be served;

D. Curb cuts;

E. Type of landscaping, fencing or other screening materials;

F. Grading, drainage, surfacing and subgrading details;

G. Delineations of all structures or other obstacles to parking and circulation on the site;

H. Specifications as to signs and wheel stops;

I. Loading areas and docks;

J. Location and type of lighting fixtures;

K. Location of planter bays where required;

L. Proposed number of employees and amount of floor area space applicable to the parking requirements of the proposed use. (Ord. 92-8 § 13; Ord. 84-2 § 5.020)


17.56.030 Off-street loading.

Every hospital, institution, hotel, commercial or industrial building hereafter erected or established having a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or more shall provide and maintain at least one off-street loading space plus one additional off-street loading space for each additional 20,000 square feet of gross floor area. Any use requiring one-half or more of a loading space shall be deemed to require the full space. Each loading space shall be not less than 10 feet wide, 25 feet in length and 14 feet in height. (Ord. 92-8 § 13; Ord. 84-2 § 5.030)


17.56.040 Off-street parking.

Off-street parking spaces shall be provided and maintained as set forth in this section for all uses in all zoning districts. Such off-street parking spaces shall be provided at the time:

A. A new building is hereafter erected;

B. An existing building is enlarged to the extent that the cost of construction exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building as shown on the county assessor’s records or to the extent that the building’s capacity is increased by more than 50 percent in terms of units listed in LCMC 17.56.050; or

C. The use of an existing building is changed and the building enlarged; parking spaces shall be provided in proportion to the increase only, provided the increase is less than 50 percent of the existing building area. If the increase exceeds 50 percent, parking shall be provided for the entire structure in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. If the structure in which the change of use is to occur is not enlarged, no additional parking shall be required;

D. Any use requiring one-half or more of a parking space shall be deemed to require the full space;

E. Parking spaces provided to meet the requirements of this section shall not be reduced in size or number to an amount less than required by this section for the use occupying the building. The provision and maintenance of off-street parking space is a continuing obligation of the property owner;

F. When additional parking or loading area is required, or added to an existing, nonconforming parking or loading area, the entire parking and loading area shall be improved as provided in LCMC 17.56.010, and landscaped pursuant to LCMC 17.52.100. (Ord. 92-8 § 13; Ord. 84-2 § 5.040)


17.56.050 Number of spaces required.

The number of off-street parking spaces required shall be set forth in the following schedule:

	Use	Requirement

	A. Residential:

	1. Single- and two-family dwelling	 

	a. 700 square feet or less per unit	1 space per dwelling unit

	b. 701 to 1,000 square feet per unit	1.5 spaces per dwelling unit (round up)

	c. Over 1,000 square feet per unit	2 spaces per dwelling unit

	2. Multiple-family dwelling containing three or more dwelling units	1.5 spaces per dwelling unit

	3. Rooming or boarding houses; residential hotel	1 space for each accommodation plus 1 additional space per 2 employees

	4. Mobile home park	1.5 spaces per dwelling

	5. Congregate care facility	1 space per 4 accommodations plus 1 additional space per employee

	6. Bed and breakfast accommodation	1 space per accommodation plus the required spaces per dwelling unit

	7. Elderly housing units	1 space per dwelling unit plus 1 additional space per employee

	B. Commercial-Residential:

	1. Recreational vehicle park	1 space per recreational vehicle space plus 1 additional space per employee

	2. Hotel or motel	1 space per guest room or suite plus one additional space for each employee

	3. Club, lodge	Spaces to meet the combined requirements of the uses conducted, such as hotel, restaurant, auditorium, etc.

	C. Institutions:

	1. Welfare or correctional institution, convalescent hospital, nursing home, rest home, sanitarium or similar institution	1 space per 4 beds for residents, patients or inmates plus 1 for each employee

	2. Hospital	1 space per 2 beds plus 1 space for each employee

	D. Places of public assembly:

	1. Place of worship, auditorium, gymnasium, community center or other place of public assembly	1 space per 4 seats or 8 feet of bench length in the main auditorium or, if no permanent seats are provided, 1 space per 80 square feet of floor area of the main auditorium

	2. Library, reading room, museum, art gallery	1 space per 400 square feet plus 1 space for each employee

	3. Preschool nursery, day nursery or kindergarten	1 space per teacher, adult supervisor or employee

	4. Elementary or junior high school and equivalent private or parochial school	1 space per classroom and special instruction area or the requirement for a place of public assembly, whichever is the greater, plus 1 space per nonteaching and administrative employee

	5. High school	8 spaces per classroom and special instruction area, or the requirement for a place of public assembly, whichever is the greater

	6. College, university, institution of higher learning and equivalent parochial school	1 space for each 5 seats in total number of classrooms

	E. Commercial amusement:

	1. Amusement park	1 space for 1,000 sq. ft. of patron serving area, plus 1 space for each employee

	2. Billiard and pool halls	1 space for each table plus 1 space for each employee

	3. Bowling alley	5 spaces for each alley plus 1 space for each employee

	4. Dance hall	1 space for each 50 sq. ft. of patron area, plus 1 space for each employee

	5. Golf course (9- and 18-hole)	5 spaces per hole, plus 1 space per employee at maximum shift plus 75 percent of the spaces otherwise required for any accessory uses (e.g., bar, restaurant, etc.)

	6. Golf driving range	1 space for each 10 linear feet of driving line

	7. Miniature golf	1-1/2 spaces per hole

	8. Indoor arena or theater	1 space for each 4 seats or 8 feet of bench length

	9. Moorage (boat)	1 space for each 2-boat berth plus 1 space for each employee

	10. Skating rink	1 space for each 50 sq. ft. of floor or rink area plus 1 space for each employee

	11. Stadium	1 space for each 8 seats or 16 feet of bench length

	12. Swimming pool	1 space for each 100 sq. ft. of pool area plus 1 space for each employee

	13. Tennis and racquet court	4 spaces for each court

	F. Commercial:

	1. Store, supermarket, and department store	1 space for each 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area plus 1 space for each employee

	2. Retail store handling bulky merchandise such as automobiles, furniture and large appliances	1 space for each 600 sq. ft. of gross floor area plus 1 space for each employee

	3. Service or repair shop	1 space per 800 sq. ft. of gross floor area plus 1 space for each employee

	4. Bank or office (except medical and dental)	1 space for each 400 sq. ft. of floor area plus 1 space for each employee

	5. Medical and dental clinic	1 space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area plus 1 space for each employee

	6. Restaurant, tavern or bar	1 space for each 3 seats provided for customers plus 1 space for each employee

	7. Mortuary	1 space for each 4 chapel seats plus 1 space for each employee

	G. Industrial:

	1. Manufacturing uses	1 space for each 2 employees on maximum shift

	2. Storage warehouse, trucking freight terminals	1 space for each 5,000 sq. ft. for first 20,000 sq. ft. plus 1 additional space for each 50,000 sq. ft.

	3. Wholesale establishment	1 space per employee plus 1 space per 700 sq. ft. of patron serving area

H. Other uses not specifically listed above shall furnish parking as required by the planning director. In determining the off-street parking requirements for said uses, the planning director shall use the above requirements as a general guide, and shall determine the minimum number of parking spaces required to avoid undue interference with the public use of streets and alleys.

I. If the planning director finds that a portion of the floor area, not less than 100 contiguous square feet, in a retail store will be used exclusively for storage of merchandise which is not being displayed for sale, the director may deduct such space in computing parking requirements, but the owner shall not thereafter use the space for any other purpose without furnishing additional off-street parking as required by this section.

J. Reductions in Parking Requirements. An applicant may ask the community development director to reduce the minimum required vehicle parking standards in this section by one space for every five bicycle parking spaces on the site. The director may allow a maximum reduction of up to 10 percent of the required vehicle parking spaces. (Ord. 2019-03 § 1; Ord. 2016-21 § 13; Ord. 2012-06 § 11; Ord. 2001-01 § 2; Ord. 93-1 § 1; Ord. 92-8 § 13; Ord. 84-2 § 5.050)


17.56.060 Joint use of facilities.

The off-street parking requirements of two or more uses, structures or parcels of land may be satisfied by the same parking or loading space used jointly to the extent that it can be shown by the owners or operators of the uses, structures or parcels that their operations and parking needs do not overlap in point of time. If the uses, structures or parcels are under separate ownership, the right to joint use of the parking space must be evidenced by a deed, lease, contract or other appropriate written document to establish the joint use. (Ord. 92-8 § 13; Ord. 84-2 § 5.060)


17.56.070 More than one use.

Where more than one use is included within any building or on any single parcel, the parking requirements shall be the sum total of the requirements of the various uses; provided however, where the operations of these different uses is such that the hours of operation or uses complement each other insofar as the parking demand is concerned, the planning director may authorize a reduction in these requirements. (Ord. 92-8 § 13; Ord. 84-2 § 5.070)


17.56.080 Use of parking facilities.

A. Areas needed to meet the parking requirements of a particular building or use shall not be transformed or changed to another type of use, or transferred to meet the parking requirements of another building or use, until the parking required for the original user of said parking area is provided at another location. Such required parking shall be available for the parking of operable passenger vehicles of residents, customers, patrons and employees only, and shall not be used for the storage of vehicles or materials, or for the parking of trucks used in the conduct of the business or use.

B. Property owners may redevelop portions of off-street parking areas for transit-related uses, such as transit shelters or park-and-ride lots, to the extent the parking area continues to meet applicable standards and subject to the approval of the planning and community development director. (Ord. 2016-21 § 14; Ord. 92-8 § 13; Ord. 84-2 § 5.080)


17.56.090 Location of parking facilities.

Off-street parking spaces for dwellings shall be located on the same lot with the dwelling. Other required parking spaces shall be located on the same parcel or on another parcel not further than 200 feet from the building or use they are intended to serve, measured in a straight line from the building. The burden of providing the existence of such off-premises parking arrangement rests upon the person who has the responsibility of providing parking, by evidence in the form of deeds, leases or contracts for such off-premises parking arrangement. Parking spaces in a public street, including an alley, shall not be eligible as fulfilling any part of the parking requirements. (Ord. 92-8 § 13; Ord. 84-2 § 5.090)


17.56.100 Parking – Front yard.

Unless otherwise provided, required parking and loading spaces shall not be located in a required front yard, except in the case of one- or two-family dwellings, but such space may be located within a required side or rear yard. (Ord. 92-8 § 13; Ord. 84-2 § 5.100)


17.56.110 Development and maintenance standards for off-street parking areas.

A. Access. Except for single-family and two-family dwellings, groups of more than two parking spaces shall:

1. Be so located and served by a driveway that their use will require no backing movements or other maneuvering within a street or right-of-way other than an alley. If served by an existing dedicated alley for egress or ingress or as a backup space, then the alley shall be improved to city standards for permanent alley construction; and

2. Except as provided in LCMC 17.20.100(E)(1), be served by a driveway that is, or driveways that are, improved from a public roadway to the parking area to a minimum width of 20 feet for two-way driveways and 10 feet for one-way driveways.

B. Screening. An off-street parking area for more than five vehicles shall be effectively screened by a sight-obscuring fence, hedge or planting on each side which adjoins property situated in residential zones or the premises of any school.

C. Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate the off-street parking areas shall be so arranged that it will not project light rays directly upon any adjoining property in residential zones.

D. Surfacing.

1. Materials. Areas used for standing and maneuvering of vehicles shall have permanent, dust-free surfaces and shall be constructed to support use by solid waste vehicles and firefighting apparatus. Surfaces shall consist of one or more of the following materials: 

a. Impervious asphaltic or portland cement; 

b. Permanent, dust-free surfaces of:

i. Block pavers of concrete, stone, brick, or similar material;

ii. Grid pavers of concrete, stone, brick, or similar material;

iii. Plastic grid pavers;

iv. Pervious asphalt;

v. Pervious concrete;

c. Crushed rock surfaces, if maintained according to the standards required in this subsection, may be used in areas for storage, display, loading and maneuvering of vehicles associated with large, low-intensity industrial or commercial uses (warehousing and distribution, manufactured dwellings or recreational vehicle sales, lumber yards, etc.), as determined by the planning director;

d. Other materials, as approved by the city engineer.

2. Installation and Maintenance.

a. Materials shall be installed and maintained adequately for all-weather use, including proper drainage so as to avoid flow of water across sidewalks and any property line.

b. All pervious surfaces shall be designed, installed, and maintained to ensure proper stormwater infiltration.

3. Maximum Impervious Surface.

a. Single-Family Dwellings and Duplexes. Driveways/parking areas shall be limited to a 20-foot width of impervious surface. Additional driveway width, if any, shall consist of pervious surfaces, as listed in subsection (D)(1)(b) of this section.

b. All Development Other Than Single-Family Dwellings and Duplexes. All parking spaces in excess of the minimum required amount shall be surfaced with pervious materials, as listed in subsection (D)(1)(b) of this section.

c. Exemptions. The restrictions in this subsection shall not be applied to the following:

i. Recorded, legal, access easements.

ii. Flag lot access ways (i.e., the “flagpole”) for a width of up to 18 feet.

E. Vision Clearance. Service drives shall have a minimum vision clearance area formed by the intersection of the driveway centerline, the street right-of-way line, and a straight line adjoining the lines through points 20 feet from their intersection.

F. Curbing and Wheel Stops. Parking spaces along the outer boundaries of a parking lot shall be contained by a curb or a bumper rail so placed to prevent a motor vehicle from extending over an adjacent property, or a street or sidewalk. Wheel stops shall be a minimum of four inches in height and width, and six feet in length; shall be firmly attached to the ground, and so constructed as to withstand normal wear. Wheel stops shall be provided where appropriate for all spaces abutting property lines, buildings, and landscaping, and no vehicle shall overhang a public right-of-way. Those parking spaces having wheel stops or curbs may be reduced in length by two feet, allowing for overhang of the vehicle parked in that space.

G. Marking. All spaces shall be permanently and clearly marked, and such marking shall be replaced regularly, to remain visible.

H. Landscaping. In all zones except single-family residential, all parking facilities shall include landscaping to cover not less than seven percent of the area devoted to outdoor parking facilities, which area is computed as a part of the required landscaping of the total lot area pursuant to LCMC 17.52.100.

I. Compact Car Parking. A maximum of 50 percent of the total required parking may be improved and designated for compact car parking spaces. The minimum dimensions for a compact car space are eight feet by 16 feet.

J. Accessible Parking. Parking areas shall meet all applicable accessible parking requirements of the State Building Code.

K. Parking Layout and Design Criteria.

1. All required parking areas for standard sized vehicle stalls shall be designed with a minimum stall width of nine feet and length of 20 feet in accordance with the following parking layout chart.


[IMAGE]


2. For compact vehicle stalls, the stall width and length may be reduced to eight feet and 16 feet, respectively.

L. RV, Motorhome and Bus Parking. For each commercial site with 50 or more required off-street parking spaces, the following minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be sized and so designated for motorhomes, RVs and buses:

	Number Required	Total Parking Spaces

	1	50 – 75

	2	76 – 100

	3	101 – 200

	One RV, motorhome, bus space for each additional 100 spaces or a fraction thereof.

Each space shall be not less than 10 feet wide and 30 feet in length. (Ord. 2012-06 §§ 12, 13; Ord. 2010-6 § 11; Ord. 98-11 § 3; Ord. 97-6 § 1; Ord. 92-8 § 13; Ord. 84-2 § 5.110)


17.56.120 Bicycle parking.

Projects requiring site plan review shall provide at a minimum bicycle parking consistent with the following standards:

A. Location. All bicycle parking shall be within a well-lighted area within 100 feet or clearly visible from the primary building entrance. Where necessary, a sign shall direct users to the parking facility.

B. Access. An unobstructed walkway of at least five feet in width shall connect each bicycle parking facility to the building entrance.

C. Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces Required. New uses requiring new or additional vehicle parking improvements shall include one bicycle parking space, as defined in subsection (D) of this section, for every 20 vehicle parking spaces required in LCMC 17.56.050.

D. Dimensions. Each bicycle parking space shall be at least two feet by six feet with a vertical clearance of six feet.

E. Security. Bicycle parking facilities shall be either a lockable enclosure for storing bicycles or a stationary object (i.e., a rack) to which bicyclists can lock their bicycles. Structures that require a user-supplied lock shall accommodate both cables and U-shaped locks and shall permit securing of the frame and both wheels, but not necessarily without removal of the front wheel. (Ord. 2016-21 § 15)




Chapter 17.60 CONDITIONAL USES

Sections:

17.60.010    Purpose.

17.60.020    Planning commission authority.

17.60.030    Application.

17.60.040    Public hearings.

17.60.050    Action by planning commission.

17.60.060    Burden of proof.

17.60.070    Entry of order.

17.60.080    Time limitation.

17.60.090    Appeal.

17.60.100    Effect.

17.60.110    Violation of conditions.

17.60.120    Limitation on new applications.

17.60.130    Notification of action.

17.60.140    Mapping.

17.60.150    Use permit to run with the land.

Prior legislation: Ords. 89-11 and 91-18.


17.60.010 Purpose.

In all zones, conditional uses may be permitted subject to the granting of a conditional use permit. Because of their unusual characteristics, or the special characteristics of the area in which they are to be located, conditional uses require special consideration so that they may be properly located with respect to the objectives of this title and their effect on surrounding properties. (Ord. 92-3 § 2; Ord. 84-2 § 6.010)


17.60.020 Planning commission authority.

The planning commission shall have the authority to approve, approve with conditions, disapprove or revoke conditional use permits subject to the provisions of this chapter. Changes in use, expansion or contraction of site area, or alteration of structures or uses classified as conditional and existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall conform to all regulations pertaining to conditional uses. (Ord. 92-3 § 2; Ord. 84-2 § 6.020)


17.60.030 Application.

The property owner or his authorized agent may make an application for a conditional use permit by filing an application, at least 45 days prior to the meeting date the matter is intended to be considered, with the department of planning and community development on a form prescribed by the city, which shall include the following information, in addition to that required in Chapter 17.76 LCMC:

A. Name and address of applicant;

B. Statement that the applicant is the owner of the property or is the authorized agent of the owner;

C. Address, legal description and Lincoln County assessor’s map and tax lot number of the property;

D. The application shall include an accurate scale drawing of the site and improvements proposed. The drawing must be adequate to enable the planning commission to determine the conformance of the proposal with the requirements of this title and shall be prepared in a manner conforming to the requirements and procedures of site plan approval, LCMC 17.52.240;

E. A map (Lincoln County assessor’s plat) showing the subject property and surrounding properties and listing of current owners within 100 feet of the property subject to the conditional use permit application, pursuant to Chapter 17.76 LCMC;

F. Statement and supportive evidence indicating the precise manner of conformance with each of the applicable provisions of this title together with any other data pertinent to the findings prerequisite to the granting of a conditional use permit as listed in LCMC 17.60.050(C);

G. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee in the amount established by general resolution of the city council. (Ord. 92-3 § 2; Ord. 84-2 § 6.030)


17.60.040 Public hearings.

Before a conditional use is permitted, the proposed conditional use shall be considered by the planning commission at a public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given as provided in LCMC 17.76.020. (Ord. 92-3 § 2; Ord. 84-2 § 6.040)


17.60.050 Action by planning commission.

A. Within 60 days after the filing of the application, a public hearing shall be held and the commission shall render its decision. The decision of the planning commission shall be final unless appealed to the city council.



B. The planning commission may approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the conditional use permit application by the entry of a planning commission order, in open meeting, which order shall describe the basis for the decision and state the specific circumstances, findings of fact and evidence presented requiring the application of conditions to the approval.

C. Findings of Fact. In order to grant any conditional use, the planning commission must find, based upon evidence, both factual and supportive, provided by the applicant, that:

1. The proposal is in compliance with the comprehensive plan;

2. The site for the proposed use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the use and all yards, spaces, walls and fences, parking, loading, landscaping and other features required by this title;

3. The site for the proposed use relates to streets and highways adequate in width and degree of improvement to handle the quantity and kind of vehicular traffic that would be generated by the proposed use;

4. The proposed use will have minimal adverse impact upon adjoining properties and the improvements thereon. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, but not be limited to, the proposed location of the improvements on the site, vehicular egress/ingress and internal circulation, pedestrian access, setbacks, height and bulk of buildings, walls and fences, landscaping, screening, exterior lighting and signing;

5. In areas designated as requiring preservation of historic, scenic or cultural attributes, proposed structures will be of a design complementary to the surrounding area.

D. Conditions of Approval. In permitting a conditional use, the planning commission may impose, in addition to regulations and standards expressly specified in this title, other conditions found necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood, or the city as a whole. These conditions may include, but not be limited to, the following:

1. Increasing required lot size, yard dimensions, open spaces or buffer areas;

2. Requiring fences, walls or landscape screening and/or buffering where necessary to reduce noise, glare and maintain the property in a character in keeping with the surrounding area;

3. Requiring landscaping and maintenance thereof;

4. Increasing street widths, controlling the location and number of vehicular access points to the property for ingress/egress;

5. Requiring means of pedestrian/bicycle access pathways to serve the property;

6. Increasing the number of off-street parking and loading spaces required; surfacing and proper drainage of parking areas;

7. Limiting size, location and number of signs;

8. Limiting the location, coverage or height of buildings because of obstruction to view and reduction of light and air to adjacent property;

9. Limiting or prohibiting openings in sides of buildings or structures;

10. Enclosure of storage areas and limitation of outside display and/or storage of merchandise;

11. Requiring maintenance of grounds;

12. Regulation of noise, vibration, odors, etc.;

13. Regulation of time for certain activities;

14. Establishing a time period within which the proposed use shall be developed;

15. The requirement of a bond for removal of such use within a specified period of time;

16. Increase the size, type or capacity of any or all utility services, facilities or appurtenances;

17. Requirements under which any future enlargement or alteration of the use shall be reviewed by the planning commission and new conditions imposed;

18. The planning commission may require that an applicant furnish the city a performance bond with a contractual agreement to assure its share of the development of streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water, sanitary sewers, storm sewers or other necessary and essential public improvements to city standards;

19. The planning commission may also require that site plan committee review and approval is necessary in any particular situation to accomplish the purposes and objectives of this title;

20. And such other conditions as will make possible the development of the city in an orderly and efficient manner and in conformity with the intent and purposes set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 92-3 § 2; Ord. 84-2 § 6.050)


17.60.060 Burden of proof.

The specific findings made by the planning commission in granting a conditional use permit must be factual and supported by substantial evidence. The burden of producing substantial evidence to support the requisite findings is on the applicant seeking the approval of the conditional use. If no evidence is produced concerning any of the findings listed in LCMC 17.60.050(C), the application may be denied based upon improper or inadequate findings. All evidence produced must be recited in the findings for approval of any conditional use permit application. (Ord. 92-3 § 2; Ord. 84-2 § 6.060)


17.60.070 Entry of order.

Where the planning commission is of the opinion that the conditional use permit shall be granted, it shall, in open public meeting, by a majority of its members in attendance, enter a planning commission order granting the conditional use permit, which order shall include specific findings of fact, conclusions and supportive evidence pertaining to LCMC 17.60.050(C), and any conditions of approval as authorized by LCMC 17.60.050(D). The chairman of or, in his absence, the officer presiding over the planning commission meeting in which the above described order is enacted shall forthwith sign the order and cause the same to be filed with the city recorder. Upon the filing of the order with the city recorder, the order shall be in full force and effect. An order denying a conditional use permit shall be entered and filed in a like manner, with the necessary findings of fact, where the planning commission, based on the standards specified herein, determines that the conditional use permit should not be granted. (Ord. 92-3 § 2; Ord. 84-2 § 6.070)


17.60.080 Time limitation.

A conditional use permit shall become void one year after approval, or after such greater or lesser time as may be specified as a condition of approval, unless within that time the required building construction, alteration or enlargement has been commenced and diligently pursued or, if no such construction, alteration or enlargement is required, unless the permitted activity is being regularly conducted on the premises. The planning commission may extend a use permit for an additional period of one year, subject to the requirements of this title. No more than one such extension may be granted. (Ord. 92-3 § 2; Ord. 84-2 § 6.080)


17.60.090 Appeal.

The applicant or any party to the proceeding may, within the time period specified in LCMC 17.76.040, after the decision of the planning commission is filed with the city recorder, appeal the same to the city council in the form prescribed by the city. The appeal procedure shall be as set forth in LCMC 17.76.040. (Ord. 92-3 § 2; Ord. 84-2 § 6.090)


17.60.100 Effect.

No building or other permit shall be issued in any case where a conditional use permit is required by the terms of this title until after the appeal period after the decision of the planning commission is filed with the city recorder. An appeal from an action of the planning commission shall automatically stay the issuance of a building or other permit until such appeal has been completed. In the event the council acts to grant the conditional use permit, the building permit may be issued immediately thereafter, in accordance with such terms and conditions as may have been imposed on the permit. (Ord. 92-3 § 2; Ord. 84-2 § 6.100)


17.60.110 Violation of conditions.

The planning commission, on its own motion, may revoke any conditional use permit for noncompliance with conditions set forth in the granting of the permit after first holding a public hearing and giving notice of such hearing as provided in LCMC 17.76.030. The foregoing shall not be the exclusive remedy, and it is unlawful and punishable hereunder for any person to violate any condition imposed by a conditional use permit. (Ord. 92-3 § 2; Ord. 84-2 § 6.110)


17.60.120 Limitation on new applications.

In a case where an application is denied by the planning commission, or denied by the city council on appeal from the planning commission, unless specifically stated to be without prejudice, it shall not be eligible for resubmittal for a period of one year from the date of said denial unless, in the opinion of the planning commission, new evidence is submitted or conditions have changed to an extent that further consideration is warranted. (Ord. 92-3 § 2; Ord. 84-2 § 6.120)


17.60.130 Notification of action.

The city manager or his designee shall notify the applicant for a conditional use permit of the planning commission’s action within the time period specified in LCMC 17.76.030 after entry of the final order. A copy of the order shall be provided to the applicant. (Ord. 92-3 § 2; Ord. 84-2 § 6.130)


17.60.140 Mapping.

Within 30 days after the entry of the final order of a conditional use permit, the permit application file number shall be indicated on the official zoning map on the lot or lots affected by such permit. (Ord. 92-3 § 2; Ord. 84-2 § 6.140)


17.60.150 Use permit to run with the land.

A conditional use permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site or structure which was the subject of the use permit application, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 92-3 § 2; Ord. 84-2 § 6.150)


Chapter 17.64 NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS

Sections:

17.64.010    General provisions.

17.64.020    Nonconforming structures.

17.64.030    Nonconforming uses.

17.64.040    Nonconforming commercial site development.

17.64.050    Nonconforming lots of record.

17.64.060    Violation – Enforcement.


17.64.010 General provisions. 

These provisions apply to nonconforming sites, structures, and uses, including accessory uses, commercial design standards, but not signs. See LCMC 17.72.090 for nonconforming sign regulations.

A. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to allow nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses to continue, but not to encourage their perpetuation, and ultimately to bring them into conformance with this code and the comprehensive plan. 

B. Pre-Existing Conditional Use Permit or Variance. A use or structure that was lawful by reason of a conditional use permit or variance may continue only on the terms of the approved permit or variance and subject to all conditions and limitations under which the permit or variance was approved or subsequently amended. 

C. Determination That Nonconforming Use, Site, or Structure Is Lawful. The city may make a determination of whether a nonconforming use on a particular property is lawful, if necessary for staff review of an application. Determination will be based on evidence submitted into the record that shows whether the nonconforming situation was permitted by the standards and regulations in existence at the time established and continued without any period of discontinuance or abandonment as provided under this chapter. This determination shall be an administrative process.

D. Restoration of a Damaged Lawful, Nonconforming Structure or Use. A lawful, nonconforming structure or use that has been damaged may be restored to its previous extent, if the value of the damage, as determined by the city, is less than 50 percent of the appraised value of the building or structure, as determined by the records of the county assessor for the year preceding destruction. 

E. Restoration of a Substantially Damaged Lawful, Nonconforming Structure or Use. If damaged to an extent of 50 percent or more, as determined by the city, a lawful nonconforming structure or use may be restored to its former height and footprint only, as approved by the city. The planning and community development director has authority to review an application to restore a lawful, nonconforming single-family dwelling or duplex use as an administrative decision. The planning commission has authority to review an application to restore a lawful, nonconforming multi-family dwelling, mixed use structure or commercial structure or use and shall conduct a public hearing on the application. A decision to approve an application to restore a nonconforming structure must include findings of all the following:

1. The damage was not intentionally caused by the property owner;

2. The restoration does not increase the degree of nonconformity or add new nonconformity, and except as specified above, restored structures conform to requirements of this code; 

3. Restoration is according to plans approved by the fire marshal, building inspector and floodplain manager, and, if required, in conformance with a geo-technical report; 

4. The restored structure or use does not encroach unlawfully on adjacent properties;

5. The restoration complies with reasonable conditions imposed by the city on a building permit in order to mitigate any new or increased adverse impact on adjacent property; and 

6. In the case of a multifamily dwelling, mixed-use structure, or commercial structure, the reconstructed use or structure would not interfere with the intent and purpose of the zone in which it is located.

F. Time Limit on Restoration of Lawful Nonconformity. The owner of a damaged lawful, nonconforming use or structure shall apply for a building permit for restoration no later than 24 months from the date of the damage. After 24 months following the date of damage, the building will be subject to current zoning regulations for the district in which the land and buildings are located, including residential density standards. 

G. Routine Repairs and Maintenance. Routine maintenance and repairs may be performed on structures, buildings, or sites that are nonconforming or that house nonconforming uses. Examples of maintenance and repairs are painting, repairing dry rot, and re-roofing. Routine repairs and maintenance do not include expansion of the square foot area of a structure or use, or creation of new units within residential structures. Routine repairs and maintenance performed in any 12-month period may not exceed 50 percent of the assessed value of the existing building, structure or use. (Ord. 2011-03 § 4)


17.64.020 Nonconforming structures.

A. Alteration of a Nonconforming Structure. A nonconforming building or structure may be enlarged or altered to the extent that such alteration or enlargement conforms to current regulations. An alteration made to provide safe access to a building for persons with disabilities is not considered an enlargement. Alteration of a nonconforming residential structure shall not change the number of dwelling units, if the change would increase nonconformity.

B. Moving a Nonconforming Structure. A nonconforming structure may be moved within the same lot, if the move decreases the level of nonconformity. A nonconforming structure may be moved to a different lot only if the relocated structure conforms to the regulations of its new location and applicable state law, including but not limited to ORS 455.410 (2010).

C. Completion of Structure. Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any change in the plans, construction, alteration or designated use of a structure for which a valid approval has been granted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, except that if the structure will be nonconforming, it shall be considered abandoned for the purposes of LCMC 17.64.030(B), if not operational within 24 months of the date of issuance (or any extension) of the building permit. (Ord. 2011-03 § 4)


17.64.030 Nonconforming uses.

A. Lawful Nonconforming Uses Allowed to Continue. A lawful nonconforming use of land may continue as long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided the nonconforming use does not cease for any reason for a period of more than six months. For purposes of calculating the six-month period, a use is discontinued or abandoned on the occurrence of the first of any of the following events:

1. On the date when the use of land is physically vacated;

2. For commercial uses, on the date the sale of merchandise or the provision of services ceases;

3. On the date of termination of any lease or contract under which the nonconforming use has occupied the land; or

4. On the date a request for final reading of water and power meters is made to the applicable utility.

B. Discontinuance of a Nonconforming Use. If a conforming use has replaced a nonconforming use, or if the nonconforming use of a building, structure or site ceases for a period of six months or more, as described in subsection (A) of this section, the planning and community development director shall deem the nonconforming use discontinued, and the building, structure or land area shall be occupied only by uses conforming to the regulations for the zone in which it is located. If a nonconforming use has ceased, but the owner is marketing the property continually and actively for sale or lease, the planning and community development director may allow the lawful nonconforming status to continue for up to 18 additional months. The director’s determination shall be an interpretation, subject to appeal to the planning commission. Following an evidentiary hearing, the planning commission decision will be final, unless called up by the city council under LCMC 17.76.040(B). 

C. Alteration of a Nonconforming Use. No building, structure, or land area devoted to or accessory to a nonconforming use may be used, moved or expanded unless the movement or expansion reduces nonconformity. Alteration of a nonconforming residential use shall not change the number of dwelling units, if the change would increase nonconformity. 

D. Change of Nonconforming Use. The planning commission may approve an application for conversion to another nonconforming use in accordance with the provisions of LCMC 17.76.010, if, on the basis of the application and the evidence submitted, it finds the proposed use is suitable to the site and location and will not have greater adverse effect on the neighborhood or community than the previous use with regard to traffic, parking demand, hours of operation, noise, dust, and customer and/or residential activity. The commission may place conditions on the new nonconforming use to ensure compatibility and maximize conformance to current regulations. (Ord. 2011-03 § 4)


17.64.040 Nonconforming commercial site development.

The purpose of this section is to upgrade elements of nonconforming commercial development that affect the appearance of a site and create adverse impact on adjacent sites. The intent is to make commercial development closer to conformance with design standards in Chapter 17.74 LCMC, but not to require extensive changes that would be impractical or extremely expensive, such as moving, lowering or structurally altering buildings. 

A. Subject to the other provisions of this chapter, when the owner of a use or structure located on a commercially zoned lot that contains nonconforming site development elements converts to a different use, enlarges or structurally alters the use or structure, the owner also shall alter the nonconforming site development elements to conform to standards in Chapter 17.74 LCMC to the maximum extent feasible within a cost not to exceed 25 percent of the cost of the conversion, enlargement, or structural alteration.

B. The following elements shall be made compliant with the commercial design standards in Chapter 17.74 LCMC, or, as approved by the planning and community development director, as close to compliant as possible within the cost limitation defined in subsection (A) of this section.

1. Pedestrian circulation, as set out in LCMC 17.74.070;

2. Materials and colors as set out in LCMC 17.74.080(B)(13);

3. Pedestrian spaces as set out in LCMC 17.74.100;

4. Screening and parking area landscaping as set out in LCMC 17.74.120; 

5. Water quality as set out in LCMC 17.74.120(B)(5);

6. Exterior lighting as set out in LCMC 17.74.130;

7. Transparency as set out in LCMC 17.74.080(B)(3); and

8. Landscaping of existing setbacks and yard areas. (Ord. 2011-03 § 4)


17.64.050 Nonconforming lots of record. 

If a lot or the aggregate of contiguous lots as recorded in the office of the county clerk has an area or dimension that does not meet the lot size requirements of the zone in which the property is located, such lot or lots may be occupied by a use or uses permitted in the zone, subject to the other requirements of the zone; provided, such lots in residential zones shall be limited to a single-family dwelling and such lots in the R-R zone shall be limited to a single-family dwelling or a recreational vehicle. (Ord. 2011-03 § 4)


17.64.060 Violation – Enforcement. 

Any modification of a nonconforming use, site or structure that according to this chapter requires city approval shall not be initiated before such approval is obtained. Failure to obtain an approval required by this chapter is a violation punishable as a Class B violation under Chapter 1.16 LCMC, with each day the property is used in violation of this section considered a separate violation. Notice provisions of LCMC 17.84.020(B) shall not apply in any enforcement of violation of this chapter, and the city may at its option proceed to file a complaint or take other remedial action as provided in Chapter 17.84 LCMC without prior notice of violation to the property owner or any opportunity to correct. (Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 2011-03 § 4)


Chapter 17.68 VARIANCES

Sections:

17.68.010    Authorization to grant or deny variances.

17.68.020    Circumstances for granting a variance.

17.68.030    Variance procedure.

17.68.040    Time limit on variance.


17.68.010 Authorization to grant or deny variances.

The planning commission may authorize variances from the requirements of this title where it can be shown that, owing to special and unusual circumstances related to a specific piece of property, strict application of this title would cause an undue or unnecessary hardship. No variances shall be granted to allow the use of property for a purpose not authorized within the zone in which the proposed use would be located. In granting a variance, the planning commission may attach conditions which it finds necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood and otherwise achieve the purposes of this title. (Ord. 84-2 § 8.010)


17.68.020 Circumstances for granting a variance.

A variance may be granted only in the event that all the following circumstances exist:

A. Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances apply to the property which do not apply generally to other properties in the same zone or vicinity and result from lot size or shape legally existing prior to the date of the ordinance codified in this title, topography, or other circumstances over which the applicant has no control;

B. The variance is necessary for the preservation of a property right of the applicant which is substantially the same as owners of other property in the same zone or vicinity possess;

C. The variance should not be materially detrimental to the purposes of this title, or to property in the zone or vicinity in which the property is located, or otherwise conflict with the objectives of any city planning policy;

D. The variance requested is the minimum variance which would alleviate the hardship. (Ord. 84-2 § 8.020)


17.68.030 Variance procedure.

A. A property owner may initiate a request for a variance by filing an application with the city manager or his designated representative, using forms prescribed pursuant to LCMC 17.80.030. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the condition to be varied and the dimensions and arrangements of the proposed development. The planning commission may request other drawings or material essential to an understanding of the variance request.

B. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing before it may act on a request for a variance.

C. Within five days after a decision has been rendered with reference to a request for a variance, and the order documenting said decision has been approved by the planning commission, the city manager or his designated representative shall provide the applicant with written notice of the decision of the planning commission. (Ord. 84-2 § 8.030)


17.68.040 Time limit on variance.

Authorization of a variance shall be void after one year unless substantial construction pursuant thereto has taken place. However, the planning commission may in its discretion extend authorization for an additional six months on request. (Ord. 91-18 § 5; Ord. 84-2 § 8.040)


Chapter 17.72 SIGN REGULATIONS1

Sections:

17.72.010    Statement of purpose.

17.72.020    Conformance with chapter provisions.

17.72.030    Definitions.

17.72.040    Prohibited signs.

17.72.045    Exempt signs and limits of exemptions.

17.72.050    Application and permit requirements for permanent and temporary signs.

17.72.060    Special conditions, standards and limitations by zoning district.

17.72.070    Permit fees.

17.72.080    Sign maintenance.

17.72.090    Nonconforming signs.

17.72.100    Nuisance signs.


17.72.010 Statement of purpose.

Signs perform an important function in identifying and promoting properties, businesses, services, residences, events, and other matters of interest to the public. The intent of this chapter is to regulate all signs within Lincoln City to ensure that they are appropriate for their uses, in keeping with the appearance of the affected property and surrounding neighborhood, and protective of the public health, safety, and general welfare by:

A. Setting standards and providing uniform, rationally based controls that permit reasonable use of signs and preserve the character of Lincoln City;

B. Prohibiting the erection of signs in such numbers, sizes, designs, illumination, construction and locations as may create a hazard to pedestrians, cyclists, and motorists;

C. Avoiding excessive conflicts from large and multiple signs, so that permitted signs provide adequate identification and direction while minimizing clutter, unsightliness, and confusion;

D. Establishing a process for review and approval of sign permit applications; and

E. Ensuring sign design that builds on the image and the visual environment Lincoln City wishes to promote.

This chapter must be interpreted in a manner consistent with the United States and Oregon Constitutional guarantees of free speech and expression. If any provision of this chapter is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such finding must not affect the validity of other provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision. (Ord. 2019-14 § 1)


17.72.020 Conformance with chapter provisions.

A. Any sign erected, altered, or repaired after May 8, 2019, must conform to the requirements of this chapter.

B. Properties in the Oceanlake Plan District (OPD), Nelscott Plan District (NPD) and Taft Village Core (TVC) zones are subject to additional or different sign requirements. Applicants should examine the texts of those zones before applying for sign permits.

C. This chapter addresses temporary and permanent signs requiring a permit; exempt temporary signs (those not requiring a permit) are addressed in Chapter 9.34 LCMC.

D. The city building code, LCMC 15.04.020(C), adopts by reference “The Uniform Sign Code” (1997 Edition), promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, Whittier, California. (If any of the provisions in this chapter are in conflict with the Uniform Sign Code, the provisions of this chapter will prevail.) (Ord. 2019-14 § 1)


17.72.030 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations will have the meaning given here. Unless expressly stated otherwise, any pertinent word or term not defined here will be construed to have its legal definition or, in the absence of a legal definition, its meaning as commonly accepted by practitioners such as civil or structural engineers, surveyors, architects, landscape architects, and planners.

“Address sign” means a permanent sign that designates the street number, street name, unit number, or unit name for identification purposes. Such signs are required government signs, necessary for public safety purposes. An address sign is exempt from permitting.

“Athletic field sign” means any permanent or temporary government sign located on the outfield fence or other structure of an athletic field. An athletic field sign is a government sign exempt from permitting, except that a privately owned (temporary or permanent) athletic field sign located on public property must be placed pursuant to a permit and concession/fee agreement and permit by the parks department or other governmental owner, administering a content-neutral sign policy.

“Attached sign” means wall signs, projecting signs, and roof signs.

“Banner” means a temporary sign printed on cloth, bunting, paper, plastic, or similar flexible material attached to a building, structure, staff, pole, rope, wire, or framing. A banner may be permitted only as a temporary sign. A flag is not a banner.

“Beacon sign” means any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the sale lot as the light source; any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.

“Directional sign” means a sign required or approved through the government development review process which directs vehicular and pedestrian traffic and is typically shown or referred to on a governmental site plan approval. Examples of these government signs include entrance and exit signs, tsunami evacuation signs, or other educational or instructional signage. Except for evacuation signs, such signs must not exceed two and one-half feet in height and are no larger than six square feet.

“Feather banner” means a temporary sign on cloth, bunting, plastic, paper, or similar nonrigid material attached to a structure, staff, or pole and that is taller than it is wide. A feather banner is not a flag.

“Flag” means a sign made of fabric or other similar nonrigid material supported or anchored along only one edge or supported or anchored at only two corners. If any dimension of the flag is more than three times as long as any other dimension, it is classified and regulated as a banner regardless of how it is anchored or supported. See also “Banner.”

“Flashing sign” means an illuminated sign on which artificial or reflected light is not stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use, but changes or cycles on and off by any means more frequently than once in any one-hour period. The actual change of display for an illuminated, changing image sign must be completed in two seconds or less. Displays must change by instantaneous change from one static display to another, and once changed, must remain static until the next change. Signs must not scroll, travel, or display video. A change in light intensity around sunset or sunrise to bring the illumination to an appropriate daytime or nighttime level is not “flashing” as that term is used in this chapter. “Flashing signs” are not (1) signs that are entirely located within an enclosed building and are not observable from the exterior of such buildings; or (2) flashing or changing message signs located inside or outside an enclosed building, but not observable from any public or private right-of-way or other property.

“Flying signs” are temporary signs, which include but are not limited to balloons, blimps, or kites, designed to be kept aloft by mechanical, wind, chemical or hot air means, that are tethered to a fixed permanent location.

“Freestanding sign” means a sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that is independent and detached from any building or other structure, whether portable or stationary. Freestanding signs include ground signs and pole signs.

Frontage, Business. “Business frontage” means the lineal front footage of a building or portion thereof devoted to a specific business or enterprise and having an entrance/exit open to the general public.

Frontage, Street. “Street frontage” means the lineal dimension in feet that the property on which a structure is built abuts a public street or streets.

Government Signs. A “government sign” is a sign that is constructed, placed or maintained by the federal, state, local government or special district, or a sign that is required to be constructed, placed or maintained by the government, including local development approval conditions, either directly or to enforce a property owner’s rights. Examples of government signs include but are not limited to required traffic control signage, address signs, apartment and motel unit identification signs, directional signs, subdivision identification signs, signs to exercise rights per trespass or solicitation ordinance or statute, athletic field signage (including approved concessions), other municipal facility identification or safety signage.

“Ground sign” means a sign permanently affixed to the ground at its base, supported entirely by a base structure, and not mounted on a pole or attached to any part of a building. A ground sign is also known as a monument sign.

“Illuminated sign” means a sign that is illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a part of the sign proper. An internally illuminated sign is illuminated through its sign face or backlit by a light source contained inside the sign. An externally illuminated sign is illuminated by a light source exterior to the sign that is aimed at its surface.

“Inflatable sign” means a sign that is inflated with air or other gas, including signs kept inflated with a blower or other means, and is made of flexible material which may be of various three-dimensional shapes. A normal balloon 14 inches in size or smaller is not considered an inflatable sign.

“Lot” means a parcel of land under one ownership, whether described by metes and bounds or as a platted subdivision or partition lot. “Lot” generally refers to a legally created lot.

“Moving signs” means signs that revolve, rotate, swing, undulate or otherwise attract attention through the movement of parts, or through the impression of movement.

“Multi-business complex” means premises operated or developed as a unit with an undivided or nonsegregated parking area that functions as a center and which has multiple occupancy by business or service firms. A business is considered as part of a multi-business complex regardless of whether said business occupies a separate structure or is under separate ownership or is on a separate parcel.

“Nonconforming sign” means any sign which lawfully exists prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter but which, due to the requirements herein, no longer complies with the height, area or placement regulations or other provisions of this title.

“Original art display” means a hand-painted work of visual art that is either affixed to or painted directly on the exterior wall of a structure with the permission of the property owner. An original art display does not include mechanically produced or computer-generated images, including but not limited to digitally printed vinyl, electrical or mechanical components or changing image art display.

“Parked vehicle sign” means any sign attached to or displayed on any type vehicle or trailer which is parked on a public right-of-way, public property, or private property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way where the apparent purpose is to display the sign. However, this is not in any way intended to prohibit signs placed on or affixed to or in the windows of vehicles and trailers, where the sign is incidental to the primary use of the vehicle or trailer.

“Person” means and includes any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.

“Pole sign” means a freestanding sign that is permanently supported in a fixed location by a structure of one or more poles, posts, uprights, or braces from the ground and not supported by a building or a base structure.

“Portable sign” means a sign that is designed to be transported or moved and not permanently attached to the ground, a building, or other structure. Portable signs include sandwich board signs, A-frame signs, swinger signs, and similar constructed signs. Such signs are not exempt from land use permitting and may not be placed on public property.

“Projected image sign” means a sign displayed by projecting an image onto a wall or other surface.

“Projecting sign” means any wall sign that is affixed at an angle or perpendicular to the wall of any building in such a manner to read perpendicular or at an angle to the wall on which it is mounted.

“Roof sign” means any sign wholly erected, constructed or maintained on the roof structure or parapet wall of any building.

“Sign” means any display, illustration, structure or device that has a visual display visible from a public right-of-way and designed to identify, announce, direct or inform, or otherwise for the purpose of communicating a message. The scope of the term “sign” does not depend on the content of the message or image being conveyed. “Sign” includes the sign faces as well as any supporting structure.

“Sign repair” means fixing or replacement of broken or worn parts. Replacement may be of comparable materials only, and in the case of nonconforming signs replacement of a structural member triggers compliance with current requirements. Repairs may be made with the sign in position or with the sign removed.

“Sign structure” means a structure specifically intended for supporting or containing a sign.

“Sign that creates glare” means a sign that is not designed, located, shielded, and directed so as to prevent the casting of glare or direct light from artificial illumination upon public rights-of-way and surrounding property.

“Signs on natural objects” means signs that are attached or otherwise affixed to trees or other vegetation, or painted, printed, or drawn upon a rock or other natural feature in its natural location.

“Snipe sign” means any small sign, generally of a temporary nature, made of any material, when such sign is tacked, nailed, posted, glued or otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes, fences, natural features, or other objects not erected, owned and maintained by the owner of the sign.

“Structural alteration” means modification of the size, shape or height of a sign structure. Also includes replacement of sign structure materials with other than comparable materials; for example, metal parts replacing wood parts.

“Structural trim” means the molding, battens, cappings, nailing strips, latticing and platforms which are attached to the sign structure.

“Subdivision sign” is a form of government address sign and means a permanent sign at the entrance to the subdivision that designates the subdivision name for identification purposes. Such signs are necessary for public safety purposes and generally approved with governmental site plan approval. Such a sign requires permitting, is generally a freestanding sign and may not exceed 42 square feet.

“Temporary sign” means a sign intended to be displayed for a specified period of time only and then removed. Temporary signs include, but are not limited to, portable signs, banners, flags, pennants, balloons, blimps, streamers, posters, or other like signs meeting the dimensional requirements of this chapter. Temporary signs are prohibited except as authorized by Chapter 9.34 LCMC and this title and do not include any form of prohibited sign listed in LCMC 17.72.040(A).

Undeveloped Lots or Parcels. A lot or parcel is undeveloped unless: (1) lawful business operations are conducted on the lot in good faith; and (2) the lot either contains development that has been approved through site plan review pursuant to LCMC 17.52.240 or contains development that would have been required to go through site plan review if site plan review had existed at the time the development occurred.

“Wall sign” means a sign that is affixed parallel to the wall or printed on a wall of any building, is affixed flat against the sloping surface of a wall, or is affixed to the face of a building marquee, building awning, or a building canopy. A wall sign must not project above the top of the wall or beyond the end of the building.

“Window sign” means a sign that is applied, printed, or affixed to a window, or placed inside a window within three feet of the glass, facing the outside of the building and visible from the outside.

“Windsock” means a light, flexible cylinder or cone mounted on a mast to show the direction and strength of the wind, especially at an airfield. (Ord. 2019-14 § 1)


17.72.040 Prohibited signs.

A. Generally prohibited signs include the following:

1. Flashing signs (except as provided in LCMC 9.34.020(E)).

2. Moving signs.

3. Snipe signs.

4. Inflatable signs (except as provided in LCMC 9.34.020(E)).

5. Pennants, strings and streamers.

6. Signs that emit smoke, visible vapors, particulate matter, sound, odor, or contain open flames.

7. Signs that prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window, or fire escape, or that prevent free access from one part of a roof to any other part.

8. Reflective signs or signs that contain mirrors.

9. Flying signs.

10. Projected image signs.

11. Beacon signs.

12. Signs that imitate traffic-control devices or can be confused with any authorized traffic control sign, signal or other device.

13. Signs that obstruct clear vision areas or that otherwise interfere with or obstruct the view of any authorized traffic control sign, signal or other device.

14. Signs on natural objects.

15. Sign that creates glare.

16. Parked vehicle signs.

17. Signs prohibited by state or federal law.

18. Temporary signs, except as provided in Chapter 9.34 LCMC and as authorized by city permit.

19. Feather banners, except when substituted for a flag as provided in LCMC 17.72.060(C)(2).

B. Specially prohibited signs by zoning district include the following:

1. Signs on undeveloped lots or parcels in the GC, PI, RC, PC, M-W, TVC, OPD and NPD zones. (Ord. 2019-14 § 1)


17.72.045 Exempt signs and limits of exemptions.

A. Exempt Signs and Limits of Exemptions. The following signs are exempt from the permit requirement of this chapter, subject to the limitations in this code, including the definition of such signage:

1. Exempt temporary signs referenced in LCMC 9.34.020.

2. Government signs.

3. Signs that are designed to be read only from within buildings or other business premises such as parking and maneuvering areas and interior public spaces such as within multi-business complexes.

4. Original art displays.

5. Markers in cemeteries and mausoleums. (Ord. 2019-14 § 1)


17.72.050 Application and permit requirements for permanent and temporary signs.

A. Except as otherwise provided by this title and Chapter 9.34 LCMC, no person may erect or re-erect, reconstruct, and/or structurally alter or replace any sign without a sign permit.

B. An applicant for a sign permit must supply the following information on or attached to application forms provided by the planning department:

1. Size, height, location, description, and all dimensions, and weight of the materials of the sign;

2. Name of manufacturer, erector, and owner;

3. Sketch and description of sign surface areas, sign structure and sign lighting. Measurement of allowable sign surface area must include:

a. The actual geometric area contained within the borders of the sign, including blank space, as well as sign surface;

b. Only one side of double-faced or back-to-back signs whose surfaces diverge at less than 45 degrees;

c. For signs having an irregular shape or having no definite border, such as those painted on the walls of buildings, a rectangle that completely encloses the sign;

4. Certification by the property owner and/or lessee that the information provided on the application is accurate. (Ord. 2019-14 § 1)


17.72.060 Special conditions, standards and limitations by zoning district.

A. General Standards Applicable to All Permanent Signs.

1. Illuminated signs must conform to electrical code and the permit fees required thereunder.

2. Light from a sign must be directed away from all residential zones and must not detract from a motorist’s view of any traffic-control device. All signs must be designed, located, shielded, and directed so as to prevent the casting of glare or direct light from artificial illumination upon public rights-of-way and surrounding property.

3. The maximum sign size for any sign requiring a permit under the provisions of this chapter is 100 square feet.

4. The maximum protrusion of a sign over a street or alley or public property will be 24 inches, except along Highway 101, where no intrusion of a sign into or over the right-of-way will be allowed. Where allowed, the sign must be at least eight feet above grade. No sign shall be constructed, erected or maintained within the public right-of-way, except as installed by a duly constituted governmental entity.

B. Permanent signs may be provided for businesses within the GC, PI, RC and PC zones as follows:

1. Attached Signs.

a. Number. There is no limit on the number of attached signs each business may have, subject to the aggregate total area limitation below.

b. Area. The total sign area for attached signs must not be more than one square foot of sign area for each lineal foot of legal business frontage not to exceed an aggregate total of 100 square feet per business. Sign area must not exceed 100 square feet for any one sign. A business with less than 25 feet of business frontage may have an aggregate total of 25 square feet of sign area. A business that does not have a freestanding sign may have an additional one square foot of attached signage for each two linear feet of business frontage in excess of 100 linear feet, not to exceed an additional aggregate total of 100 square feet. Where the aggregate total of attached signs is more than 100 square feet as provided above, a business cannot have a freestanding sign until the aggregate signage attached to buildings is reduced to 100 square feet or less.

c. Roof Signs. No roof sign may extend more than six feet above a flat roof or the ridge of a pitched roof, and in no case may the combined height of the building and sign exceed the building height limitations of this title.

2. Freestanding Signs.

a. Number. Each lot with a street frontage of 50 or more lineal feet may have one freestanding sign. Owners of two or more contiguous lots of less than 50 feet may combine them for purposes of meeting the foregoing standard. Owners of corner lots can count both street frontages in determining the lineal feet of street frontage, but may have only one freestanding sign. As an alternative to the foregoing provision applicable to corner lots, a lot with multiple street frontages each of 100 linear feet or more may have one freestanding sign for each such street frontage, placed so as to be read from the qualifying street frontage. In addition, if a lot’s frontage on a street exceeds 200 linear feet, the lot may have a subordinate freestanding sign on that street. No freestanding sign may be within 100 linear feet of another freestanding sign on the same lot.

b. Area. Signs must not exceed an area of one square foot for each lineal foot of street frontage, with a maximum area of 100 square feet per sign. A subordinate freestanding sign must not exceed an area of one square foot for each two lineal feet of street frontage in excess of 200 feet with a maximum area of 100 square feet per sign.

c. Placement. Signs on corner properties also must comply with the vision clearance provisions of LCMC 17.52.060.

d. Height. The maximum height of a freestanding sign is 20 feet measured as the vertical distance from the highest point of the sign, including any vertical projection thereof, to the level of the street upon which the sign faces, or the adjoining ground level, if it is above the street level.

e. Where the adjoining ground level is the reference in determining the permissible height of a freestanding sign, it is unlawful to alter the grade or ground level below the sign so as to allow a higher sign.

C. Temporary Signs. Businesses within the GC, PI, RC, PC, TVC, OPD and NPD (except NCR) zones may have the following temporary signs:

1. The exempt temporary sign permitted by LCMC 9.34.020(D) may not exceed 32 square feet in size in the above zones.

2. Flags/Windsocks. In a commercial zone, up to three temporary flags are permitted per business location. In a commercial zone a flagpole must be shown on the approved site plan. A flagpole and flag may not project into a public right-of-way or onto abutting property and no flagpole may exceed the maximum building height in the underlying zone. Up to two windsocks are permitted, when securely attached to a pole or structure. A property owner in a commercial zone may substitute two feather banners not to exceed 16 square feet for two temporary flags. The allowance in this subsection to substitute two feather banners for two flags is affirmed, extended and reinstated and shall sunset on April 8, 2020.

3. Temporary Banner Signs Requiring a Permit. A temporary banner sign is allowed subject to all the provisions of this title other than the requirement to pay a fee. Specifically, a temporary banner sign must be consistent with the sign requirements for the zone, including total signage and maximum size per sign type. All such signage must be securely attached to a structure. A permit for a temporary banner sign will be good for a time certain not to exceed 60 days. The owner of any such signs must remove such signage no later than one day following the expiration date on the temporary permit. The city may deny a request for such a temporary banner sign if the sign would obstruct a public right-of-way. The city will issue no more than two temporary permits per business in a calendar year. A temporary banner sign permitted under this section may be located on an undeveloped lot or parcel.

4. Portable signs require a permit and are subject to the following standards and limitations:

a. Number. Each legal lot may have one sign of this type.

b. Area. The sign must not exceed an area of 12 square feet, and no dimension of the sign face may exceed four feet.

c. Placement. The sign must comply with the clear vision provisions of this title, may not obstruct vehicular or pedestrian circulation and must comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act administrative guidelines.

d. Prohibition. No portable sign may be placed in a street, alley, public right-of-way or on public property, unless granted a permit by the city and/or the Oregon Department of Transportation.

e. Attachments. The portable sign may not be supplemented with lights, balloons, flags, ribbons, streamers, or other attachments.

5. Additional Seasonal Signs. A person holding a seasonal permit issued under LCMC 5.04.150(B) for the temporary outside display of merchandise may obtain permits for up to two signs whose combined areas total not more than 64 square feet, in addition to any other signs allowed for a lot. Any such signs may be displayed only during the same period as the seasonal permit for the temporary outside display of merchandise. The permittee must remove any such signs no later than one day following the expiration date on the permit.

D. Additional Sign Regulations in the R-1, R-1-RE, R-M, R-R, VR, and NCR Zones.

1. Any lighting provided for signs in the above zones must be indirect. No flashing lights, electronic message centers or moving or rotating parts are allowed on signs in the above zones.

2. For the exempt temporary sign permitted by LCMC 9.34.020(A), a property owner may make such temporary sign permanent, provided the sign dimensions are not exceeded and building permit requirements are not triggered.

3. For the exempt temporary sign permitted by LCMC 9.34.020(D), the size of such sign is limited to eight square feet.

4. An authorized nonresidential use in the above zones may have a sign not exceeding 50 square feet in area.

5. In an R-M zone, sites with three or more residential units in a building may have one additional sign not to exceed 20 square feet and one additional sign per building, not to exceed 10 square feet for each sign. A permit is required.

6. Flags/Windsocks. In residential zones the limit is three temporary flags per residential lot and two windsocks when such windsocks are attached to a pole or structure. A flagpole 25 or more feet in height triggers building permit requirements. A flag two square feet or less is not counted as a flag. No flagpole may exceed the maximum building height in the underlying zone. (Ord. 2019-34 § 1; Ord. 2019-14 § 1)


17.72.070 Permit fees.

A. Application Fees. The application for a new sign permit must be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the council.

B. Nonconforming Signs. If an existing nonconforming sign that was previously permitted under a prior ordinance is brought into conformity with this chapter or replaced with a sign meeting the requirements of this chapter, a permit will be required but no fee will be charged. (Ord. 2019-14 § 1)


17.72.080 Sign maintenance.

A. Premises Maintenance. The owner must maintain all signs and the surrounding premises in a clean and inoffensive condition, free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds.

B. Unsafe and Unlawful Signs. If the planning director finds that any permanent or temporary sign or other sign structure on private property regulated by this chapter or Chapter 9.34 LCMC is unsafe or insecure, is a threat to the public health or safety, is abandoned or maintained in a dilapidated condition, or has been constructed, erected, or maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter or Chapter 9.34 LCMC, the planning director will give written notice to the permittee or property owner thereof. If the permittee or property owner fails to remove, repair, replace or alter the sign so as to comply with the standards of the municipal code within the time specified in such notice (not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days), the planning director or designee may issue a citation pursuant to Chapter 1.16 LCMC. Such an offense is a Class B violation. Each day the violation persists is a separate offense. The planning director may also, but is not required to, after appropriate due process with a right to appeal, enter and remove, repair or alter the sign to comply at the expense of the owner or permittee which will constitute a lien upon the property. The planning director or his/her representative may declare any sign or other structure that is an immediate peril or imminent threat to persons or property to be a public nuisance and may remove it without notice. The owner or lessee of any sign removed without notice has the right to a post-seizure administrative hearing to determine whether there was probable cause to remove the sign.

C. Summary Abatement. The city may remove without notice any unauthorized temporary or permanent sign in a public right-of-way to a place of storage. If the city reasonably estimates the value of the sign materials to be less than $10.00, the city may immediately dispose of the sign without notice. For a sign of greater estimated value, a notice of removal will be sent to any owner known to the city, notifying that the sign will be destroyed unless claimed within 20 days of the notice. If the owner is unknown to the city, the sign may be destroyed without notice, if unclaimed after 20 days from the date of removal. No sign removed from the right-of-way will be returned to the owner, unless the owner pays a removal fee to the city in an amount set by council resolution. Nothing in this section prohibits citation of the sign owner under Chapters 1.16 and 9.34 LCMC.

D. Inspection Requests. Any person may file a written request with the planning director requesting an inspection of one or more existing permanent signs as identified in the request. In each such instance, the city will inspect such sign(s) to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter; however, no existing permanent sign needs to be inspected more than once annually. The planning director will report the results of the inspection to both the owner of the inspected sign and to the person filing the request for inspection. (Ord. 2019-14 § 1)


17.72.090 Nonconforming signs.

Nonconforming signs are not subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.64 LCMC. All permanent signs and sign structures must be brought into conformance with this chapter when and if any of the following occurs:

A. The sign is removed, relocated, or significantly altered. Significant alteration includes, but is not limited to, changing the size or dimension of the sign, replacing a structural member, adding a sign cabinet, or changing the electrical facilities, or type of illumination. Changes to sign copy or the replacement of a sign face with a sign face of identical material are not significant alterations.

B. Damage to the sign by any cause to the extent of 50 percent of the replacement value of the sign.

C. An alteration in the sign structure.

D. A change in the material of the sign face.

E. No nonconforming single-sided sign may be converted to a two-sided or double-faced sign.

F. Expansion or change in use of one or more buildings at the site that requires a building permit or site plan review at that site. A nonconforming sign used by multiple entities at a multi-business complex must be brought into conformance prior to any expansion of the multi-business complex that requires site plan or planning commission review. (Ord. 2019-14 § 1)


17.72.100 Nuisance signs.

Any sign that is located, constructed, maintained, repaired or used in violation of this chapter constitutes a nuisance. The city may take action against such signs as provided in Chapter 17.84 LCMC or as provided in Chapter 8.12 LCMC. (Ord. 2019-14 § 1)1

Code reviser’s note: Section 8 of Ord. 2019-14 provides: “Measure 49 Reservation. Notwithstanding Section 2 of this ordinance, LCMC 17.72 as it existed on the date of this ordinance adoption, (as modified by Ordinance 2018-13), is preserved in its entirety for purposes of application of such regulations to residential compensation claims, if any, made pursuant to Ballot Measure 49.” 


Chapter 17.74 COMMERCIAL DESIGN STANDARDS

Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

17.74.005    Definitions.

17.74.010    Purpose and intent.

17.74.020    Applicability.

17.74.030    Administration of design standards and guidelines.

Article II. Guiding Principles

17.74.040    Guiding principles – Pearls.

17.74.050    Guiding principles – Strings.

Article III. Design Standards and Guidelines

17.74.060    Site design.

17.74.070    Pedestrian circulation.

17.74.080    Building design.

17.74.090    Transportation and streetscape standards.

17.74.100    Pedestrian spaces.

17.74.110    Parking.

17.74.120    Landscaping.

17.74.130    Exterior lighting.

Article I. General Provisions


17.74.005 Definitions.

The following definitions are informational. Where conflicts occur between the definitions below and an adopted building code, the adopted building code shall apply. For terms that are not defined below and are not defined in the building code, the reviewing authority will use its discretion in selecting from professional source materials that are most relevant to the question at hand.

“Accessibility” means the locational and design characteristics of a use, structure, or facility that permit it to be reached by one with a disability, as prescribed under the Americans with Disabilities Act and associated building codes and guidelines.

“Alcove” means a recessed section of a building’s exterior wall; may provide weather protection, outdoor seating or other pedestrian amenities.

“Basement” means the lowest story of a building where 50 percent or more of the floor is located below the grade plane.

“Belt course” means a horizontal course in a masonry wall that is of a different color, texture, size, or material and which is compatible with the overall form and architectural composition.

“Bollard” means a post of metal, wood or masonry, or a combination thereof, that is used to separate or direct traffic (vehicles, pedestrians or both). Bollards may contain sidewalk or pathway lighting.

“Clerestory” means a window that extends from the ground floor of a building to near the top of an outside wall.

“Corbel” means a projection of a building out from a masonry wall, sometimes to support a load and sometimes for decorative effect.

“Cornice” means the exterior trim of a structure at the meeting of the roof and wall.

“Facade” means the front or principal face of a building, any side of a building that faces a street, way, or pedestrian space.

“False front” means a front wall that extends beyond the side walls or rooftop of a building to create a more imposing facade. (See also “Parapet.”)

“Fenestration” means the arrangement and design of windows and doors in a building.

“Grade” means the surface elevation of the ground.

“Grade plane” represents the average of the finished ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls or, for common wall buildings, the exterior walls and common wall. Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior wall(s), the reference plane is established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the property line or, where the property line is more than six feet from the building, between the structure and a point six feet from the building.

“Guideline” means a recommended approach, parameter, example, and/or rationale for interpreting, applying, and/or modifying a standard through the design review process. For the purpose of design review, the photographs, illustrations, and diagrams contained in this chapter are intended to be used as guidelines, except where an illustration contains a specific dimensional requirement or is accompanied by the words “shall” or “must,” then the illustration is intended as a standard.

“Height” is measured from the grade plane to the highest point on a flat roof, including any parapet, or to the average height of the highest gable on a pitched or sloped roof.

“Lintel” means a heavy horizontal beam of wood or stone over an opening of a door or window to support the weight above it.

“Medallion” means a small decorative detail used to accent a building’s exterior.

“Mezzanine” means an intermediate level between a ground floor and the upper story(ies) occupying a partial area of floor space.

“Parapet” means a low protective wall at the edge of a roof.

“Pearl” means an area on the zoning map designated to support the revitalization or preservation of one of Lincoln City’s historic village centers (e.g., Wecoma, DeLake, and Cutler City) by facilitating compact, pedestrian-friendly development at an appropriate village scale and character. The pearl overlay is an interim designation; it is intended to be removed as the city adopts redevelopment plans and specific design standards for a specific pearl, as it has for Oceanlake, Nelscott, and Taft.

“Pedestrian-scale lighting” means lighting that is designed and located to illuminate a sidewalk, pathway or other area that is used principally by pedestrians. Bollards, wall-mounted lights and step lights are typical of pedestrian-scale lighting.

“Pedestrian space” means a public gathering space, such as a plaza, square, outdoor seating area, alcove, sculpture garden, or similar space, oriented to pedestrians and connecting one or more developments to the adjacent streetscape.

“Pediment” means a low-pitched gable over a portico, door or window; may be used to reduce the scale of a building facade.

“Pier” means a portion of a wall between windows, doors or other openings.

“Pilaster” means a shallow pier used to buttress a wall; or a rectangular column with a capital and base, projecting only slightly from a wall as an ornamental motif.

“Pocket park” means a small plaza or landscaped pedestrian space, typically less than one-quarter acre and not for recreational use.

“Portico” means a porch or entrance to a building consisting of a covered and often columned area; may be used to address building orientation standards where redeveloping a building to meet the front property line is not feasible.

“Public art” means artwork in the public realm, regardless of whether it is on public or private property, or whether it is acquired through public or private funding. Public art can be a sculpture, mural, manhole cover, paving pattern, lighting, seating, kiosk, gate, fountain, engraving, carving, fresco or similar artwork which is approved through design review. In evaluating public art proposals, the reviewing authority may refer to guidelines and inventories prepared by the city of Lincoln City, the National Trust for Historic Preservation and/or other references it deems appropriate.

“Spandrel” means the blank space between windows and successive stories, or the area between the top of a column or pier and the apex of the arch springing from it.

“Split-barrel roof” means a rounded roof that resembles a barrel split in half and resting rounded side up.

“Standard” means a requirement for the purposes of design review approval. Dimensional requirements and provisions containing the words “shall,” “must,” “not permitted,” “prohibited,” “required/requirement,” or similar prescriptive or proscriptive terms indicate the presence of a standard.

“Streetscape” means the interface between development and a public street along the development’s street frontage; it typically includes storefronts, building entrances, weather protective canopies or awnings, pedestrian spaces such as plazas and curb extensions at intersections, a building front zone along the sidewalk where outdoor seating may occur, a through zone for pedestrians, a street furnishings zone for lights, trees, and other furnishings, and on-street parking where applicable.

“String” means any area on Lincoln City’s zoning map not included in a designated “pearl.”

“Transom” means a window immediately above a window or door; may or may not be hinged to a transom.

“Transparency (windows)” means nonreflective glass with a visible transmittance rating of 0.50 or greater, per the National Fenestration Rating Council.

“Turret” means a small tower extending above a building.

“Wayfinding sign” means a directional sign that is part of an overall sign program for a district, neighborhood, or other city-recognized area as approved through design review. (Ord. 2011-12 § 1; Ord. 2007-10 § 5)


17.74.010 Purpose and intent.

A. These commercial development design standards are intended to enhance and protect the city’s quality of life and community image through clearly articulated commercial development design goals and policies and minimum design standards; to protect and promote the city’s economic vitality through commercial design standards that encourage and reward high quality development while discouraging less attractive and less enduring alternatives; and to enhance and protect the security and health, safety, and welfare of the public. In addition, the standards are intended to serve as interim design standards for “pearl” areas until such a time that the city adopts specific standards for each pearl.

B. In furtherance of this purpose, the city considers the following design features to be desirable elements of commercial development, and the standards set forth in this chapter are intended to facilitate incorporation of these features into all commercial development projects:

1. Access driveways consistent with LCMC 17.52.060 that provide for safe access and egress with clear visibility of entrances and retail signage.

2. Interconnected driveways with access to local streets wherever possible.

3. Consolidated access and shared driveways, where possible.

4. Continuous landscape frontage, with specific standards based on building orientation and front setbacks.

5. Landscaped and screened parking areas with natural landscape swales for stormwater and aesthetics.

6. Coordinated lighting, retaining walls, street furnishings, public art and landscape design that ties together the highway corridor (i.e., “string” areas between Oceanlake, DeLake, Nelscott, Taft and Cutler City).

7. Visual compatibility with development on adjacent sites.

8. Reduced visual clutter associated with overhead utilities, freestanding signs (in the pearls), rooftop signs (in the strings), and outdoor storage.

9. Quality exterior building materials, surfaces, and textures.

10. Building locations close to street sidewalks and streetscapes that provide pedestrian amenities.

11. Connections between building entrances, sidewalks and associated pedestrian areas to encourage visual and physical integration with a strong sense of place.

12. Stepped-down building scale adjacent to pedestrian routes.

13. Pedestrian-oriented ornamentation and detail at ground level in architectural and landscape designs.

14. Multi-planed pitched roofs with meaningful overhangs and weather protection features such as awnings, canopies and pedestrian arcades.

15. Regular or traditional window rhythm.

16. Articulated building forms and massing with significant wall articulation.

C. In furtherance of this purpose, the city considers the following design features to be undesirable elements of commercial development:

1. Poorly defined site access points.

2. Excessive surface parking lot paving and redundant driveways.

3. Disjointed parking areas, confusing or unsafe circulation pattern.

4. Square, box-like structures with large, blank, unarticulated wall surfaces.

5. Highly reflective surfaces or heavily tinted glass storefronts.

6. Strongly thematic architectural styles including some forms of franchise architectural styles associated with some chain commercial establishments.

7. Inadequate landscape buffers adjacent to parking lots, walkways, streets, and the highway.

8. Visible outdoor storage, loading, and equipment areas. (Ord. 2014-05 § 2; Ord. 2011-12 § 1; Ord. 2007-10 § 5)


17.74.020 Applicability.

A. This chapter applies to all commercial and mixed use development in the General Commercial and Recreation Commercial zones for which site plan review is required, except where superseded by a specific plan district or overlay zone (e.g., Oceanlake and Taft) established for a similar purpose. Different standards apply depending on whether a property is within a designated “pearl” or “string” district.

B. Where an existing use or development is proposed to be modified through redevelopment or exterior remodeling, the standards shall apply only to that portion of the use or development that is to be modified; however, where more than 50 percent of the use or development is to be modified, the entire use or development, as applicable, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.

C. The applicant has the burden of proof of demonstrating conformity with the standards and criteria of this chapter.

D. Where conflicts occur between the design standards and other municipal code regulations or other ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.

E. Existing uses and/or developments that do not conform to the provisions of this chapter, but were established lawfully prior to the city adopting this chapter, shall be allowed to continue, as provided in Chapter 17.64 LCMC, Nonconforming Situations. (Ord. 2011-12 § 1; Ord. 2007-10 § 5)


17.74.030 Administration of design standards and guidelines.

A. Site Plan Review. For properties within the RC and GC zones, site plan review required by LCMC 17.52.240 must include review of these commercial design standards. The site plan review process is an administrative review by the planning director. The planning director may refer any site plan review application to the planning commission for a public hearing when:

1. The applicant has requested an adjustment or modification to one or more code standard(s), as provided in subsection (D) of this section; or

2. The applicant requests a hearing; or

3. The planning director determines that the size or scale of the development (vis-a-vis its appearance, traffic generation, parking, or other characteristics) warrants a public hearing.

B. Design Standards Versus Guidelines. The code sections that follow provide intent statements, followed by standards and guidelines. Most sections contain objective standards and approval criteria; however, some criteria require the reviewing body to apply discretion. Where discretion is involved, the code provides guidelines to assist the reviewing body in evaluating a proposal. The following further explains the relationship between intent statements, standards and guidelines.

1. Intent statements are not applicable approval criteria, except requests for adjustments or variance must demonstrate how the proposal conforms to the code’s intent.

2. Standards use the words “shall” or “must” and are mandatory.

3. Guidelines use the words “should,” “may,” “preferred,” and “discouraged,” and are advisory. Guidelines supplement the standards and provide examples of acceptable or unacceptable design. Guidelines also assist in reviewing requests for adjustments and variances and may serve as the basis for approval, denial, or approval with modifications in such instances.

4. Graphics are used to illustrate standards and guidelines. They are not intended to prescribe a particular design but serve as examples of acceptable or unacceptable design solutions.

5. Standards and guidelines both serve as approval criteria, but the reviewing body is afforded greater latitude in applying guidelines. Where the word “should” is used, the applicant must demonstrate that the proposal is consistent with the guideline, or that applying an alternate design solution is consistent with the code’s stated intent. Where a guideline conflicts with any code standard, the standard shall prevail.

6. In the case of a proposed variance or adjustment to a code standard, the applicant must demonstrate how the variance or adjustment results in equal or greater conformity to the intent of the code and all other applicable standards and guidelines.

7. Nullification of one standard or guideline by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not cause any other standard or guideline to be nullified (severability).

C. Burden of Proof. The applicant must demonstrate how his or her proposal meets all of the applicable standards contained in this chapter and other applicable city regulations. The applicant must also demonstrate that the proposal is consistent with the guidelines, or provide evidence of why a particular guideline is not relevant given the context of the site and proposed use.

D. Adjustments/Modifications to the Standards. The standards contained in this chapter may be adjusted or modified without the need for a variance if the applicant demonstrates that:

1. The code’s guiding principles, as contained in Article II of this chapter, and the intent statement(s) under the applicable standard to be adjusted (Article III of this chapter) can be better met through a proposed alternative design solution; or

2. Necessary characteristics of an allowed use present practical difficulties in meeting a standard. In such cases the design must provide other features that tend to meet the goal of the standard (such as a trellis with vines, a sculpture, or a pergola).

Where the code language suggests more than one way to meet a particular standard, the applicant is encouraged to be creative and propose the most appropriate design solution given the site’s context and the purpose of the code. The decision-making body shall refer to the purpose and intent in LCMC 17.74.010, and the intent under each standard to be adjusted, in making its decision; the purpose, guiding principles and intent statements shall serve as the approval criteria for adjustments. (Ord. 2011-12 § 1; Ord. 2007-10 § 5)

Article II. Guiding Principles


17.74.040 Guiding principles – Pearls.

The following are intended to serve as interim design standards for areas zoned GC-PO and RC-PO until the city adopts redevelopment plans and implementing regulations for such areas. The standards reflect the following values and objectives:

A. Enhance Lincoln City’s historic village centers.

B. Facilitate the development of compact, walkable village centers.

C. Support the formation of a mixed use, pedestrian-oriented district serving residents and visitors.

D. Develop an interconnected system of driveways or alleys with central public parking and encourage the provision of shared private off-street parking.

E. Encourage architecture that is consistent with the character of each village or pearl, while ensuring that new development creates a close, intimate human scale and architectural designs address all four sides of a building.

F. Encourage the use of contextually appropriate materials, textures and colors.

G. Promote storefront uses by orienting buildings and their entrances to the street or to pedestrian spaces abutting the street.

H. Create vibrant pedestrian spaces (e.g., plazas, public art, cafe seating areas, etc.) oriented to take advantage of southern exposures; pedestrian spaces should help identify the village, create intrigue, and offer weather protection and comfort to pedestrians while adding value to adjoining properties.

I. Break down large building masses and provide visual interest along the street.

J. Balance rhythm and continuity; encourage creativity in the design of building elevations, rooflines and facade elements.

K. Treat corner lots as focal points with vertical elements, public art, seating, and other design features.

L. Provide weather protection where commercial and mixed use buildings abut the street. (Ord. 2011-12 § 1; Ord. 2007-10 § 5)


17.74.050 Guiding principles – Strings.

A wide variety of site conditions within the commercial areas of the community make uniform application of design standards difficult. Most of the string areas are developed with commercial uses, although some are sparsely developed. Some buildings are placed right up to the highway; others are set back 100 feet or more behind large parking lots. In many locations, grade changes make connections between individual properties difficult and have resulted in a disjointed pattern with closely spaced driveways onto the highway and few secondary accesses or local street connections. The design standards for strings are intended to accomplish the following objectives:

A. Improve transportation operations and safety for all modes of travel.

B. Better integrate land use and transportation planning.

C. Protect and enhance aesthetic values.

D. Contribute to the unique identity and design of each pearl (e.g., by providing landscape and building orientation standards that distinguish between strings and pearls). (Ord. 2011-12 § 1; Ord. 2007-10 § 5)

Article III. Design Standards and Guidelines


17.74.060 Site design.

A. Intent.

1. Define the edges of the highway with noticeable transitions between strings and pearls.

2. Institute a continuous landscape frontage. Utilize planters with shrubs and street trees in tree wells where space does not allow planting strips.

3. Orient buildings to streets or, where buildings are to be set back from the street, require pedestrian orientation and appropriate landscaping.

4. Maintain on-street parking where it currently exists.

5. Over time, remove visual clutter along streets, such as power poles, overhead lines, rooftop signs, and internally illuminated freestanding signs.

6. Use coastal vegetation in landscapes.

7. Use landscapes and building orientation to create visual transitions between pearls and strings.

8. Maintain views to the ocean, bay, rivers, and forested hillsides and bluffs where practicable.

9. Facilitate the development of a continuous pedestrian network and bicycle ways connecting pearls and strings and extending into adjacent neighborhoods.

10. Reduce reliance on the highway for local vehicle trips (e.g., from one store to another store in the same vicinity).

11. Develop an interconnected system of driveways or alleys with central public parking and encourage the provision of shared off-street parking.

B. Standards. Due to the wide variety of site conditions and challenges posed by existing parcel configurations and development patterns, the city has adopted flexible, performance-based site design standards.

1. Building Setback, Orientation and Pedestrian Circulation. In determining the specific access, circulation, building orientation, and street frontage requirements for a particular project, the applicant, in consultation with the planning director, shall select from prototypes in subsections (B)(1)(a) through (f) of this section. Within pearl areas, at least 50 percent of the street-facing elevation of new buildings must be within 20 feet of the right-of-way, or the primary building entrance must be within 10 feet of the right-of-way and directly connected to a public sidewalk. New buildings within string areas shall be not more than 40 feet from public right-of-way or shopping street, consistent with the performance standards in this section. Primary building entrances may be oriented to a front yard or a side yard, consistent with the standards specified in subsections (B)(1)(a) through (f) of this section. 

a. Corner Property. On corner properties designated “pearl,” buildings shall be oriented to the corner, with vehicle access provided from a side street. Primary building entrances shall be located within 20 feet of a street right-of-way. The building shall meet transparency and weather protection standards along all street-facing elevations. If the primary building entrance is more than 20 feet from the sidewalk, a minimum 10-foot landscape pedestrian space shall connect them.

If a property is designated “string,” the building entrance need not be oriented to a corner; provided, that a minimum 20-foot-wide landscape screen separates all off-street parking areas from adjacent rights-of-way, except where the screen is interrupted for walkways required by code. See LCMC 17.74.120, Landscaping. 

Highway access is subject to ODOT review and approval. A connection to a rear alley or shared driveway (where applicable), or a temporary turnaround where such connection cannot be made, may be required.


[IMAGE]


b. Front Entrance at Street. On non-corner parcels designated “pearl,” the building shall be oriented to the street and have a primary entrance placed at or within 10 feet of the right-of-way. This maximum setback distance may be increased only where a pedestrian space of not less than six feet in width connects the sidewalk and primary building entrance, and no parking is allowed between them. The building shall meet weather protection and transparency standards along all street-facing elevations. 

If a property is designated “string,” the building entrance need not be placed within 10 feet of the street edge; provided, that a minimum 20-foot-wide landscape screen separates all off-street parking areas from adjacent rights-of-way (except where the screen is interrupted for walkways required by code). See LCMC 17.74.120, Landscaping.

Highway access is subject to ODOT review and approval. A connection to a rear alley or shared driveway (where applicable), or a temporary turnaround where such connection cannot be made, may be required.


[IMAGE]


c. Building at Street with Side Entrance. On properties designated “pearl,” and where the planning director determines that a building may have its primary entrance placed on a side elevation not facing a street, a primary building entrance shall be placed within 40 feet of a street right-of-way, and a pedestrian pathway shall connect the entrance directly to the right-of-way. No parking shall be located between the building and any street frontage. The building shall meet weather protection and transparency standards on all street-facing elevations.

If the primary building entrance is more than 20 feet from the sidewalk, a pedestrian space of not less than six feet in width shall connect them. See LCMC 17.74.100, Pedestrian spaces.

Where a property is designated “string,” the building entrance need not be placed within 40 feet of a street right-of-way, and surface parking may be located between the building and street; provided, that a minimum 20-foot-wide landscape screen separates all off-street parking areas from adjacent rights-of-way (except where the screen is interrupted for walkways required by code). See LCMC 17.74.120, Landscaping.

Highway access shall be subject to ODOT review and approval; a connection to a rear alley or shared driveway (where applicable), or a temporary turnaround where such connection cannot be made, may be required.


[IMAGE]


d. Building Set Back with Side Entrance. Where the planning director determines that a building may be oriented to an internal parking area and it may have its primary entrance placed on a side elevation (strings only), the following standards shall apply: all street-facing elevations and elevations on which a primary building entrance is placed shall meet the transparency and weather protection requirements of this code.

No parking shall be located between the building and street; buildings with primary entrances more than 40 feet from the street edge need not meet weather protection and transparency standards along the street frontage; provided, that a landscape buffer of 25 to 30 feet in width shall be planted in front of those portions of the wall facing the street that do not meet the standards. (Plantings shall conform to the “volume landscape” requirements of this code.) See LCMC 17.74.120, Landscaping.

Highway access shall be subject to ODOT review and approval; a connection to a rear alley or shared driveway (where applicable), or a temporary turnaround where such connection is not possible, may be required.


[IMAGE]


e. Parking in Front. Where the planning director finds that multiple buildings and/or building pads should be set back from the street right-of-way behind surface parking and oriented to internal driveways instead of streets (strings only), such driveways shall be designed as “shopping streets.” Shopping streets shall contain, at a minimum, on-street parking, sidewalks/walkways with raised curbs, street trees and pedestrian lighting, as generally shown below. Such buildings may have their primary entrance(s) placed along the shopping street instead of a public street; in such cases, primary building entrances shall be within 10 feet of a walkway (eight-foot minimum width), except where a pedestrian space (e.g., plaza or outdoor seating area) is provided, the setback may be increased accordingly. Surface parking shall be set back and screened from the street right-of-way behind a 20-foot (minimum width) landscape buffer. Buildings shall meet weather protection and transparency standards along all shopping streets. See LCMC 17.74.080, Building design, and LCMC 17.74.120, Landscaping.

Highway access is subject to ODOT review and approval; connection to a rear alley or abutting driveway (where applicable), or a temporary turnaround where such connection is not possible, may be required.


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


Examples of internal shopping streets that meet the building orientation requirement when building(s) are not oriented to the highway (strings only). Note: The above driveways do not have to extend through to Highway 101; provided, that a pedestrian connection is made to required sidewalk.

f. Parking in Front without Shopping Street. Where the planning director finds that it is necessary to place surface parking between a building’s primary entrance and the highway or other public street (strings only), and it is not possible to develop an internal shopping street as described above, e.g., due to the small size of a property, its configuration, or other physical site constraints, then the following standards shall apply: all surface parking and internal drives shall be set back at least 20 feet from the street right-of-way behind a landscape buffer; adequate vehicle queuing distances shall be provided between the highway right-of-way and all parking areas, subject to review and approval by ODOT; a six-foot minimum width walkway shall connect the primary building entrance to a public sidewalk with three-foot minimum width planter strips placed between such walkways and abutting driveways; raised or textured paving with ADA wheelchair accessible ramps shall be provided at all pedestrian crossings of vehicle areas; and provisions shall be made for potential future driveway extensions as adjacent properties are developed or street connections can be made. See also LCMC 17.74.120, Landscaping.

Highway access is subject to ODOT review and approval; connection to a rear alley or abutting driveway (where applicable), or a temporary turnaround where such connection is not possible, may be required.


[IMAGE]


2. Property with Grade Change. Where retaining walls are required adjacent to a public right-of-way (strings or pearls), they shall incorporate rusticated concrete block, striated or battered concrete, or natural stone. Applications for site plan review shall include proposed retaining wall detail drawings.


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 2011-12 § 1; Ord. 2010-05 § 11; Ord. 2007-10 § 5)


17.74.070 Pedestrian circulation.

Pedestrian facilities shall be provided in accordance with the site design standards in LCMC 17.74.060. (Ord. 2011-12 § 1; Ord. 2007-10 § 5)


17.74.080 Building design.

A. Intent. The building design standards reflect the following community values:

1. Eclectic coastal architecture.

2. Building orientation to streets to create a sense of enclosure and human scale.

3. Articulated building facades to break up large volumes and promote human scale.

4. Contextually appropriate materials, textures and colors.

5. Storefront character (windows, pedestrian shelter, furnishings, etc.).

6. Corner buildings that serve as focal points with vertical elements, furnishings and/or public art.

B. Standards.

1. Height.

a. Maximum Height. Maximum height is established by the underlying zone.

b. Minimum Height. Buildings within pearls (GC-PO or RC-PO zoned properties) shall be built to a height of not less than 18 feet where those buildings are required to orient to a public right-of-way. The minimum height is intended to maintain a sense of enclosure of the street. Single-story buildings shall incorporate parapets, towers or other design elements that reach the minimum height.

2. Building Form.

a. Overall Design. Architectural designs shall address all four sides of a building, for example by continuing architectural elements (e.g., articulation, materials, detailing, etc.) around building corners. New buildings should not mimic any other building in their form or detailing, but instead should reflect the predominant form(s) within each pearl or string, as applicable, while expressing individuality.

b. Stepped Rooflines. Height should vary from building to building to avoid a homogenous appearance. This standard is met by using stepped parapets, gables, or slightly dissimilar height from building to building. Abrupt changes in height between buildings can be managed by having the taller building follow the horizontal lines of the shorter building along the ground floor, and by having the taller building reference elements or detailing of the shorter building(s) on its upper stories. See also subsection (B)(3) of this section concerning storefront character.

c. Roof Forms. Roof designs shall conform predominately to one of the following: flat with stepped parapet, gabled, or hipped. Secondary roof forms may include towers, dormers, turrets or other features with rounded (e.g., split-barrel), shed (e.g., dormer), pyramidal, or crossing elevations. Gambrel, dual-pitched (e.g., hipped “mansard”), deck (flat-topped, hipped), A-frame, and similar roof forms are discouraged. Where roofs are pitched, a minimum pitch of at least 30 degrees should be maintained.


[IMAGE]


3. Window Transparency.

a. Applicability. The window transparency requirement does not apply to the auditorium portion of a theater (but does apply to the lobby and concession area), to the guestroom portion of a motel, hotel, or resort (but does apply to the lobby and other portions), or to multiple-family dwellings (but does apply to the commercial parts of mixed use buildings incorporating multiple-family dwellings).

b. Standard. Consistent with a desired storefront character, and to avoid the creation of large blank walls, buildings shall have large display windows, windowed doors and transom windows. In the pearls this standard is met when the ground floor, street-facing elevation of a building between the building base (or 30 inches above the sidewalk grade, whichever is less) and a plane 80 inches above the sidewalk grade is comprised of at least 60 percent transparent windows. In the strings, this standard is reduced to 40 percent. Upper floors may have less window area, but should follow the vertical lines of the lower level piers and the horizontal definition of spandrels and any cornices. Buildings not containing a street-facing elevation, such as those that are set back behind another building and those that are oriented to a pedestrian space (e.g., side plaza or court), shall meet the transparency standard on all elevations abutting pedestrian space(s) and on elevations containing a primary entrance. (Recommended: Figures 17.74.080-1 and 17.74.080-2.)

4. Building Orientation. New buildings shall be placed consistent with the performance standards in LCMC 17.74.060, Site design.

5. Primary Entrances. Buildings shall have clearly defined primary entrances that provide a weather protection shelter for a depth of not less than five feet (e.g., either by recess, overhang, canopy, portico and/or awning) extending from the building entry. See also subsection (B)(14) of this section, Pedestrian Shelters.

6. Secondary Entrances. Buildings in pearl areas should provide at least one entrance for every 40 feet of street frontage, consistent with a walkable storefront character. Where it is not practical to provide entrances every 40 feet (e.g., a large building is designed for only one or two uses requiring street access), building entries may be spaced an average of 90 feet apart or less.

7. Armature of the Block. In pearl areas, where practical, the width of buildings should extend from side lot line to side lot line, to create a human scale and to maintain continuity of the storefront character.

8. Building Mass (Strings and Pearls).

a. Articulation. Building elevations shall incorporate offsets or divisions to reduce the apparent building scale and to improve aesthetics of large buildings. Elevations of a structure shall be divided into smaller areas or planes to minimize the appearance of bulk as viewed from any street, pedestrian space or adjacent property. When an elevation of a primary structure is more than 800 square feet in area, the elevation must be divided into distinct planes of not more than 800 square feet. For the purpose of this standard, areas of wall planes that are entirely separated from other wall planes are those that result in a change in plane such as a recessed or projecting section of the structure that projects or recedes at least one foot from the adjacent plane, for a length of at least six feet. Changes in plane may include but are not limited to recessed entries, bays, stepped parapets, secondary roof forms (e.g., gables, lower roof sheds, dormers and towers), building bases, canopies, awnings, projections, recesses, alcoves, pergolas, porticos, roof overhangs, or other features that are consistent with the overall composition of the building. See also subsection (B)(11) of this section, Horizontal Rhythms. (Recommended: Figures 17.74.080-1 and 17.74.080-2.)

b. Street Level/Upper Floor. The distinction between street level and upper floors shall be established, for example, through the use of awnings, canopies, belt course, or similar detailing, materials and/or fenestration. (Recommended: Figures 17.74.080-1 and 17.74.080-2.)


[IMAGE]


Figure 17.74.080-1: Example of acceptable building elements (applicable to single- or multi-story buildings).

9. Accessibility. Accessibility shall be provided consistent with applicable building codes. Where wheelchair ramps are required, the ramp design shall incorporate materials and detailing similar to the base of the building.

10. Openings.

a. Ground Floor Windows. Ground floor elevations shall conform to subsection (B)(3) of this section and should contain windows that are framed by piers or pilasters (sides); awnings, canopies or trim/hoods (tops); and kick plates or bulkheads (base). Decorative detailing and ornamentation around windows (e.g., corbels, medallions, pediments, or similar features) is encouraged. (Recommended: Figures 17.74.080-1 and 17.74.080-2.)

b. Upper Floor Windows. Upper floor window orientation should be primarily vertical, or have a width that is no greater than the width of the ground floor windows. (Recommended: Figures 17.74.080-1 and 17.74.080-2.)

c. Projecting Windows, Display Cases. For durability and aesthetic reasons, display cases, when provided, shall be integral to the building design (not affixed to the exterior) and contain trim or other detailing consistent with the overall composition of the building.

d. Entrances. Ground level entrances shall be at least partly transparent. This standard may be met by providing a door with a window(s), a transom window above the door, or sidelights beside the door.

e. ATMs and Service Windows. Where ATMs or service windows are proposed on any street-facing elevation, they shall be visible from the street for security and have a canopy, awning, or other weather protection shelter. Where drive-up windows or similar automobile-oriented uses are provided, they shall conform to the standards in LCMC 17.32.040.

f. Corner Entrances. Buildings on corner lots should have corner entrances, consistent with LCMC 17.74.060, Site design. Such entrances are not required to be recessed, but shall have an awning or canopy of at least five feet in depth for weather protection. Where a corner building is to be built in a pearl area but does not have a corner entrance, it shall provide for a corner plaza consistent with LCMC 17.74.100, or architectural features shall be provided honoring the corner as a pedestrian space; such features may include but are not limited to an alcove with seating, public art (e.g., sculpture or fountain), a vertical building element such as a tower (e.g., clock tower), or other feature approved through site plan review. (See also LCMC 17.74.100, Pedestrian spaces.)

g. Remodels. The scale and proportion of altered or added building elements, such as the size and relationship of new windows, doors, entrances, columns, weather protection shelters, and other features should be visually compatible with the overall composition of the building (i.e., including building materials, color, detailing, etc.). The approval body may require modifications to a proposed design to address scale and proportion.

11. Horizontal Rhythms.

a. Horizontal Lines. New building designs and exterior remodels should establish prominent horizontal lines and avoid blank walls. Examples of such horizontal lines include: the base below a series of storefront windows; an existing awning or canopy line, or belt course between building stories; and/or an existing cornice or parapet line. It is not necessary for new lines to match existing lines. (Recommended: Figures 17.74.080-1 and 17.74.080-2.)

b. Ground Floor/Upper Floor Division. A clear visual division shall be maintained between the ground level floor and upper floors, for example, through the use of a belt course, transom, awnings or canopies. (Recommended: Figures 17.74.080-1 and 17.74.080-2.)

c. Building Base. Buildings shall have a foundation or base, typically from ground to the bottom of the lower windowsills, with changes in volume or material, to give a sense of strength and symmetry. (Recommended: Figures 17.74.080-1 and 17.74.080-2.)


[IMAGE]


Figure 17.74.080-2: Rhythm, massing, and building openings.

12. Vertical Lines. New construction or front elevation remodels shall reflect a vertical orientation, either through breaks in volume or the use of surface details, to divide large walls and create a human scale. Building designs for corner properties in pearl areas should accentuate the corner location with a vertical element. (Recommended: Figure 17.74.080-3.)


[IMAGE]


Figure 17.74.080-3: Example of vertical element and desirable building height on a corner property in a pearl.

13. Materials and Color.

a. Primary Materials. Exterior building materials shall predominately consist of painted or natural stain wood, stone, brick, rusticated concrete block (warm tones) or comparable cladding. Rough-hewn wood, timbers and metals may be used as accents but not as the primary exterior cladding. The following may not be used as primary cladding on new buildings: corrugated metal, foam/synthetic stucco, and similar materials as determined by the decision body. See also subsections (B)(13)(c), Secondary Materials, and (B)(13)(d), Substitute Materials, of this section.

b. Change in Materials. Elevations shall incorporate changes in material that define a building’s base, middle and top and create visual interest and relief. Side and rear elevations that do not face a street, public parking area, pedestrian access way or plaza may utilize changes in texture and/or color of materials in the interest of affordability; provided, that the design is consistent with the overall composition of the building.

c. Secondary Materials. Any of the materials listed as primary materials may also be used as secondary materials or accents. Metals such as copper, steel, iron, bronze and similar appearance metals may be used as trims or accents (e.g., flashing, weather protection features, ornamentation, etc.) when compatible with the overall building design, and subject to review and approval through site plan review.

d. Substitute Materials. Substitute materials that are equal in appearance and durability to those in subsections (B)(13)(a) and (c) of this section may be approved at the discretion of the reviewing authority through site plan review. The applicant will be required to provide specifications from the manufacturer.

e. Color. Color schemes should be simple and coordinated over the entire building to establish a sense of overall composition. Color schemes should tie together signs, ornamentation, awnings, canopies and entrances. There shall be no more than one base color for each 25 feet of the front elevation; one base color for the entire front elevation is preferred. Using only one or two accent colors is also preferred, except where precedent exists for using more than two colors with some architectural styles (e.g., arts and crafts). Natural wood finishes are appropriate for doors, window sashes and trim, signs, canopies and other architectural accents. Luminescent, sparkling, neon and “day-glow” colors are not allowed (e.g., outlining building), except that neon signs are allowed subject to applicable sign codes. Metals shall be brushed finish or painted in mute or earth tones to minimize glare.

f. Contemporary Designs. Materials that provide a contemporary interpretation of local architecture styles, including arts and crafts, art deco, and vernacular (beach cottage) styles, are encouraged. Buildings that resemble suburban strip-malls (e.g., picture windows extending to near grade level) and those that use highly reflective glass, clerestory windows and/or similar non-traditional features are discouraged.

g. Restoration and Rehabilitation. Restoration and rehabilitation projects should incorporate original materials and design elements (e.g., previously covered over) to the extent practicable.

14. Pedestrian Shelters. Awnings, canopies, recesses or similar pedestrian shelters shall be provided along at least 60 percent of a building’s ground floor elevation(s) where the building abuts a sidewalk, plaza, pedestrian access way or outdoor seating area. Pedestrian shelters used to meet the above standard shall extend at least five feet over the pedestrian area, shed rain away from building entrance(s), be proportionate to the building in its dimensions, and not obscure the building’s architectural details. If mezzanine or transom windows exist, the shelter shall be below such windows where feasible.


[IMAGE]


Pedestrian shelters may come in a variety of forms, materials, and colors, provided they fit the overall composition of the building. Actual designs should address the location and function of the shelter, building codes, architectural compatibility, durability, and right-of-way constraints, if any.

15. Mechanical Equipment.

a. Screening. When mechanical equipment, such as utility vaults, air compressors, generators, antennas, satellite dishes, or similar equipment is adjacent to a street, sidewalk or pedestrian space, it shall be screened from view from all streets. Where such equipment is installed on a side or rear building elevation and is adjacent to an alley, access way, or pedestrian space, its appearance shall be minimized or screened using materials and/or colors that are similar to those used on the subject building. Standpipes, meters, vaults and similar equipment should not be placed on a front elevation when other alternative locations exist; such equipment shall be placed on a side or rear elevation when practicable.

b. Rooftops. Rooftop mechanical units shall not be visible from any street.

c. Ground-Mounted Units. Ground-mounted mechanical units shall be limited to side or rear yards and screened with fences or walls constructed of materials similar to those on adjacent buildings. Hedges may also be used as screens where there is adequate sunlight and irrigation to ensure their successful growth. (Ord. 2011-12 § 1; Ord. 2007-10 § 5)


17.74.090 Transportation and streetscape standards.

A. Intent. The relationship between the local street system, Highway 101 and adjoining properties is important from both a transportation planning and a land use perspective. Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) is the permitting authority for all access onto Highway 101. As the permitting agency for land use, the city works cooperatively with ODOT to manage development adjacent to the highway. The city’s design standards are intended to implement the community’s vision of a cohesive streetscape, with on-street parking, wide sidewalks, weather protection (pedestrian) shelters, benches, pedestrian-scaled lighting, public art, opportunities for cafe seating, and other amenities. A safe, inviting and comfortable pedestrian environment benefits businesses, highway users and the community as a whole.

B. Standards. In addition to site design standards in LCMC 17.74.060, the following provisions apply to all new development:

1. Transportation Plan Conformity. New development shall conform to the policies, standards, specifications and design details (e.g., street sections) contained in the city’s transportation system plan (TSP) and the standards in LCMC 17.74.060. When streetscape improvements are required of new development, such improvements shall conform to the TSP.

2. A connection to a rear alley or shared driveway (where applicable) may be required, or where such connection cannot be made, a temporary turnaround may be required.

3. Streetscapes. Where a project is subject to a redevelopment plan, it shall conform to applicable streetscape provisions (e.g., sidewalks, street furnishings, etc.) of the redevelopment plan. (Ord. 2011-12 § 1; Ord. 2007-10 § 5)


17.74.100 Pedestrian spaces.

A. Intent. The increased development intensity, mixture of uses, pedestrian activity, close building orientation and minimal private open space envisioned for the pearl areas should be offset by pedestrian spaces along building frontages and in breaks between buildings. Pedestrian spaces, such as plazas, extra-wide sidewalks, outdoor seating areas, pedestrian access ways between buildings, alcoves and pocket parks, provide visual relief, pedestrian resting areas and opportunities for socialization. Pedestrian spaces do not have to be publicly owned or maintained. Therefore, projects within pearl areas are required to contribute their proportionate share of pedestrian space. String area projects are encouraged to incorporate appropriate pedestrian space. Pedestrian spaces count toward the required minimum landscape area in each zone.

B. Standards.

1. Pedestrian Space Standard. At least three percent of every pearl development site, except for residential developments, shall be designated and improved as pedestrian space. The highest priority locations for pedestrian space are those areas with the highest pedestrian activity (e.g., street corners and mid-block pedestrian access ways) that have a western or southern exposure (within 45 degrees of true south or west). Where no such area exists, then pedestrian space should be provided as an extended sidewalk or walkway connecting multiple developments.

The reviewing authority may find that the creation of pedestrian space is not practicable based on the project location or other relevant factors. In such cases, the city may accept an in-lieu fee equal to the fair market value of the land and improvements that would have otherwise been required. The fair market value shall be determined after the city approves the site plan review application and before issuance of any building permits on the project.

2. Dimensions. All pedestrian spaces shall have dimensions of not less than eight feet across and have a surface area of not less than 64 square feet.

3. Public Access. Such areas shall abut a public right-of-way or otherwise be connected to and visible from a public right-of-way by a sidewalk or pedestrian access way; access ways shall be identifiable with a change in paving materials (e.g., pavers inlaid in concrete or a change in pavement scoring patterns and/or texture). Where a right-of-way connection is not possible, the owner shall be required to provide a public access way easement to the pedestrian space. Pedestrian spaces shall not be gated or closed to public access, unless otherwise required by the city. (Recommended: Figures 17.74.100-1 and 17.74.100-2.)


[IMAGE]


Pedestrian spaces should serve as focal points and gathering places, giving the downtown a unique identity and sense of place. Pedestrian amenities may include, but are not limited to, outdoor seating areas or cafes, pedestrian access ways, weather protection, plazas, benches, public art, and street furnishings such as bicycle racks and pedestrian lighting (e.g., bollards) at crossings.


[IMAGE]


Figure 17.74.100-1: Example of a small pedestrian space containing approximately 64 square feet.

4. Pedestrian Amenities Required. Where pedestrian space is required, it shall contain pedestrian amenities such as plaza space, extra-wide sidewalks (i.e., outdoor cafe space), benches, public art, pedestrian-scale lighting, wayfinding signs (as approved by the city) or similar pedestrian areas in an amount equal to or greater than one-half of one percent of the estimated construction cost of the subject building(s). Where a pedestrian space adjoins a building entrance it should incorporate a canopy, awning, pergola, portico, or similar weather protection feature. Pedestrian amenities such as seating, planters, public art and pedestrian lighting (e.g., antique lamps or bollard lights) at street corners or pedestrian access ways may be counted in fulfilling the one-half of one percent requirement. (See Figure 17.74.100-2.) Cost estimates for pedestrian amenity improvements shall be prepared by a licensed architect, landscape architect, or other qualified professional, and shall be subject to review and approval by the planning and community development director.

5. Mechanical Equipment and Garbage Storage Areas. Mechanical equipment and garbage storage areas are not counted in the pedestrian space(s) required under subsection (B)(1) of this section. Such facilities shall be screened completely from view and set back 20 feet or more from a pedestrian space for aesthetic reasons and to minimize odors and noise.


[IMAGE]


Figure 17.74.100-2: Example of preferred types of pedestrian amenities, shown with access way between buildings leading to an internal parking area or street end.

(Ord. 2011-12 § 1; Ord. 2007-10 § 5)


17.74.110 Parking.

The off-street parking standards are the same as provided in Chapter 17.56 LCMC, except that credit toward minimum parking standards shall be granted for on-street parking spaces abutting the development. Shared parking between uses is allowed, in conformance with LCMC 17.56.060. (Ord. 2011-12 § 1; Ord. 2007-10 § 5)


17.74.120 Landscaping.

A. Intent. Lincoln City is identifiable, in part, by its shore pines and other coastal vegetation. While it is inevitable that some existing trees will be removed with new development, native vegetation should be preserved where practicable or otherwise replanted in required landscape areas. Trees and hedges serve as windbreaks and visual screens in an area that is otherwise being exposed to high winds. Grassy swales capture and cleanse surface water runoff before it infiltrates into the ground or seeps onto the beach. Mature vegetation also enhances real estate values. For these reasons, as well as for aesthetic reasons, the city requires that all new developments and redevelopment projects attempt to save mature vegetation that is not within building envelopes and provide landscaping in surface parking areas, as buffers between uses, within street planter strips, and to soften the appearance of large building elevations. Landscaping must conform to the following provisions, in addition to those in LCMC 17.52.100.

B. Standards.

1. Mature Landscaping. Site plans shall incorporate existing, mature vegetation that is not within building envelopes and not within areas that are required to be graded or excavated (e.g., for utilities, foundations, and driveways) into the project’s landscape design to the greatest extent practicable. Where mature tree removal is unavoidable (e.g., a tree’s location precludes reasonable development consistent with prescribed building envelopes, required building orientation, or public improvement requirements), mitigation shall be required as per subsection (B)(3)(g) of this section.

2. Volume Landscaping and Screening. Large trees and/or shrub planting may be required in quantities exceeding the base requirements of this code to mitigate adjustments to other standards or the loss of mature trees as described under subsection (B)(1) of this section.

3. Minimum Landscape Standards.

a. All off-street parking and vehicular use areas (including driveways and loading docks) shall have perimeter landscaping of not less than four feet in depth, and interior landscaping covering at least 10 percent of the entire vehicular use area.

The planning commission may reduce the minimum landscape area to not less than five percent where the development preserves and protects one or more existing mature trees. The commission shall use its discretion in awarding credit; provided, that more credit may be awarded to projects that preserve the largest or most visible trees as viewed from public rights-of-way including the beach. Areas with preserved trees are counted toward the required parking lot landscaping.

b. Each separate landscape area shall be a minimum of 24 square feet with a minimum dimension of at least four feet and, on parking lot islands and in park strips along a street, shall contain at least one tree. All remaining land in the landscape area shall be covered by a combination of shrubs, ground cover plants or other city-approved nonvegetative ground cover.

c. All required buffer strips, screens, and other required landscape areas shall be planted at a density to ensure the intended buffering or screening intent is met; in no case shall a landscape area have less than one tree per 200 square feet of surface or less than one shrub per 50 square feet of area.

d. Required trees and shrubs shall be non-invasive species that are known to thrive in the northern Oregon coastal environment.

e. The following guidelines apply:

i. Vegetation native to the Pacific Northwest coast is encouraged;

ii. Turf and grass is discouraged, except in residential developments;

iii. Species should be those contained in the Lincoln City Tree Planting Guide and List of Recommended Species, or species recommended by a licensed nurseryman as being suitable for the local climate, as approved by the planning director.

f. Trees shall be at least two-inch caliper at time of planting.

g. When tree mitigation is required, the number of mitigation trees required shall be equal to the total number required to achieve at least half of the number of inches of mature tree(s) removed (diameter measured at four feet above grade). For instance, if a 12-inch diameter tree is removed, then at least two three-inch trees of the same or comparable species shall be planted. Alternatively, the reviewing authority may require fewer trees of a larger size be planted.

h. Irrigation systems shall be provided for all planted areas for a period of at least two years, or until it is demonstrated that new plants have become naturalized.

i. Shrubs shall be at least three-gallon size when planted.

j. If hedges are planted for screening, plants shall be at least of an initial size so that the required screening will be achieved within two years.

k. Trees shall be planted so that encroachment below eight feet into a public right-of-way can be prevented without long-term detriment to the subject tree.

l. Landscaping shall preserve an adequate line of sight around vehicle accesses.

m. All landscaping materials shall be in vigorous and healthy growing condition and shall be installed according to common planting procedures, with consideration given to soil condition. The property owner is responsible for maintaining and replacing, as necessary, all approved landscape plants on his property and those within abutting rights-of-way (e.g., street trees).

4. Parking Area Landscaping. Surface parking areas shall have perimeter landscaping, as described above. Surface parking lots containing more than 20 parking stalls shall be divided into rows of not more than 12 continuous parking spaces. (Recommended: Figure 17.74.120.)

5. Water Quality. Where a surface parking area incorporates water quality filters/swales and porous paving materials, such as pavers set in sand, concrete blocks allowing grass to grow through, and/or porous concrete (e.g., particularly along walkways and in parking areas that are used infrequently), the reviewing authority may allow additional building (lot) coverage. Porous paving may also be used for small areas, such as the first four feet of a parking lot’s perimeter, where it would help reduce or slow surface water runoff. (Recommended: Figure 17.74.120.)


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


Figure 17.74.120: Typical parking lot landscaping concepts, incorporating water quality features.

(Ord. 2011-12 § 1; Ord. 2007-10 § 5)


17.74.130 Exterior lighting.

A. Intent. The number, size, design and placement of lights all contribute to creating a safe and aesthetically pleasing development. Excessive lighting contributes to light pollution, glare and light trespass, and it diminishes views of the night sky. Outdoor lights should function primarily as tools for pedestrian wayfinding and business visibility. Business visibility does not require that owners fully illuminate their building and parking areas. Urban renewal plans for some areas (e.g., Taft and Oceanlake) include sidewalk lighting (antique street lamps) that, together with modest on-site lighting in developments, will enable motorists and pedestrians to recognize businesses and safely walk to them. Lights in string areas need not be designed to a highway scale.

B. Standards. Outdoor light fixtures shall not be installed without site plan review approval. Where a light fixture is required as part of a larger project, the lighting package shall be reviewed under the following guidelines and standards. Where an outdoor light fixture is to be installed apart from any other development application, it shall be processed administratively. Outdoor lighting that does not conform to current standards, but conformed to city standards prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, is allowed to continue as nonconforming until such time that the light fixture and/or building is remodeled or replaced.

1. Contextual Design. Exterior lights shall be designed to fit their particular location and function. They should be simple in character and similar in color and intensity to those used traditionally. High pressure sodium lights are appropriate, except where good color rendition is required; enhanced color rendition high pressure sodium lamps, or more uniform spectrum lamps, may also be used.

a. Pedestrian ways and entrances that are not otherwise illuminated by building-mounted lights or streetlights shall be illuminated using bollards, step lights, or other low-profile fixtures that are appropriate for walkways and plazas. Illumination between one and two foot-candles for such areas is required.

b. Building-mounted lights should complement the building background in style; using lights to draw attention to (wash) architectural elements is permitted; provided, that unshielded, high intensity light sources and sources that direct light upward without cut-offs are not permitted. (See subsection (B)(2) of this section.)

c. Antique-style lights are preferred over recessed can lights and globe fixtures. Contemporary light fixtures that draw on historic elements or provide a new interpretation of an historic style are encouraged.

d. Maximum initial luminance of outdoor sales areas, storage areas and service station canopies and similar areas shall not exceed 20 foot-candles, except as otherwise approved by the planning director.

e. Maximum initial luminance of parking lots shall not exceed four foot-candles, except as otherwise approved by the planning director.

2. Impacts of Lighting. The visual impacts of site and architectural lighting, such as overspray of lights onto adjacent residential properties and lights shining into the night sky, shall be avoided.

a. Light poles shall not exceed a height of 20 feet.

b. Only shielded lights are permitted. Shielding should be integral to the light fixture and direct light downward. Exception: Up-lighting of official flags may be allowed; provided, that the luminance level is minimized.

c. Lighting associated with service areas, parking lots and parking structures, as well as streetlights, shall be shielded or provide cut-offs to avoid glare, light pollution (night sky) and light spillover onto residential properties. Luminance at the property line, or no more than five feet over the property line, shall be zero.

d. The planning director may require the installation and use of timers or activity switches to prevent unnecessary sources of light by controlling the length of time that exterior lights are in use late at night.

e. Lights used to wash a building elevation (including any signs) shall not wash more than 75 percent of the facade. Interior lights (e.g., store displays, etc.) are exempt.

f. Up-lighting is prohibited. Where lighting is used to wash an exterior wall, the use of recessed eave lighting is preferred. The maximum illumination limits for wall washing are one foot-candle for dark colored surfaces and one-half foot-candle for light colored surfaces.

g. The manufacturer’s data or measurement shall be provided to demonstrate conformance with subsection (B)(1) of this section. Photometric plans are required with site plan review applications, unless waived by the planning director.


[IMAGE]


Figure 17.74.130: Examples of acceptable lights.

(Ord. 2011-12 § 1; Ord. 2007-10 § 5)


Chapter 17.76 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS

Sections:

17.76.010    Application information and procedures.

17.76.020    Public notice.

17.76.030    Quasi-judicial public hearing procedure and requirements.

17.76.040    Appeals.

17.76.050    Final action on application for permit or zone change request.

17.76.060    Filing fees.


17.76.010 Application information and procedures.

A. An application for a land use action or permit shall consist of:

1. A complete application form and all supporting documents and evidence;

2. Proof that the property affected by the application is in the exclusive ownership of the applicant, or that the applicant has the consent of all parties in ownership of the affected property;

3. A description of the property affected by the application and, in the case of a quasi-judicial map amendment, a legal description.

B. All documents or evidence relied on by the applicant shall be made available to the public.

C. If an application for a permit or zone change is incomplete, the city shall notify the applicant of exactly what information is missing within 30 days of the receipt of the application. The notification shall give the applicant a deadline by which to submit missing information, after which the city will deem the application complete and proceed with its consideration. The application shall be deemed complete upon expiration of the 30-day period, if no notification of missing information is given, or, if notification of missing information is given, upon receipt of the missing information or expiration of the deadline for submitting the missing information, whichever occurs first. If the application was complete when first submitted or the applicant submits the missing information within 180 days of the date the application was first submitted, approval or denial of the application shall be based on the standards and criteria of the comprehensive plan and this title that were applicable at the time the application was first submitted. In all other cases, approval or denial shall be based on the standards and criteria applicable at the time of final action on the application.

D. Where a proposed development requires more than one development permit or zone change request from the city, the applicant may request that the city consider all necessary permit and zone change requests in a consolidated manner. If the applicant requests that the city consolidate its review of the development proposal, all necessary public hearings before the planning commission shall be held on the same date. If the applicant’s request includes a request for a comprehensive plan amendment, the applicant shall be required to waive in writing the 120-day requirement set out in LCMC 17.76.050(A) as a condition to consolidated treatment.

E. In the case of an application for a planning commission resolution, under LCMC 17.52.050, that a use is included among the allowed uses in a zoning district, if the application so requests, the department shall provide notice of the decision on the application in accord with the provisions of LCMC 17.76.020(A) and (B)(1) governing notice of administrative actions, which decision thereafter shall be directly appealable to the land use board of appeals in accordance with ORS 197.830 and 227.175(12).

F. If an application for a land use action or permit is denied, the applicant thereafter may submit a single supplemental application for any or all other uses allowed under the comprehensive plan and this title in the zone in which the site that is the subject of the application is, or on rezoning would be, located. The supplemental application shall include a request for any rezoning or variance that may be required in order to obtain approval of a permit under the comprehensive plan and this title. The supplemental application shall be subject to the same procedures as any other application for a land use action or permit, except that the time within which the city must take final action shall be 240 days rather than the 120 days set out in LCMC 17.76.050(A).

G. Except as otherwise provided in this section:

1. If the land use board of appeals issues a final order remanding to the city a city decision on an application for a land use action or permit, and if no petition for judicial review of the LUBA final order is timely filed, then the city shall take final action on the remanded application within 111 days after LUBA delivered or mailed its final order; and

2. If LUBA issues a final order remanding to the city a city decision on an application for a land use action or permit, if a petition for judicial review is timely filed, and if the final resolution of the judicial review affirms LUBA remand, then the city shall take final action on the remanded application within 90 days after the resolution of the judicial review becomes final.

The commencement of the 111- and 90-day periods set out in this subsection shall be automatically deferred until the applicant delivers to the department a written request that the city proceed with the application on remand. The 111- and 90-day periods set out in this subsection may be extended by the director, at the director’s discretion, for a reasonable period of time on receipt of a written request from the applicant. The 111- and 90-day requirements set out in this subsection shall not apply to remand proceedings concerning amendments to the city’s comprehensive plan or land use regulations or the adoption of new land use regulations that were forwarded to the Director of the Department of Land Conservation and Development under ORS 197.610.

H. Any staff report used at the hearing shall be available at least seven days prior to the hearing. (Ord. 2000-06-A §§ 9 – 12; Ord. 91-18 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 9.010)


17.76.020 Public notice.

A. Content of Mailed and Published Notice. A notice of a public hearing or an administrative action shall contain the following information:

1. The name of the applicant;

2. In the case of a public hearing, the date, time and place of hearing, and who is holding the public hearing;

3. The street address or other easily understood geographical reference to the subject property;

4. The nature of the application and, in the case of a public hearing, the proposed use or uses which could be authorized and, in the case of an administrative action, the proposed use or uses which have been authorized;

5. A list of the applicable criteria from this title and the comprehensive plan that apply to the application at issue;

6. In the case of a public hearing, a statement that a failure to raise an issue in person or by letter not later than the close of the record following the evidentiary hearing, or failing to provide accompanying statements of evidence sufficient to afford the decision-making body an adequate opportunity to respond to the issue will preclude an appeal to the land use board of appeals on that issue;

7. The name of the city representative to contact and the telephone number where additional information may be obtained;

8. A statement that a copy of the application, all documents and evidence relied upon by the applicant, and applicable criteria and, in the case of an administrative action, a copy of the administrative action are available for inspection at no cost and will be provided at reasonable cost;

9. In the case of a public hearing, a statement that a copy of the staff report will be available for inspection at no cost at least seven days prior to the hearing and will be provided at reasonable cost;

10. In the case of a public hearing, a general explanation of the requirements for submission of testimony and the procedure for conducting hearings;

11. In the case of an administrative action, statements that:

a. Any person who is adversely affected or aggrieved or who is entitled to written notice under subsection (B) of this section may appeal the decision by filing a written appeal to the planning commission in the manner and within the time period provided in LCMC 17.76.040(A);

b. The administrative action will not become final until the period for filing an appeal to the planning commission has expired; and

c. A person who is mailed written notice of the administrative action cannot appeal the action directly to the land use board of appeals under ORS 197.830.

B. Mailed Notice.

1. The city shall mail notice of hearings or actions requiring notice pursuant to the provisions of this title to the applicant and to owners of record of property located within 250 feet from the exterior boundary of the subject property, and also to any neighborhood or community organization recognized as such by the city council, whose boundaries include the subject property. The city shall mail notice at least 20 days before the hearing for applications for conditional uses, variances and discretionary land use decisions made by staff and the appeals therefrom, and at least 10 days before the hearing for applications for quasi-judicial text or map amendments to this title, and quasi-judicial comprehensive plan map amendments. In addition, if so requested in the application, the city also shall mail notice to the Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development. For the purpose of this section, the “owners of record” is defined as property owners at mailing addresses verified in writing by the Lincoln County assessor’s office, and includes changes in ownership and mailing address that are readily available since the most recent property tax assessment.

2. If an application would change the zone of property which includes all or part of a mobile home or manufactured dwelling park as defined in ORS 446.003, the city shall give written notice by first class mail to each existing mailing address for tenants of the park at least 20 but not more than 40 days before the date of the first evidentiary hearing on the application. Failure of a tenant to receive a notice shall not invalidate the zone change.

3. The city shall mail notice of an appeal from a planning commission decision to all persons who gave testimony before the planning commission orally or in writing.

4. Failure of a property owner, neighborhood or community association, or DLCD to receive required notice shall not invalidate such proceedings, if the city can demonstrate by affidavit that such notice was given.

C. Published Notice. Notice shall be given for text or map amendments to this title and comprehensive plan by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 10 days before the date of the public hearing.

D. Change in Nature of Decision. In a proceeding for which notice is provided under this section, the city shall not make a final decision that is different from the proposal described in the notice to such a degree that the notice did not reasonably describe the city’s final action.

E. Notice of Zone Change or Limitation or Prohibition of Use. Except as to cases described in subsection (F) of this section, at least 20 days but not more than 40 days before the date of the first hearing on an ordinance that proposes to amend the comprehensive plan or any element thereof or this title in a manner that would change, or require a change in, the base zone of property or limit or prohibit, or require a limitation or prohibition of, land uses previously allowed in the affected zone, a written individual notice of the land use change shall be mailed by first class or bulk mail to the owner of each lot that the ordinance proposes to so affect, as shown on the most recent property tax assessment roll. The notice shall contain substantially the following statement in bold-faced type, extending from the left-hand margin to the right-hand margin across the top of the face page of the notice:

This is to notify you that Lincoln City is considering a land use regulation that will affect the permissible uses of your land.

The notice also shall contain substantially the following statement in the body of the notice:

On _________________, Lincoln City will hold a hearing on the adoption of a proposed ordinance. The City has determined that adoption of the ordinance will affect the permissible uses of your property and may reduce the value of your property. The ordinance is available for inspection at the Department of Planning and Community Development at Lincoln City’s City Hall, located at 801 SW Highway 101, Lincoln City, Oregon 97367. A copy of the ordinance also is available for purchase at a cost of $________. For additional information concerning the ordinance, you may call the Department at _______________.

The notice also shall describe in detail how the proposed ordinance would affect the use of the property.

F. At least 30 days prior to the amendment of the comprehensive plan or this title pursuant to a requirement of periodic review of the comprehensive plan, in a manner that would change the base zone of property or limit or prohibit land uses previously allowed in the affected zone, a written individual notice of the land use change shall be mailed by first class or bulk mail to the owner of each lot that the ordinance proposes to so affect, as shown on the most recent property tax assessment roll. The notice shall contain substantially the following statement in bold-faced type, extending from the left-hand margin to the right-hand margin across the top of the face page of the notice: 

This is to notify you that Lincoln City is considering a land use regulation that will affect the permissible uses of your land.

The notice also shall contain substantially the following statement in the body of the notice:

As a result of an order of the Oregon Land Conservation and Development Commission, Lincoln City is considering a proposed ordinance. Lincoln City has determined that the adoption of the ordinance will affect the permissible uses of your property and may reduce the value of your property. The ordinance, if adopted, will become effective on or about _________________. The ordinance is available for inspection at the Department of Planning and Community Development at Lincoln City’s City Hall, located at 801 SW Highway 101, Lincoln City, Oregon 97367. A copy of the ordinance also is available for purchase at a cost of $________. For additional information concerning the ordinance, you may call the Department at _______________.

The notice also shall describe in detail how the proposed ordinance would affect the use of the property.

G. Notice to ODOT and Other Public Agencies. The city shall provide written notice to ODOT and other public agencies in accordance with LCMC 12.28.200(D). (Ord. 2016-21 § 16; Ord. 2011-10 § 1; Ord. 2000-06-A § 13; Ord. 91-18 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 9.020)


17.76.030 Quasi-judicial public hearing procedure and requirements.

A. The following procedural entitlements shall be provided at the public hearing:

1. An impartial review as free from potential conflicts of interest and ex parte contact as is reasonably possible;

2. No member of a hearing body (planning commission or city council) shall participate in a discussion of the proposal or vote on the proposal when any of the following conditions exist:

a. Any of the following have a direct or substantial financial interest in the proposal: the hearing body member or the member’s spouse, brother, sister, child, parent, father-in-law, mother-in-law, any business in which the member is then serving or has served within the previous two years, or any business with which the member is negotiating for or has an arrangement or understanding concerning prospective partnership or employment, or any business with which the member is in direct competition, where the number of similar businesses is five or less,

b. The member has a direct private interest in the proposal,

c. For any other valid reason, the member has determined that participation in the hearing and decision cannot be in an impartial manner;

3. Body members shall reveal any ex parte contacts with regard to any matter and shall state the parties’ right to rebut the substance of the communication at the commencement of the first public hearing following the prehearing or ex parte contact where action will be considered or taken on the matter. If such contacts have not impaired the member’s impartiality or ability to vote on the matter, the member shall so state and shall participate in the public hearing. If the member determines that such contact has affected his impartiality or ability to vote on the matter, the member shall remove himself from the deliberations;

4. A party to a hearing, or a member of a hearing body, may challenge the qualifications of a member of the hearing body to participate in the hearing and decision regarding the matter. The challenge shall state the facts relied upon by the challenger relating to a person’s bias, prejudgment, personal interest, ex parte contact or other facts from which the challenger has concluded that the member of the hearing body cannot participate in an impartial manner. The hearing body shall deliberate and vote on such a challenge. The person who is the subject of the challenge may not vote on the motion;

5. No officer or employee of the city who has a financial or other private interest in a proposal shall participate in discussion with or give an official opinion to the hearing body on the proposal without first declaring for the record the nature and extent of each interest;

6. A reasonable opportunity for those persons potentially affected by the proposal to present evidence;

7. A reasonable opportunity for rebuttal or new material.

B. Rights of Disqualified Member of the Hearing Body.

1. An abstaining or disqualified member of the hearing body may be counted for purposes of forming a quorum. A member who represents his or her own personal interests at a hearing may do so only by abstaining from voting on the proposal, physically joining the audience and vacating the seat on the hearing body, and making full disclosure of his or her status and position at the time of addressing the hearing body.

2. Except for hearings on legislative actions conducted by the governing body, a member absent during the presentation of evidence in a hearing may not participate in the deliberations or final decision regarding the matter of the hearing unless the member has reviewed the record and evidence received at the prior hearing(s).

C. Burden and Nature of Proof. The burden of proof is upon the proponent. The proposal must be supported by proof that it conforms to the applicable provisions of this title, especially the specific criteria set forth for the particular type of decision under consideration.

D. Nature of Proceedings. An order of proceedings for a hearing will depend in part on the nature of the hearing. The following shall be supplemented by administrative procedures as appropriate.

1. Before receiving testimony on the issue, the following shall be addressed:

a. Any objections on jurisdictional grounds shall be noted in the record and if there is objection, the person presiding has the discretion to proceed or terminate.

b. Any abstentions or disqualification based on conflict of interest, personal bias, or ex parte contacts shall be determined. If ex parte contacts are reported by any commission member, the member shall state the content of the communication. Thereafter, the chairperson of the commission shall state that the parties have the right to rebut the substance of the ex parte communication. Communications with city staff are not to be considered as ex parte communications.

c. A statement by the chairperson presiding that:

i. States that testimony, arguments, and evidence must be directed toward the applicable criteria or other criteria in the comprehensive plan or this title which the person believes apply to the decision;

ii. States that failure to raise an issue accompanied by statements or evidence sufficient to afford the hearing body an opportunity to respond to the issue will preclude an appeal to the land use board of appeals based on that issue;

iii. States that failure of the applicant to raise constitutional or other issues relating to proposed conditions of approval with sufficient specificity to allow the city to respond to the issues will preclude an action for damages in the circuit court.

2. Presentations and Evidence.

a. The presiding officer shall preserve order at the public hearing and shall decide questions of order.

b. Members of the hearing body may take official notice of judicially cognizable facts of a general, technical or scientific nature. Such notice shall be stated and may be rebutted.

c. After presentation of the staff report, the proponent and all persons in favor of proponent’s proposal shall be heard. Following the presentation of proponent’s case, the opponents shall be heard. After presentation of the evidence by the opponents, neutral parties who do not necessarily support or oppose the petition shall have an opportunity to be heard, and then representatives of public agencies. Following all presentations of evidence, brief rebuttal shall be permitted in the same general order, but the presiding officer shall have broad discretion to limit rebuttal to avoid repetition and redundancy.

3. The hearing body may continue a hearing in order to obtain additional information or to serve further notice upon other property owners or persons it decides may be interested in the proposal being considered. The time and date when the hearing is to resume may be announced.

4. Prior to the conclusion of the initial evidentiary hearing, any participant may request an opportunity to present additional evidence, arguments, or testimony regarding the application. The hearing body shall grant such request by either continuing the hearing or leaving the record open for additional written evidence, arguments, or testimony.

a. If the hearing body grants a continuance, the hearing shall be continued to a date, time, and place at least seven days from the initial evidentiary hearing. An opportunity shall be provided at the continued hearing for persons to present and rebut new evidence, arguments, or testimony. If new written evidence is submitted at the continued hearing, any person may request, prior to the conclusion of the continued hearing, that the record be left open for at least seven days to submit additional written evidence, arguments, or testimony for the purpose of responding to the new written evidence. The hearing body may grant or deny such a request, at its discretion.

b. If the hearing body leaves the record open for additional written evidence, arguments, or testimony, the record shall be left open for at least seven days. If new evidence is submitted during the period the record is left open, any participant, within two working days after the period terminates, may file a written request with the department for an opportunity to respond to new evidence submitted during the period the record was left open. If such a request is filed, the record shall be reopened for an additional five days to allow the participant to raise new issues in response to the new evidence.

5. When the hearing body reopens a record to admit new evidence, arguments or testimony, any person may raise new issues related to the new evidence, arguments, testimony, or criteria for decision making that apply to the matter at issue.

6. Unless waived by the applicant, the hearing body shall allow the applicant at least seven days after the record is closed to all other parties to submit final written arguments in support of the application. The applicant’s final submittal shall be part of the record. The applicant’s final submittal shall not include any new evidence and, if it does include new evidence, the new evidence shall be considered not part of the record and shall be disregarded.

7. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (D)(3), (4) and (5) of this section, the hearing body shall not continue a hearing, leave a record open for the submittal of additional written evidence, arguments, or testimony, or reopen a record, if the continuance, leaving open, or reopening will result in the city’s not taking final action on an application within the time period set out in LCMC 17.76.050(A).

E. Decision. Following the procedure described in this section, the hearing body shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. If the hearing is before the planning commission on a zoning map or text amendment, the planning commission shall make a recommendation to council to adopt or deny the change. Such recommendation will be reflected in the minutes of the planning commission. If the hearing is in the nature of an appeal, the body may affirm, affirm with modifications or additional conditions, reverse, or remand the decision that is on appeal. The hearing body shall not impose conditions of approval that have not been stated, either prior to the close of the hearing or prior to the close of a reopened hearing, with sufficient specificity to allow the applicant to respond to the conditions.

1. The decision of the hearing body, which has the authority to approve the application or decide the appeal, shall be by a written order signed by the presiding officer.

2. The order shall incorporate findings of fact and conclusions that include:

a. A statement of the applicable criteria and standards against which the proposal was tested;

b. A statement of the facts upon which the hearing body relied in establishing compliance or noncompliance with each applicable criteria or standards, briefly stating how those facts support the decision.

3. The written order is the final decision in the matter.

F. Record of Proceedings. The proceedings shall be recorded stenographically or electronically.

1. The hearing body shall, where practicable, retain as part of the hearing records each item of physical or documentary evidence presented and shall have the items marked to show the identity of the person offering the same and whether presented on behalf of a proponent or opponent. Exhibits received into evidence shall be retained in the hearing file.

2. The findings shall be included in the record.

3. A person shall have access to the record of proceedings at reasonable times, places and circumstances. A person shall be entitled copies of the record at the person’s own expense.

G. Notice of Decision. Notice of decision by a hearing body shall be provided to all persons who appeared before the hearing body orally or in writing, or requested in writing that they be given notice of such decisions. The act of signing a petition shall not be deemed a written appearance before the hearing body and shall not confer party status on the signator. Only the representative submitting the petition or chief petitioner shall be given notice of the decision. The notice of the decision shall include:

1. A brief description of the decisions reached and date of decision;

2. A description of the requirements for an appeal, including the type of appeal that may be requested, and the applicable timelines;

3. A statement that an appeal may only be filed concerning criteria that were addressed at the initial public hearing;

4. A statement that the complete case, including the final order, is available for review at the city. (Ord. 2000-06-A §§ 14 – 18; Ord. 91-18 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 9.030)


17.76.040 Appeals.

A. Decision of Planning Director. A decision of the planning director on the issuance of an administrative permit or discretionary action concerning a land use matter may be appealed to the planning commission by an affected party entitled to notice of decision by filing an appeal with the planning and community development director within 12 days of the mailing of the decision. The notice of appeal that is filed with the city shall indicate the decision that is being appealed and the basis for the appeal. The notice shall indicate in what respects the decision being appealed is a discretionary decision involving a land use matter. The matter at issue will be a determination of the appropriateness of the director’s interpretation of the requirements of this title. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed as provided in LCMC 17.76.020(B)(1).

B. Decision of Planning Commission. A decision of the planning commission concerning a quasi-judicial land use matter may be appealed to the city council by a party to the hearing by filing an appeal within 10 calendar days of the mailing of the order. The notice of appeal filed with the city shall contain the information outlined in subsection (C) of this section. For purposes of this section, “party” refers to the applicant and any person who appeared orally or in writing at the hearing.

The city council may by motion call up a decision of the planning commission on a quasi-judicial land use application, review of which shall be in the form of an appeal reviewed de novo or on the record as the council determines appropriate. The motion shall set the date, time, and place of hearing.

C. Information Required. A request for appeal of a planning commission decision shall contain:

1. An identification of the decision sought to be reviewed, including the date of the decision;

2. A statement of interest of the person seeking review including that the person was a party to the initial proceedings and appeared orally or in writing before the planning commission;

3. The specific grounds relied upon for the review, including a statement that the criteria against which review is being requested were addressed at the planning commission hearing.

D. Review.

1. Except as provided in subsections (D)(6) and (7) of this section, city council review is limited to the evidence in the record before the hearing body. If an appeal is confined to the record of the proceeding, the record shall include:

a. All exhibits, materials, pleadings, memoranda, stipulations and motions submitted by a party and received or considered in reaching the decision under review;

b. The final order and findings of fact adopted in support of the decision being appealed;

c. The request for an appeal filed by the appellant;

d. The minutes of the public hearing;

e. The transcript of the hearing below if provided. A verbatim transcript of the hearing body proceedings is not required. Any person who appeared before the hearing body on the application may prepare a certified verbatim transcript of all or part of the hearing body proceedings at that person’s own expense. The city manager may prepare a certified verbatim transcript of all or part of the hearing body’s proceedings at the city’s expense if the city manager deems a transcript necessary or advisable. A certified transcript prepared under this subsection shall be considered part of the record and if offered shall be accepted into evidence and considered by the city council.

2. After receipt of all required fees the director shall set a hearing and provide public notice indicating the date, time and place of the review and the issues that are the subject of the review pursuant to LCMC 17.76.020(B)(1).

3. The reviewing body shall make its decision based upon the record after first granting the right of argument, but not the introduction of additional evidence, to parties to the hearing.

4. In considering the appeal, the reviewing body need only consider those matters specifically raised by the appellant.

5. The appellant shall bear the burden of proof.

6. Submission of New Evidence. The city council may reopen the record and consider new evidence if such a request is made prior to or at the city council hearing by the appellant or any person who testified before the hearing body, and the requesting party demonstrates:

a. The hearing body committed a procedural error that prejudiced the requesting party’s substantial rights and that reopening the record is the only alternative to remanding the application to the hearing body to correct the error; or

b. That new evidence material to the decision on appeal exists and could not have been presented earlier to the hearing body. A requesting party may only qualify for this exception if the person demonstrates that the new evidence concerns an unanticipated event which occurred after the close of the hearing before the hearing body. This exception shall be strictly construed by the city council to ensure that all relevant evidence and testimony is submitted to the hearing body.

7. De Novo Hearing. In deciding whether to conduct de novo proceedings on an appeal, the city council shall consider the following: the matter involves an interpretation of city ordinance; there is new information that was not available at the time the hearing was conducted as demonstrated in subsection (D)(6)(b) of this section; or for any other reason the city council determines it would be appropriate to conduct a de novo hearing.

E. Review Body Decision.

1. Upon review, the reviewing body may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the lower body or staff. The hearing body may also remand the decision of the lower body or staff, with instructions.

2. Notice of the reviewing body decision shall be provided to all parties to the hearing, within five working days of the date of the final decision. The notice of the decision shall include:

a. A brief description of the decision reached, and a copy of the final order;

b. If the reviewing body is the planning commission, a statement that the decision may be appealed to the city council on the record, by filing an appeal within 10 calendar days of the date that the final order was mailed;

c. If the reviewing body is the city council, a statement that the decision may be appealed to the land use board of appeals by filing a notice of intent to appeal within 21 days of the date that the final order was mailed;

d. A statement that the complete case is available for review at the city. (Ord. 2008-01 § 2; Ord. 2000-06-A § 19; Ord. 91-18 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 9.040)


17.76.050 Final action on application for permit or zone change request.

A. The city shall take final action on an application for a permit or zone change, including the resolution of all appeals, within 120 days after the application is deemed complete. The 120-day period does not apply to an amendment to the comprehensive plan or zoning ordinance, or the adoption of a new land use regulation, notice of which was forwarded to the director of the Department of Land Conservation and Development under LCMC 17.88.065. At the request of the applicant, the 120-day period may be extended for a reasonable period of time by the director, at the director’s discretion. In addition, the 120-day period shall be extended by an amount of time equal to the length of any continuance or extension of the time for closing the hearing record or of any period during which the hearing record has been reopened, requested or agreed to by the applicant, and by an additional seven days unless the applicant waives in writing the applicant’s right to submit final written arguments in support of the application following closing of the record.

B. If the planning commission fails to take action on a quasi-judicial land use matter within 30 days of the close of the public hearing, any party who appeared before the planning commission either orally or in writing may seek review of the matter by the city council on the record. Such review shall be as if on appeal, and all provisions of this title applicable to appeals of planning commission decisions to city council shall apply.

C. If the city has insufficient time to conduct a hearing before the planning commission and allow for appeal of the decision, if required, to city council, the city council on its own motion may call up the matter for hearing prior to hearing by the planning commission. In such a case, the city council shall conduct an evidentiary hearing on the application and make a final decision within the time allowed by law.

D. If the city fails to take final action on an application for a permit or zone change within the time period set out in subsection (A) of this section, and the applicant files a petition for a writ of mandamus under ORS 227.160 through 227.185, then the city thereafter shall take no further action on the application under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-01 § 2; Ord. 2000-06-A § 20; Ord. 91-18 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 9.050)


17.76.060 Filing fees.

A. Permit Fees. A schedule of permit fees shall be established by resolution of the city council and paid to the city upon the filing of an application. Such fees shall not be refundable. The failure to submit a required fee with an application, including return of checks unpaid, or other failure of consideration, shall be a jurisdictional defect and the permit application shall not be processed.

B. Appeal Filing Fees. A filing fee shall be required for the processing of an appeal and shall be in an amount set by resolution of the city council. The failure to submit a required fee with a notice of appeal, including return of checks unpaid or other failure of consideration, shall be a jurisdictional defect and the city shall deem the appeal abandoned.

C. Additional Costs. Where the planning and community development director, with the concurrence of the city manager, deems it necessary and in the public’s interest to incur additional costs, such as the hiring of an independent geotechnical or engineering expert, or other technical expertise during the course of land use proceedings, such costs shall be borne by the applicant. (Ord. 2008-01 § 2; Ord. 91-18 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 9.060)


Chapter 17.80 PROVISIONS APPLYING TO SPECIAL USES

Sections:

17.80.010    Schools.

17.80.020    Utility substation or pumping substation.

17.80.030    Automobile service station.

17.80.040    Standards for mobile home parks, recreational vehicle parks, and tiny house developments.

17.80.050    Vacation rental dwelling use criteria.

17.80.060    Bed and breakfast accommodation standards.

17.80.070    Essential emergency communications and warning facilities.

17.80.080    Animals and gardens.

17.80.090    Small wind energy systems.

17.80.100    Small solar energy systems.

17.80.110    Accessory dwelling unit standards.

17.80.120    Cottage housing developments.

17.80.130    Retail marijuana facilities.

17.80.140    Temporary emergency operations uses during declared emergency.

17.80.150    Four-flat dwellings.

17.80.160    Accessory uses – Places of worship.


17.80.010 Schools.

A. Nursery schools, day care centers and kindergartens shall have a minimum site size of 10,000 square feet and shall provide and thereafter maintain outdoor play areas with a minimum area of 100 square feet per child of total capacity. In all zones, a sight-obscuring fence of at least five feet but not more than six feet in height shall be provided separating the play area from abutting lots. Adequate off-street parking and loading shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.56 LCMC.

B. Elementary schools shall provide one acre of site area for each 90 pupils or one acre for every three classrooms, whichever is greater.

C. Secondary schools shall provide one acre of site area for each 75 pupils or one acre for every two and one-half classrooms, whichever is greater. (Ord. 92-3 § 4; Ord. 84-2 § 10.010)


17.80.020 Utility substation or pumping substation.

In the case of a utility substation or pumping substation, the planning commission may waive the minimum lot size requirement of the underlying zone only if it is determined that the waiver will not have a detrimental effect on adjacent property. (Ord. 92-3 § 4; Ord. 84-2 § 10.020)


17.80.030 Automobile service station.

Automobile service stations shall comply with the following development standards:

A. Site and Location.

1. The minimum area for a service station site shall be 14,000 square feet.

2. The minimum street frontage on a corner lot shall be 120 feet.

3. The minimum street frontage on an interior lot shall be 150 feet. (Ord. 92-3 § 4; Ord. 84-2 § 10.030)


17.80.040 Standards for mobile home parks, recreational vehicle parks, and tiny house developments.

A. Mobile Home Park Standards.

1. All mobile home parks shall comply with state statutes.

2. If space for a mobile home in the park is located more than 500 feet from a public fire hydrant, the park shall install and maintain hydrants so that no mobile home within the park shall be more than 500 feet from a hydrant when the park is fully occupied. Each hydrant shall be adjacent to a vehicular way within the park and shall conform in design and capacity to the public hydrant standards in the city.

3. Except at driveway accesses, a decorative, sight-obscuring fence at least five but no more than six feet in height shall be located 10 feet back from the outer boundary of the mobile home park. The area between the sight-obscuring fence and mobile home park boundary shall be landscaped. The fence and landscaping plan shall be approved by the planning commission.

4. Storage space (for boats, campers, etc.) shall be provided within the mobile home park at the rate of one 10-foot by 20-foot space in size for every four mobile homes within the park’s designed maximum capacity. Adequate maneuvering room shall be provided.

5. In any mobile home park, no more than 20 percent of the total spaces shall be available to and used by recreational vehicles. Such spaces shall be designed, constructed and maintained under the standards for a recreational vehicle park in this title. Furthermore, all such spaces shall be contiguous in one area of the park.

6. Every mobile home park must have a resident manager. The resident manager shall maintain a permanent residence within the park and shall be either the owner or his agent charged for the care and control of the mobile home park. The owner of the park shall notify the planning commission of the name of the original resident manager and all changes thereto within 14 days after any change takes place.

B. Recreational Vehicle Park Standards.

1. Surface drainage plans for the entire park shall be reviewed by the city manager or designee. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of the park shall be paved, or covered with stone screening or other solid materials, or protected with a vegetative growth capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating objectionable dust.

2. The space provided for each recreational vehicle shall not be less than 1,200 square feet. To the greatest extent possible, parks should be developed to preserve their natural character.

3. Each site for an individual recreational vehicle shall contain a paved pad of at least 400 square feet.

4. Recreational vehicles shall be separated from each other and from other structures by at least 10 feet. Any accessory structure attached to the recreational vehicle shall, for purposes of this separation requirement, be considered to be part of the recreational vehicle.

5. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided and improved in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.56 LCMC.

6. Roadways shall not be less than 30 feet in width if parking is permitted on the margin of the roadway or less than 20 feet in width if parking is not permitted on the edge of the roadway. All such roadways shall be paved with asphalt or concrete and be designed to permit easy access to each recreational vehicle space for recreational vehicles of at least 35 feet in length.

7. Except for the driveway accesses for the park, a decorative sight-obscuring fence at least five but no more than six feet in height shall be located five feet back from the outer boundary of the recreational vehicle park. The area between the sight-obscuring fence and the recreational vehicle park boundary shall be landscaped. The fence and landscaping shall be approved by the planning commission.

8. Trash receptacles for the disposal of solid waste materials shall be provided in convenient locations for the use of guests of the park in such number and of such capacity that there is no uncovered accumulation of trash at any time, and that such containers shall be surrounded by sight-obscuring fence.

9. The park is to be maintained in a neat appearance at all times. Except for vehicles, there shall be no outside storage of materials or equipment belonging to the park or to any guest of the park.

C. Tiny House Developments.

1. Definitions. The following definitions apply to this section:

a. “Tiny house” means a standalone dwelling with a floor area of 400 square feet or less, excluding lofts. For purposes of this section, “tiny house” does not mean a trailer or a recreational vehicle.

b. “Tiny house development” means a site designed to contain at least four tiny houses and designed and operated under a single land development plan, or as a part of another land development plan such as a planned unit development or a cottage cluster development.

2. Tiny houses are allowed in a tiny house development at a density of one tiny house for each 1,200 square feet of land area.

3. Tiny house developments shall not be used as vacation rentals.

4. Tiny houses must be separated from each other and from other structures by at least 10 feet, and at the perimeter of the development must comply with the setback requirements of the R-1 zone.

5. A tiny house development must provide at least one off-street parking space for each tiny house. Parking spaces may be clustered and need not be located immediately adjacent to the individual tiny houses they serve.

6. All tiny houses in a tiny house development must comply with all applicable Oregon building code requirements.

7. A tiny house development is subject to the site plan approval process of LCMC 17.52.240. (Ord. 2019-05 § 4; Ord. 92-8 § 12; Ord. 92-3 § 4; Ord. 84-2 § 10.040)


17.80.050 Vacation rental dwelling use criteria.1

A. Purpose.

1. Purpose. Vacation rental dwellings are allowed in recognition of the fact that property owners may desire to allow others to use a vacation home on occasions when the owners themselves are not using it, and the accommodation option that best fulfills the desires of many guests visiting Lincoln City is the rental of a private home during their stay.

2. Basis. The city council finds:

a. The use of vacation rental dwellings can have a perceived negative cumulative effect on Lincoln City neighborhoods by creating nuisances including but not limited to excessive loud noise, excessive numbers of parked vehicles interfering with vehicle access along public roadways and blocking private drives, and litter migrating onto adjacent properties from untended solid waste receptacles.

b. An absentee owner may not be aware of the extent to which use of a vacation rental dwelling potentially causes negative effects on neighboring properties and the livability of a neighborhood.

c. All owners of property in the city have a common interest in maintaining and promoting livable and viable neighborhoods for residents and visitors alike.

B. Vacation Rental Dwelling Standards. Except where noted, the following standards apply to all vacation rental dwellings in the city:

1. Ownership. The approved use of the vacation rental dwelling in any zone is in the name of the property owner and the approval, including any license, is not transferable. When the owner sells or transfers the property occupied or rented as a vacation rental dwelling, the approved use shall cease.

a. For purposes of this chapter, “sale or transfer” means any change of ownership during the lifetime of the owner, whether or not there is consideration, or after the death of the owner, except a change in ownership where title is held in survivorship with a spouse or domestic partner, or transfers on the owner’s death to a trust which benefits only a spouse or domestic partner for the lifetime of the spouse or domestic partner. An owner may transfer ownership of the real property to a trustee, a limited liability company, a corporation, a partnership, a limited partnership, a limited liability partnership, or other similar entity and not be subject to loss of approval of the vacation rental dwelling use so long as the transferor lives and remains the only owner of the entity. Upon the transferor’s death or the sale or transfer of his or her interest in the entity to another person, the approval for the use held by the transferor shall terminate.

b. For purposes of this chapter, “person” means the natural person or legal entity that owns and holds legal and/or equitable title to the property. If the owner is a natural person, or where the natural person has transferred his or her property to a trust of which the natural person is the trustor, that person can have an ownership right, title, or interest in no more than one dwelling unit in a residential zone that has a vacation rental dwelling permit. If the owner is a business entity such as a partnership, corporation, limited liability company, limited partnership, limited liability partnership or similar entity, any person who owns an interest in that business entity shall be considered an owner and such a person can have an ownership right, title, or interest in no more than one dwelling unit in a residential zone that has a vacation rental dwelling permit.

2. Accessory or Permitted Use.

a. Except as otherwise provided in this title, a VRD is allowed as an accessory use in the R-1-5, R-1-7.5, R-1-10, R-1-RE, R-M, and R-R zones, and as a permitted use in the R-1-5, R-1-RE, NBD, NBMU, TVC, OP-OF, OP-IM, OP-MSH, VR, RC, and GC zones, provided the VRD meets the applicable standards of this chapter and obtains a license under Chapter 5.14 LCMC.

b. Incidental and subordinate accessory vacation rental dwelling use is not a commercial use. Commercial vacation rental dwelling use is use of a dwelling for vacation rental dwelling purposes for more than 30 nights per calendar year.

c. The total number of vacation rental dwellings operating without limits on the number of nights for which they may be rented in the R-1-5 zone shall not exceed 10 percent of the total number of lots in that zone.

d. In the R-1-RE zone, all existing licensed vacation rentals and those with complete applications per ORS 227.178(3) on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section (November 22, 2017) shall be allowed to continue to operate as legal nonconforming uses without limits on the number of nights for which they may be rented. Nonconforming uses are subject to loss of such status per Chapter 17.64 LCMC and this section. Specifically, discontinuance or abandonment of VRD operations, including but not limited to failure to maintain a VRD license pursuant to Chapter 5.14 LCMC for a period of six months or more, shall constitute termination of the nonconforming unlimited VRD use. The director is prohibited from granting extensions to the six-month discontinuance time period. When the total number of nonconforming unlimited VRDs in the R-1-RE zone is reduced to 10 percent of the total number of lots in that zone, a cap of 10 percent shall be triggered on such unlimited VRDs and all existing nonconforming unlimited VRDs under the cap will be rendered permitted uses. In the R-1-RE zone, a VRD sale or transfer, as defined in subsection (B)(1) of this section, will terminate the nonconforming unlimited VRD use, provided the sale or transfer occurs at least seven years after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section.

3. Parking. In any residential or commercial zone, one off-street parking space will be provided for each bedroom in the dwelling unit, and no less than two spaces will be provided for each dwelling unit. If the proposed VRD use cannot provide the required parking and also meet the other standards of subsection (B) of this section, including required landscaping, the vacation rental occupancy of the dwelling shall be reduced to conform to the available amount of off-street parking and made a condition of licensing under Chapter 5.14 LCMC.

a. The planning and community development director has the discretion to require such changes as are necessary to conform the dwelling to available approved parking and shall inspect the dwelling as necessary to confirm the occupancy has been so conformed prior to approving the use in any allowed zone. An example is changing a bedroom to another use.

b. No more vehicles shall be parked on the property than there are designated off-street parking spaces.

c. No variance from the parking standards is allowed.

4. Solid Waste. The owner must provide securable receptacles of sufficient size for the deposit of solid waste generated by the vacation rental dwelling use and subscribe to a solid waste collection service for service sufficient for the vacation rental dwelling during all months the dwelling is used for vacation rental. No dumpsters are allowed.

5. Landscaping.

a. Residential Zones and the VR Zone. The owner must landscape all yards in accordance with the standards of LCMC 17.52.100. A minimum of 50 percent of the front yard (the area between the side lot lines, the front lot line, and the front of the dwelling) must be landscaped. For oceanfront properties constrained by a need to be set back from the bluff edge due to geological hazards, landscaping may be reduced in order to accommodate required parking.

b. Commercial Zones. The owner shall install and maintain the landscaping as shown in the approved site plan for the commercial use or mixed-use application. If the approval does not include a site plan then the landscaping, at a minimum, must meet the landscaping standards of LCMC 17.52.100. 

6. Signs. In both residential and commercial zones, any sign on the property shall be in compliance with the sign requirements for the use in the R-1 zone, as established in LCMC 17.72.060(B).

7. TRT. The owner shall comply with Chapter 3.04, Transient Room Tax.

8. VRD License. Prior to making a VRD available for use, including advertising by any means or otherwise offering the VRD for use, the owner shall obtain a valid VRD License as provided in Chapter 5.14 LCMC.

9. Subject to the limitations and provisions of this section and of Chapter 5.14 LCMC, a vacation rental dwelling located in the R-1-7.5, R-1-10, R-M, R-R, or NCR zone that, prior to December 1, 2016, had received a vacation rental dwelling land use approval and a vacation rental dwelling license approval for the 2016 license year, and that has such approvals remaining valid as of January 18, 2017, may continue to operate without compliance with the 30-night accessory use limitation of this section, and continue as nonconforming approvals pursuant to the land use terms and conditions of their existing land use approvals. Except for existing conditional use approvals, this authorization terminates upon the sale or transfer of the property as defined in subsection (B)(1) of this section.

C. Application and Review.

1. Application Requirements.

a. The owner of the property or authorized agent shall apply for a vacation rental dwelling on a form provided by Lincoln City. The owner shall sign the application. No application shall be accepted without payment of the application fee.

b. At a minimum, the names, mailing addresses, and telephone numbers of all persons holding an ownership interest in the property, or holding an ownership interest in the entity that owns the property, shall be provided in the application.

c. The applicant shall certify that the person identified as the owner on the application does not own other property in the city that is used as a vacation rental dwelling or is approved by the city for vacation rental dwelling use, if the application is for a vacation rental dwelling in a residential zone.

d. The applicant shall certify solid waste collection service is provided to the property.

e. The application shall demonstrate parking and landscaping standards of this section are met.

f. Providing false information in the application shall be a violation and grounds to deny the application, void the approval, enjoin the use, and revoke a vacation rental dwelling license issued for the dwelling under Chapter 5.14 LCMC.

2. Administrative Review and Decision.

a. Notice of Receipt of Application. After receipt of a vacation rental dwelling land use approval application, the department shall provide written notice of the application to:

i. Owners of property within 250 feet of the property for which the application is submitted. The list of property owners shall be compiled from the most recent property tax assessment roll. Where 50 percent or more of the number of properties in the area subject to notice are owned by the same person, as defined in this section, the notice area shall be expanded until the number of properties owned by the same person constitutes 20 percent or less of the properties in the notice area.

ii. Any neighborhood association recognized by the city whose boundaries include the site.

b. The written notice of the application shall include the following information:

i. The date, time, and place where comments are due, if a person wishes to have the comments considered during the review process. The due date shall be 14 days after the date of the notice.

ii. A statement that the criteria governing the land use approval decision are the requirements of subsection (B) of this section.

iii. The street address or another easily understood geographical reference to the property.

iv. A statement that the land use application and any other file materials are available for review at the department and that copies can be obtained at cost.

v. The name and phone number of a department contact person.

c. The planning and community development director shall review an application for VRD in any zone under the applicable standards of subsection (B) of this section and shall issue an administrative decision on the application.

d. Notice of administrative decision shall be provided as required in LCMC 17.76.020 and mailed at applicant’s expense to all owners of property of record as indicated on the most recently available tax assessment roll, located within 250 feet of the exterior boundary of the property for which the application is made. Where 50 percent or more of the number of properties in the area subject to notice are owned by the same person, as defined in this section, the notice area shall be expanded until the number of properties owned by the same person constitutes 20 percent or less of the properties in the notice area. The notice shall contain the information required by LCMC 17.76.020(A) and allow any person opportunity to appeal the decision within 20 days of mailing of the notice. The mailed notice shall state that if tenants or lessees are in possession of the property, the city requests the owner to provide a copy of the notice to each tenant or lessee.

e. The authorization for VRD land use approval or VRD nonconforming use shall remain valid provided the use is conducted lawfully, under a valid revocable vacation rental dwelling license issued under Chapter 5.14 LCMC, and in compliance with Chapter 3.04 LCMC, Transient Room Tax. If a property owner who has received a VRD land use authorization fails to apply for and receive a VRD license under Chapter 5.14 LCMC within one year of having received the VRD land use authorization, or having received a VRD license under Chapter 5.14 LCMC, fails to renew it within the license grace period, the city will consider the VRD authorization abandoned and the planning and community development director will declare the authorization void. For a legal nonconforming use in the R-1-RE zone, discontinuance, abandonment, sale or transfer, as specified in subsection (B)(2)(d) of this section, triggers termination of the nonconforming use. The planning and community development director will mail a written notice of the decision to declare the VRD land use authorization null and void or declare the VRD nonconforming use terminated to the property owner. The property owner may appeal the planning and community development director’s decision as provided in LCMC 17.76.040.

3. Appeal. The decision of the planning and community development director on an application for vacation rental dwelling use may be appealed as provided in LCMC 17.76.040(A). Appeal of the decision of the planning and community development director shall be in the form of an evidentiary hearing before the planning commission. The planning commission decision shall be final and is not subject to further appeal.

4. Fees. The city is authorized to adopt fees in an amount established by resolution to recover the actual costs of processing and reviewing an application for vacation rental dwelling use including fees for appeals of such decisions.

D. Violation – Penalties – Sanction.

1. Offering or making available a vacation rental dwelling for occupancy, use, or rent, with or without an exchange of value or other consideration, without first obtaining city approval of the use under this section, is a violation and enforceable as a Class B violation.

a. Proof the dwelling is advertised, listed with an agent, or publicly described in any manner by the owner or owner’s agent as a vacation rental dwelling creates a rebuttable presumption that a vacation rental dwelling exists and is available for use, rent, or occupancy.

b. Oral or written statements indicating a vacation rental dwelling is or was made available for use, rent, or occupancy, including but not limited to an advertisement, offer, agreement, or correspondence in any medium, made on or about the date of an alleged violation, are admissible in court for the purpose of establishing a presumption that the vacation rental dwelling was available for occupancy on the date of the alleged violation, whether or not the dwelling was actually rented, used or occupied on such date.

c. When a vacation rental dwelling is shown to be made available on a particular date, it is presumed the VRD continues to be made available unless the defendant proves otherwise.

2. Operating a vacation rental dwelling in violation of any of the standards of subsection (B) of this section is a Class B violation enforceable as provided in Chapter 1.16 LCMC, grounds to suspend or revoke a license under Chapter 5.14 LCMC, and a nuisance.

3. A person convicted of violating this section is subject to a fine as a penalty as established in Chapter 1.16 LCMC. Each day of violation is a separate violation.

E. Prior Existing Use.

1. Application of Chapter 17.60 LCMC, Conditional Uses. Any vacation rental dwelling accessory approved by the city under the conditional use standards of Chapter 17.60 LCMC as in effect prior to November 21, 2007, and lawfully conducted may continue as a nonconforming use after such date, provided the occupancy of the vacation rental dwelling is lawfully conducted under a valid vacation rental dwelling license or renewal license as required by this section. The owner of the dwelling has the burden of establishing a prior approved conditional use when applying for a vacation rental dwelling license or license renewal.

2. A vacation rental dwelling accessory use that is not a conditional use and was approved by the city prior to November 21, 2007, shall be allowed to continue provided the owner obtains an annual vacation rental dwelling license or renewal license as required by this section. Provided the occupancy is otherwise lawfully conducted, the use may continue until such time as the license holder sells, transfers or conveys the property to which the approved use and license apply. The owner of the dwelling has the burden of establishing a prior approved use when applying for a vacation rental dwelling license or license renewal.

3. Except as specifically provided in this subsection, any use conducted under subsection (E) of this section must otherwise conform to all requirements of this section and other applicable code provisions, including but not limited to Chapters 3.04 and 5.14 LCMC. (Ord. 2019-01 § 1; Ord. 2017-17 §§ 3, 4; Ord. 2017-10 § 1; Ord. 2016-20 §§ 9 – 11, 13, 14; Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 2009-11 § 4; Ord. 2009-02 § 1; Ord. 2008-17 § 1; Ord. 2008-07 § 1; Ord. 2007-11 § 1; Ord. 2002-02 § 2; Ord. 95-15 § 16; Ord. 92-3 § 4; Ord. 84-2 § 10.050)


17.80.060 Bed and breakfast accommodation standards.

Bed and breakfast accommodations shall comply with the following standards:

A. All residences used for bed and breakfast accommodations shall be owner-occupied. No separate structures shall be allowed.

B. No more than 25 percent of the entire structure but no more than two bedrooms shall be used as a part of the bed and breakfast accommodation.

C. Each room rented shall not be rented for a period to exceed 15 consecutive days.

D. Maximum signage of one and one-half square feet shall be allowed in residentially zoned areas of the city.

E. Bed and breakfast accommodations must maintain the residential lawn nature of front and side yards. (Ord. 95-15 § 17; Ord. 84-2 § 10.060)


17.80.070 Essential emergency communications and warning facilities.

A. Essential emergency communications, early warning and associated emergency facilities are not required to comply with the minimum lot size, parking, landscaping, city services availability, or yard requirements of the zone in which they are located.

B. Essential emergency communications, early warning and associated emergency facilities are not required to comply with the requirements, guidelines, or standards of either LCMC 17.52.240 or Chapter 17.74 LCMC, or any other site plan or design standards, guidelines, or requirements contained in this code.

C. Essential emergency communications, early warning and associated emergency facilities are permitted in any zone, except open space, and are not to be located on environmentally sensitive lands and resources, including but not limited to Goal 5 resources, coastal shortlands, beaches and dunes or estuarine resource areas. (Ord. 2019-24 § 2; Ord. 2005-14 § 13; Ord. 84-2 § 10.070)


17.80.080 Animals and gardens.2

A. Animals. The keeping of small animals, farm animals, domestic fowl, and worms is permitted in all zones as an accessory use to any principal use permitted outright or to a permitted conditional use, in each case subject to the standards of this section.

1. Small Animals. Up to three small animals may be kept accessory to each business establishment or dwelling unit on a lot, except as follows:

a. In no case is more than one miniature potbelly pig allowed per business establishment or dwelling unit.

b. In single-family zones:

i. Accessory dwelling units shall not be considered separate dwelling units for the purpose of this section;

ii. Up to four small animals are permitted on lots of at least 20,000 square feet; and

iii. One additional small animal is permitted for each 5,000 square feet of lot area in excess of 20,000 square feet. Accessory structures, including kennels, for four or more animals must be at least 10 feet from any other lot in a residential zone.

2. Domestic Fowl. Up to five domestic fowl may be kept accessory to any principal use on any lot in addition to the small animals permitted in subsection (A)(1) of this section. For each 1,000 square feet of lot area in excess of the minimum lot area required for the zone or, if there is no minimum lot area, for each 1,000 square feet of lot area in excess of 5,000 square feet, one additional domestic fowl may be kept. Accessory structures for domestic fowl, such as coops (including portable coops), must be at least 10 feet away from any property line and any dwelling, excepting the property owner’s own residence. The keeping of peafowl is prohibited.

3. Farm Animals. Cows, horses, sheep and other similar farm animals are permitted accessory to any principal use only on lots of at least 20,000 square feet. The keeping of swine is prohibited, except for miniature potbelly pigs allowed under subsection (A)(1)(a) of this section.

a. One farm animal for every 10,000 square feet of lot area is permitted.

b. Farm animals and structures housing them must be kept at least 50 feet from any lot in a residential zone.

4. Vermiculture. Vermiculture is allowed accessory to any principal use on any lot; provided, that the surface area of all bins used for vermiculture does not exceed two square feet for each 1,000 square feet of lot area. Vermiculture bins must be located at least 10 feet from any abutting properties.



B. Gardens. Gardens are permitted in all zones as an accessory use to any principal use permitted outright or to a permitted conditional use, in each case subject to the standards of this section.

1. Personal Gardens. Personal gardens are allowed as an accessory use on any lot. Personal gardens may be used to meet part or all of any landscaping requirement set out in this code. Personal gardens may include structures such as cold frames, greenhouses, and hoop houses in any yard other than a required front yard or street side yard and do not count against the allowed building coverage in any zone, even if the structure requires a building permit. To the extent such structures require a building permit they may not be located closer than three feet to any property line.

2. Community Gardens. Community gardens, including those allowed as a principal use under the regulations of any zone, may include structures such as cold frames, greenhouses, and hoop houses. If the community garden is a use accessory to a principal use involving a building, such structures may be located in any yard other than a required front yard or street side yard and do not count against the allowed building coverage in any zone, even if the structure requires a building permit. To the extent such structures require a building permit they may not be located closer than three feet to any property line (five feet in a residential zone). Community gardens may include a tool house or other storage building not exceeding 10 feet by 10 feet or 10 feet in height and not located closer than three feet to any property line. No off-street parking spaces are required for a community garden.

3. Market Gardens. Market gardens, including those allowed as a principal use under the regulations of any zone, may include structures such as cold frames, greenhouses, and hoop houses. If the market garden is a use accessory to a principal use involving a building, such structures may be located in any yard other than a required front yard or street side yard and do not count against the allowed building coverage in any zone, even if the structure requires a building permit. To the extent such structures require a building permit they may not be located closer than three feet to any property line (five feet in a residential zone). Market gardens may include a tool house or other storage building not exceeding 10 feet by 10 feet or 10 feet in height and not located closer than three feet to any property line. No off-street parking spaces are required for a market garden that is accessory to a principal use that requires parking. If a market garden is a principal use at least one parking space must be provided for the first 5,000 square feet of garden area or portion thereof, and for each 5,000 square feet of garden area beyond the first 5,000 square feet. Market gardens are not subject to the home occupation requirements of LCMC 17.52.010(E). Operators of market gardens are subject to the occupation tax requirements of Chapter 5.04 LCMC. (Ord. 2017-11 § 1; Ord. 2010-06 § 9; Ord. 2009-05 § 19)


17.80.090 Small wind energy systems.3

A. Accessory Use. A small wind energy system is allowed as an accessory use in all zones in which structures are permitted.

B. General Standards.

1. The minimum distance between the ground and any part of a rotor blade must be at least 20 feet.

2. Small wind energy systems may not be illuminated, nor may they bear any signs or advertising.

3. Small wind energy systems must have automatic braking, governing, or feathering system to prevent uncontrolled rotation, overspeeding, and excessive pressure on the support structure, rotor blades, and turbine components.

4. All wiring serving small wind energy systems must be underground.



5. Noise produced by small wind energy systems may not exceed 55 dBA measured at the property line.

6. Small wind energy systems must not cause any interference with normal radio and television reception in the surrounding area, with any public safety agency or organization (including but not limited to police, fire, ambulance, and Coast Guard) radio transmissions, or with any microwave communications link. The owner shall bear the costs of immediately eliminating any such interference should any occur, or must immediately shut down the system or parts of the system causing the interference.

7. A finish (paint/surface) must be provided for the small wind energy system that reduces the visibility of the facility, including the rotors. In most circumstances this condition may be satisfied by painting the support structure and rotors with flat light haze gray paint. If the support structure is unpainted it must be of a single color throughout its height. The owner must maintain the finish, painted or unpainted, so that no discoloration is allowed to occur.

8. The diameter of the area swept by the rotors may not exceed 25 feet.

C. Freestanding Systems – Additional Standards. Small wind energy systems may be mounted on a tower detached from other structures on the lot.

1. Setback. The minimum setback from any property line, overhead utility line, or public right-of-way shall be a distance equal to the vertical distance from the ground to the tip of a wind generator blade when the tip is at its highest point unless the affected utility, property owner, or governmental entity grants written permission for a lesser setback. In addition to the system’s structures, guy wires associated with towers shall meet applicable setbacks for the zone district.

2. Height. Support structures for freestanding systems may not exceed 80 feet in height.

3. Security. Support structures for freestanding systems must be unclimbable from the ground to a height of at least 15 feet.

4. Number. A maximum of one freestanding small wind generator system may be allowed on a parcel of 25,000 square feet or less. One additional freestanding system is allowed for each 12,500 square feet of lot area above 25,000 square feet.

D. Roof-Mounted Systems – Additional Standards. Small wind energy systems may be mounted on the roof of a structure as an appurtenance.

1. Height. Roof-mounted systems may not be more than five feet over the maximum allowed height for the structure.

2. Number. There is no maximum number of roof-mounted systems permitted.

3. Engineering Report. Before any roof-mounted system is mounted the property owner must submit a report prepared by an Oregon licensed professional engineer attesting to the fact that the structure to which the system will be mounted is or will be sufficiently strong to support the system and to withstand the wind, vibratory, and other loads to which it would be subjected as a result of mounting the system on it. This report is subject to approval by the planning and community development director prior to the mounting of the system. (Ord. 2009-06 § 2)


17.80.100 Small solar energy systems.4

A. Accessory Use. A small solar energy system is allowed as an accessory use in all zones in which structures are permitted.

B. General Standards.

1. Ground-mounted solar energy systems are considered structures and must meet applicable setbacks for the zone district.

2. Roof-mounted systems shall be mounted as flush as possible to the roof but in any case not more than three feet above the existing roof. (Ord. 2009-06 § 3)


17.80.110 Accessory dwelling unit standards.

A. Purpose. Accessory dwelling units (ADUs) are allowed to provide homeowners with a means of obtaining, through tenants in either the accessory dwelling unit or the principal unit, rental income, companionship, security, and services; ADUs add affordable units to the existing housing supply; ADUs make housing units available to moderate-income people who might otherwise have difficulty finding homes within Lincoln City; ADUs create housing units in single-family neighborhoods that are appropriate for people at a variety of stages in the life cycle; and ADUs protect neighborhood stability, property values, and the single-family residential appearance of the neighborhood.

B. Standards. Accessory dwelling units shall conform to the following standards:

1. Type. Accessory dwelling units may be a portion of the building that contains the primary dwelling unit, attached to a garage, or a separate, freestanding unit.

2. Floor Area. Accessory dwelling units shall not exceed 750 square feet of floor area or 50 percent of the floor area of the principal dwelling unit, whichever is less.

3. Lot Size. An accessory dwelling unit may be developed on a lot or parcel with an area of 3,500 square feet or more. If the lot or parcel does not meet the minimum lot size for the zoning district in which the lot or parcel is located, the accessory dwelling unit must be a portion of the existing building (or lawful addition to) the principal dwelling unit. Notwithstanding the above, the ADU may be a separate structure if the lot is 5,000 square feet or larger, is legally nonconforming and provided all other zoning standards are met.

4. One Unit. A lot or parcel may have a maximum of one accessory dwelling unit.

5. Exempt from Density Limits. Accessory dwelling units are exempt from the density standards of the zoning districts in which they are located.

6. Occupancy. No one may occupy an accessory dwelling unit until the planning and community development department has issued a certificate of occupancy for the unit.

7. Design. An accessory dwelling unit shall comply with the following standards:

a. Roofs. Roofs of detached accessory dwelling units shall be similar to the main house, preferably not flat, and shall include high-quality architectural embellishments, such as dormers, gables, and eave trim.

b. Facades. A street-facing facade of the accessory dwelling unit shall include a high-quality exterior of materials that are durable and appropriate in a coastal environment, and windows similar in size, style, and orientation to the main house, including molding.

c. Color. The exterior color shall be of the same color family and intensity as the main house.

8. Unity of Ownership. An accessory dwelling unit shall not in any way be segregated in ownership from the principal dwelling unit.

9. Primary Entrance. If the accessory dwelling unit’s primary entrance is not the same as that for the principal dwelling unit it shall be less visible from the street view of the principal dwelling than the main entrance of the principal dwelling unit. If the accessory dwelling unit is accessed via a stairway the stairway may not be constructed on the front of the principal dwelling unit.

10. Vacation Rental. Neither the accessory dwelling unit nor the principal dwelling unit may be used as a vacation rental dwelling.

11. Sewer Connection. Both the principal dwelling unit and the accessory dwelling unit must be connected to the city sewer system. Neither the accessory dwelling unit nor the principal dwelling unit may use a septic system. (Ord. 2019-37 § 1; Ord. 2014-08 § 8)


17.80.120 Cottage housing developments.

A. Purpose. A cottage housing development is a small cluster of dwelling units appropriately sized for smaller households and available as an alternative to the development of typical detached single-family homes. Cottage housing is intended to address the changing composition of households, and the need for smaller, more diverse, and often, more affordable housing choices. Providing for a variety of housing types also encourages innovation and diversity in housing design and site development, while ensuring compatibility with surrounding single-family residential development.

B. Definitions. The following definitions apply to this section:

1. “Common open space” means an area improved for recreational use or gardening that all owners in the cottage cluster own and maintain in common through a homeowners’ association, condominium association, or similar mechanism.

2. “Cottage” means a detached, single-family dwelling unit that is part of a cottage housing development and that contains 1,250 square feet or less of gross floor area.

3. “Cottage cluster” means a group of four to 12 cottages, arranged around a common open space.

4. “Cottage housing development” means one or two clusters of cottages developed under a single land development plan, or as a part of another land development plan.

5. “Footprint” means the gross floor area of a cottage’s ground-level story.

6. “Gross floor area” means the area within the exterior walls, but excluding any space where the floor to ceiling height is less than six feet.

C. Applicable Zoning Districts. Cottage housing developments are allowed only in the single-family residential (R-1), recreation residential (R-R), and multiple-family (R-M) zoning districts.

D. Ownership. Cottage housing developments may be sited on one commonly owned parcel with individual cottages owned in a condominium, cooperative, or similar arrangement, or cottages may be on individual lots with shared amenities and facilities owned in common.

E. Site Plan Review Required. Cottage housing developments require approval through the site plan review process of LCMC 17.52.240.

F. Standards. Cottage housing developments are subject to the following standards:

1. Density. Cottages may be built at up to twice the density allowed by the underlying zoning for detached single-family houses.

2. Number of Cottages. A cottage housing development is composed of one or two cottage clusters, with each cluster containing four to 12 dwelling units.

3. Proximity to Other Cottage Housing Developments. No part of a cottage housing development may be within 500 feet of another cottage housing development.

4. Cottage Design. The cottages in a cottage housing development are subject to the following standards:

a. Maximum Floor Area. The gross floor area of each cottage shall not exceed 1,250 square feet. At least 25 percent of the cottages in each cluster shall have a gross floor area less than 1,000 square feet.

b. Maximum Footprint. The footprint of each cottage shall not exceed 800 square feet, or 1,200 square feet including an attached garage.

c. Maximum Height. The height of each cottage shall not exceed 25 feet.

d. Setbacks. The setbacks from adjacent property lines along the perimeter of the cottage housing development shall be the same as required by the underlying zone. The minimum distance between all structures, including accessory structures, shall be in accordance with building code requirements.

e. Private Open Space. Each cottage may have private open space for the exclusive use of the cottage residents. Private open space does not count towards the required common open space.

f. Orientation of Cottages. Cottages shall be clustered around the common open space. Each cottage shall have a primary entrance and covered porch oriented to the common open space. All cottages shall be within 50 feet walking distance from the common open space, measured from the facade of the cottage to the nearest delineation of the common open space. The design of the common open space shall not use unusual areas or projections to meet this requirement. Lots in a cottage housing development are not required to abut a public street.

g. Public Street Facing Facades. Cottages abutting a public street shall have an entrance and a porch, bay window, or other architectural enhancement oriented to the public street. Garage or carport entrances may not face a public street.

h. Porches. Each cottage shall have a covered open porch that shall be oriented toward the common open space and that shall be at least six feet in depth measured perpendicular to the abutting building facade and at least 60 square feet in area.

i. Fire Access. No part of any structure shall be more than 150 feet, as measured by the shortest clear path on the ground, from fire department vehicle access.

j. Energy Efficiency. Each cottage shall meet or exceed the energy code provisions of the Oregon Residential Specialty Code.

5. Community Buildings. Cottage housing developments may include community buildings that provide space for accessory uses such as community meeting rooms, exercise rooms, day care, or community eating areas. They shall have a footprint of no more than 800 square feet and may not exceed one story in height. Their design, including the roof lines, shall be similar to and compatible with that of the cottages within the cottage housing development.

6. Common Open Space. Each cottage cluster shall have common open space in order to provide a sense of openness and community of residents. Common open space is subject to the following standards:

a. Each cottage cluster shall contain at least 2,000 square feet of common open space regardless of the number of cottages in the cluster, and not less than 400 square feet of common open space per cottage.

b. Each cottage cluster’s common open space shall be in a single, contiguous, usable piece.

c. Each cottage cluster’s common open space shall abut at least 50 percent of the cluster’s cottages.

d. Cottages shall abut each cottage cluster’s common open space on at least two sides of the open space.

e. Parking areas, required yards, private open space, and driveways do not qualify as common open space.

7. Parking. Parking for a cottage housing development is subject to the following standards:

a. Minimum Number of Parking Spaces. Cottage housing developments shall have at least one parking space for each cottage with a gross floor area of 700 feet or less, one and one-half parking spaces for each cottage with a gross floor area of 701 to 1,000 square feet (with the total number required rounded up to the nearest whole number), and two parking spaces for each cottage with a gross floor area over 1,000 square feet.

b. Guest Parking. Cottage housing developments shall have at least one-half additional guest parking spaces for each cottage in the development, rounded up to the nearest whole number. These spaces shall be clearly identified as being reserved for guests.

c. Reduction in Number of Required Parking Spaces. The required number of parking spaces may be reduced by the number of on-street parking spaces on public streets adjacent to and immediately abutting the cottage housing development.

d. Clustering. Parking areas may be arranged in clusters limited to no more than five contiguous spaces.

e. Access. Parking areas shall be accessed only by a private driveway or public alley. No parking space may access a public or private street directly. No parking space may be between a public street and cottages abutting the public street.

f. Design. The design of garages and carports, including the roof lines, windows, and trim, shall be similar to and compatible with that of the cottages within the cottage housing development.

g. Screening. Landscaping or architectural screening at least three feet tall shall separate parking areas from the common area and public streets. Solid board fencing shall not be allowed as an architectural screen.

8. Walkways. A cottage housing development shall have sidewalks abutting all public streets. A system of interior walkways shall connect each cottage to the common open space, parking areas, any community buildings, and the sidewalks abutting any public streets bordering the cottage housing development. Sidewalks abutting public streets shall be at least six feet in width, and interior walkways shall be at least four feet in width.

9. Interior Fences. Fences on the interior of the cottage housing development shall not exceed three feet in height and shall not consist of solid board fencing.

10. Existing Structures. On a lot or parcel to be used for a cottage housing development, an existing detached single-family dwelling that may be nonconforming with respect to the requirements of this section may remain, but the extent of its nonconformity may not be increased. Such dwellings shall count towards the number of cottages allowed in the cottage housing development.

11. Exemptions. Cottage housing developments are exempt from the following standards:

a. The requirement of LCMC 16.08.050 that a subdivision with land area greater than two acres or 10 lots must be processed as a planned unit development.

b. The minimum lot sizes of LCMC 16.12.220.

c. The standards of LCMC 17.16.070 (R-1 zone) for minimum lot width, maximum lot coverage, minimum lot area (but not the applicable underlying maximum density, as modified by subsection (F)(1) of this section), and yard requirements (except on the perimeter of the cottage housing development). Notwithstanding the exception for maximum lot coverage above, if the coverage standard for the underlying district is exceeded, the cottage cluster project shall utilize innovative design techniques (e.g., bioswales and pervious concrete) to retain stormwater on site and provide for water quality treatment before discharge. Such stormwater treatment methods are subject to approval of the city engineer.

d. The standards of LCMC 17.16.090 (R-1 zone) relating to off-street parking and loading.

e. The standards of LCMC 17.40.060 (R-R zone) for yard requirements (except on the perimeter of the cottage housing development), minimum lot area (but not the applicable underlying maximum density, as modified by subsection (F)(1) of this section), and off-street parking and loading.

f. The number of required parking spaces of LCMC 17.56.050.

12. Vacation Rental. No cottage in a cottage housing development may be used as a vacation rental dwelling.

13. Sewer Connection. Each cottage in a cottage housing development must be connected to the city sewer system. No cottage in a cottage housing development may use a septic system.

G. Conflicts. In the event of a conflict between this section and other sections of LCMC Title 16 or this title, this section shall control. (Ord. 2014-10 § 4)


17.80.130 Retail marijuana facilities.5

A. Definitions. Retail marijuana facilities are limited to medical marijuana dispensaries and retail recreational marijuana facilities.

1. “Medical marijuana dispensary” means a business facility registered by the Oregon Health Authority under ORS 475.300 to 475.346 and that sells, distributes, transmits, gives, dispenses or otherwise provides medical marijuana to registry identification cardholders (persons who have been diagnosed by a physician as having a debilitating medical condition) as further defined by ORS 475.302(3) or the designated primary caregivers of the cardholders as defined by ORS 475.302(5).

2. “Retail recreational marijuana facility” is a facility, registered and licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission, that engages in retail sales of marijuana and marijuana-derived products to persons 21 years of age or older.

3. A recreational licensee registered with the Oregon Liquor Control Commission to also sell marijuana for medical purposes is not considered to have two separate retail marijuana stores if the dispensary and the recreational marijuana store are located in the same store or adjacent stores. A medical dispensary authorized to also sell recreational marijuana is not considered to have two separate retail marijuana stores if the dispensary and the recreational marijuana store are located in the same store or adjacent stores.

B. Limitations. Operators of retail marijuana facilities are solely responsible for obtaining all required approvals, permits, licenses, and authorizations from the responsible federal, state, and local authorities or other entities necessary to engage in the business of selling or otherwise providing marijuana and marijuana-infused products for consideration in the manner contemplated. The city of Lincoln City has no duty, responsibility, or liability for requesting, obtaining, ensuring, or verifying an operator’s compliance with applicable federal or state permit or approval requirements. Designating retail marijuana facilities as permitted uses is not an approval or endorsement of such facilities and shall not in any way be interpreted as a waiver, modification, or grant of any federal, state, or local agency permits, approvals, or authorizations. Businesses operating within the city of Lincoln City shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws.

C. Standards. Retail marijuana facilities must comply with the following standards:

1. The business must be located in a permanent building and may not be located in a trailer, cargo container or motor vehicle;

2. The business must be located in a building or tenant space no portion of which is less than 1,000 feet from any lot upon which there is located a public or private elementary, secondary, or career school primarily attended by minors;

3. The business must be located in a building or tenant space no portion of which is less than 1,000 feet from any lot upon which there is located another retail marijuana facility;

4. The business must not be located on the same lot as a marijuana grow site;

5. Doorways, windows and other openings shall be located, covered, or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view into the interior from any adjacent exterior public or semipublic area;

6. No retail marijuana facility, as defined in this chapter, may be open for business earlier than 8:00 a.m. or later than 8:00 p.m. of the same day;

7. Cultivation or infusion of marijuana at the site of the retail marijuana facility is prohibited;

8. The business must have a written plan for secure disposal of marijuana remnants or by-products and must provide for secure disposal of marijuana remnants or by-products; such remnants or by-products shall not be placed within the facility’s exterior refuse containers;

9. The business may not have a drive-through. (Ord. 2016-05 § 5; Ord. 2014-29 § 5)


17.80.140 Temporary emergency operations uses during declared emergency.

A. Temporary emergency operations uses are permitted in any zone, except open space, and are not required to comply with the minimum lot size, parking, landscaping, city services availability, or yard requirements of the zone in which they are located. Notwithstanding the above, emergency operations uses shall not be located on environmentally sensitive lands and resources, including but not limited to Goal 5 resources, coastal shorelands, beaches and dunes, or estuarine resource areas.

B. Temporary emergency operations uses are not required to comply with the requirements of LCMC 17.52.240 (Site plan review).

C. Temporary emergency operations uses are of limited duration and are intended to terminate when the emergency has ended. In no event will an emergency operations use be permitted to remain past the time needed to demobilize, or 60 days past the end of the declared emergency under Chapter 2.72 LCMC, whichever is less.

D. Emergency operations uses must be authorized by the emergency order under Chapter 2.72 LCMC and may be sited on city property, except for open space properties, when the property or buildings thereon meet the need created by the emergency. Private property or other public property may, with permission of the owner, be used for such temporary emergency operations purposes. Emergency operations uses include, but are not limited to, emergency facilities, shelters, overnight shelters, bivouacs, mess halls, emergency campgrounds, staging areas, inoculation centers, distribution centers, or similar emergency operation uses. (Ord. 2018-15 § 1)


17.80.150 Four-flat dwellings.6

A. Definition. A “four-flat dwelling” is a structure designed to resemble a single-family dwelling, containing four individual dwelling units and appearing to have no more than two (one in front) exterior entrances opening onto a common hallway(s) providing access to the four individual units within the structure.

B. Standards. Four-flat dwellings are subject to the following standards:

1. Minimum Lot Size. A four-flat dwelling may be located on a lot of at least 10,000 square feet.

2. Parking. Each four-flat dwelling must have a minimum of six off-street parking spaces.

3. Setbacks. Each four-flat dwelling must meet the single-family dwelling setback requirements of the zone in which it is located.

4. Lot Coverage. Each four-flat dwelling must meet the maximum lot coverage requirements of the zone in which it is located.

5. Vacation Rentals. Four-flat dwellings shall not be used as vacation rentals in any zone.

6. Height Requirement. Four-flat dwellings must comply with the height requirement of the zone in which they are located.

7. Site plan review per LCMC 17.52.240 is not required for four-flat dwellings. (Ord. 2019-02 § 8)


17.80.160 Accessory uses - Places of worship.

A. In the general commercial (GC) district, Nelscott Plan (NP) district (business district and Beachside mixed use), Taft Village Core (TVC), and Oceanlake Plan (OP) district (Main Street interior MU and Oceanfront), the following accessory uses, customarily associated with the practices of the religious activity, are allowed:

1. Subject to compliance with site plan review (LCMC 17.52.240) and availability of adequate public facilities, an approved and constructed place of worship shall be allowed the reasonable use of the subject real property for accessory use activities, including those uses and limitations identified in ORS 227.500 as that section exists on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. In addition, temporary sheltering of individuals and families in building and fire code compliant facilities is authorized (temporary use), not to exceed 50 persons, with a minimum of 35 square feet per person required. Strict compliance with Oregon Fire Code TA No. 14-12, adopted herein by this reference and on file in the Lincoln City planning department, is required. The fire district shall be notified when such temporary sheltering use is requested.

B. In the single-family residential (R-1) district, single-family residential roads-end (R-1-RE) district, vacation rental (VR) district, the multifamily residential (R-M) district, the recreation residential (R-R) district, Nelscott Plan (NP) district (cottage residential) the following accessory uses, customarily associated with the practices of the religious activity, are allowed:

1. Subject to compliance with site plan review (LCMC 17.52.240) and availability of adequate public facilities, an approved and constructed place of worship shall be allowed the reasonable use of the subject real property for accessory use activities, including those uses and limitations identified in ORS 227.500 as that section exists on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. In addition, temporary sheltering of individuals and families in building and fire code compliant facilities is authorized (temporary use), not to exceed 25 persons, with a minimum of 35 square feet per person required. Strict compliance with Oregon Fire Code TA No. 14-12, adopted herein by this reference and on file in the Lincoln City planning department, is required. The fire district shall be notified when such temporary sheltering use is requested. (Ord. 2019-21 § 10)1

Editor’s note: Ordinance 2009-11 §§ 2, 3 provide:

    The provisions of Ordinance Nos. 2007-11 and 2008-07 as readopted in Section 1 will continue to apply to all vacation rental dwelling permits issued under those ordinances as of June 21, 2009, until such time as the permits expire under their terms or on the latest possible renewal date, or expire by operation of law under Ordinance Nos. 2007-11 and 2008-07, whichever comes first. 

    A vacation rental permit due to expire December 31, 2009, will be subject to renewal only as a license under the provisions of Ordinance Nos. 2009-02 and 2009-03.  2

This section was added by Ord. 2009-05 as LCMC 17.80.070. It was editorially renumbered to avoid duplication. 3

This section was added by Ord. 2009-06 as LCMC 17.80.080. It was editorially renumbered to avoid duplication. 4

This section was added by Ord. 2009-06 as LCMC 17.80.090. It was editorially renumbered to avoid duplication. 5

Code reviser’s note: Ord. 2014-29 adds these provisions as Section 17.80.120. The section has been renumbered to avoid duplication of numbering. 6

Code reviser’s note: Ord. 2019-02 adds these provisions as Section 17.80.140. The section has been editorially renumbered to avoid duplication of numbering. 


Chapter 17.84 REMEDIES

Sections:

17.84.010    Failure to obtain permit.

17.84.020    Enforcement.

17.84.030    Remedial power of the court.

17.84.040    Certificates of occupancy.

17.84.050    Inspections.

17.84.060    Search warrants.

17.84.070    Alternative remedy.


17.84.010 Failure to obtain permit.

Any person, firm, association or corporation, whether its principal, agent, employee or otherwise, who fails to obtain any permits required pursuant to this title shall be subject to a double permit fee, which fee may be imposed in addition to any other enforcement action taken to obtain compliance with the requirements of this title. (Ord. 92-3 § 5; Ord. 84-2 § 11.010)


17.84.020 Enforcement.

A. Civil Infraction. Any person, firm, association or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, who violates any provision of this title or any order adopted pursuant to this title shall be punished under the provisions of Chapter 1.16 LCMC. Unless otherwise specified, any such violation is a Class B civil infraction. Each day that the violation of this title exists is deemed to be a separate offense.

B. Notice of Violation.

1. The building official, designee, or an authorized enforcement officer listed in or designated pursuant to LCMC 1.16.030 (hereinafter “enforcement officer”) may give written notice of any violation of this title to the party responsible for the violation.

2. The party notified of the violation shall have 10 days to execute and deliver to the city an assurance of voluntary compliance. The assurance shall set forth what actions, if any, the party intends to take with respect to the alleged violation. If the enforcement officer is satisfied with the assurance of voluntary compliance, the assurance shall be submitted to the municipal court for approval, and if approved shall be filed with the clerk of the court as an order of the court.

3. The enforcement officer may reject any assurance:

a. Which does not provide for correction of the violation or removal of a noncomplying structure in a timely manner approved by the city; or

b. Which does not provide for restitution in specific amounts to the city where there has been an ascertainable loss of money or property as a result of the alleged violation; or

c. Which does not contain any provision, including but not limited to the keeping of records, which the enforcement officer reasonably believes necessary to ensure the continued cessation of the alleged violation.

4. Violation of any terms of an assurance of voluntary compliance which has been approved and filed with the court shall constitute a contempt of court.

5. The court shall not conduct a trial or hearing if the named violator in the notice of violation has timely filed an appeal to the city land use reviewing body with appropriate jurisdiction of any land use code interpretation by the planning director contained in the notice of violation letter. Upon exhaustion of the land use appeal process, or failure to timely file such appeal by the named violator, the court may proceed with adjudication of the offense. In proceeding with the case the court is bound to apply the final interpretation of the director or the appropriate appellate reviewing body. There can be no land use appeal based upon clear and objective standards or based upon a codified interpretation of a provision of the land use code (i.e., the council has defined a term which would otherwise involve the exercise of discretion).

C. Filing of Complaint.

1. After the expiration of 10 days from the date of notice given under subsection (B) of this section, the enforcement officer may bring action in the name of the city in the municipal court to restrain the violation or to seek daily imposition of fines and costs pursuant to Chapter 1.16 LCMC or both.

2. If the delay caused by complying with the notice provisions of subsection (B) of this section would cause immediate harm to the public health, safety or welfare or to property, or if it is necessary to stop construction then underway, a stop work order may be issued and an action shall be immediately commenced under subsection (A) of this section.

3. A temporary restraining order may be granted without prior notice to the party allegedly violating the provisions of this title, if the municipal court finds there is a threat of immediate harm to the public health, safety or welfare or to property. The court shall fix a time not to exceed 15 days after which the temporary restraining order shall expire by its terms, unless within the time fixed a hearing is held and for good cause shown the court extends the restraining order or provides for any other equitable relief.

D. Tree Removal Infraction. Any person, firm, association, or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, who removes or destroys any trees without first having obtained a tree removal permit in accordance with LCMC 17.52.220(F), when such a permit is required, or who violates any of the conditions of such a permit commits a civil infraction. Any such infraction shall be punished under the provisions of Chapter 1.16 LCMC as a tree removal infraction.

E. Enforcement by the Police Department. The chief of police, his authorized representative and any sworn police officer shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2017-12 § 1; Ord. 2015-10 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 92-25 § 1; Ord. 92-3 § 5; Ord. 84-2 § 11.020)


17.84.030 Remedial power of the court.

A. The municipal court is empowered to hear and determine violations of this title. In addition to any other penalty provided by law, the court is empowered to issue any injunction, order or judgment necessary to enforce this title and to ensure cessation of the violation.

B. The court may order the party violating the provisions of this title to reimburse the city for the full city costs, including any administrative costs, that result from the violation of any provision of this title, including any costs associated with abating the violation. The court may also order that the costs shall become a lien against the property unless paid within the time specified by the court.

C. The municipal court may order a party who has been found guilty of a tree removal violation to replace or plant additional trees, taking into consideration the value of the lost trees. The tree or trees shall be of the variety so designated by the court, after receiving a recommendation from city personnel involved with tree protection or enforcement of the tree removal permit provisions of this title. (Ord. 2015-10 § 5; Ord. 92-25 § 2; Ord. 92-3 § 5; Ord. 84-2 § 11.030)


17.84.040 Certificates of occupancy.

It is unlawful to use or occupy any building or premises until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the designated building official stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of the Uniform Building Code, this title, and any other city conditions attached to the development or use of the building or land. The occupancy of a building without a certificate of occupancy may be punished under the provisions of Chapter 1.16 LCMC. Any such violation is a Class B violation. Each day that the violation of this section exists is deemed to be a separate offense. (Ord. 2015-10 § 5; Ord. 92-3 § 5; Ord. 84-2 § 11.040)


17.84.050 Inspections.

The building official or code enforcement officer or designee shall have the authority to make routine periodic inspections of property and premises, and inspect books and records required to be maintained by city code within the city limits to determine whether there is compliance with the laws, rules and regulations which are designed for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public, and to make such inspections upon receipt of complaints or specific or general information indicating the existence of hazardous conditions or noncompliance with such rules, regulations and laws. In the event that the building official or code enforcement officer or designee is denied access to any property or premises or denied inspection of books and records required to be maintained for the purposes of making an inspection provided for in this title or other provision of the municipal code, such officer or official shall not inspect such premises or records unless or until he or she has obtained from the municipal judge of the city a search warrant for the inspection of such premises or records. (Ord. 2017-12 § 2; Ord. 92-3 § 5; Ord. 84-2 § 11.050)


17.84.060 Search warrants.

The municipal court of the city shall have the power to issue search warrants under the terms of this title for the inspection of any property or premises within the city limits upon a showing of probable cause for such inspection supported by an affidavit stating the purpose and extent of the proposed inspection and citing the ordinance or ordinances which form the basis for inspection and whether it is a routine or periodic inspection or an inspection instituted by complaint or other specific or general information concerning the property or premises or the area in which it is situated. The search warrant issued by the court shall specify the purpose and extent of the inspection which is proposed to be made on the specific property or premises covered by such warrant. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association to hinder, delay or obstruct the inspection of premises based on a search warrant issued under the provisions of this title. (Ord. 92-3 § 5; Ord. 84-2 § 11.060)


17.84.070 Alternative remedy.

A. In case a building or other structure is, or is proposed to be, located, constructed, maintained, repaired or used; or land is, or is proposed to be used in violation of this title, the building or land thus in violation shall constitute a nuisance. The city may, as an alternative to other remedies that are legally available for enforcing this title, institute a civil suit for an injunction, abatement or other appropriate proceedings to prevent, enjoin temporarily or permanently, abate or remove the unlawful location, construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or use.

B. If the city initiates and prevails in an action under subsection (A) of this section, the city shall be entitled to an assessment of its costs as provided in LCMC 8.12.170 relating to nuisances. Such assessment will then become a lien against the property as provided in LCMC 8.12.170. (Ord. 92-3 § 5; Ord. 84-2 § 11.070)


Chapter 17.88 AMENDMENTS

Sections:

17.88.010    Procedure.

17.88.020    Initiation of amendments.

17.88.030    Application.

17.88.040    Action by the planning commission.

17.88.050    Action by the city council.

17.88.060    Burden of proof.

17.88.065    Notice.

17.88.070    Limitation on new applications.


17.88.010 Procedure.

This title and/or the comprehensive plan map or text may be amended by changing the boundaries of districts or designations or by changing any other provisions thereof, whenever the public necessity and convenience and the general welfare requires such an amendment, by following the procedure of this chapter. (Ord. 92-3 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 12.010)


17.88.020 Initiation of amendments.

An amendment to the text of this title or to the zoning map and/or to the comprehensive plan map or text may be initiated by:

A. Motion of the planning commission;

B. Motion of the city council;

C. Application filed by an owner of record, a purchaser under a recorded land sale contract, or the holder of an option to purchase property which is the subject of the application for rezoning or comprehensive plan map redesignation;

D. A Lincoln City resident requesting a change to the text of the comprehensive plan or this title;

E. The planning and community development director. (Ord. 2016-07 § 1; Ord. 92-3 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 12.020)


17.88.030 Application.

The property owner or his authorized agent or for textual changes a resident of Lincoln City may make application for an amendment by filing an application, at least 45 days prior to the meeting date the matter is intended to be considered, with the planning director or his designee on a form and in a manner prescribed by the city, pursuant to LCMC 17.76.010, which shall include the following additional information:

A. Name and address of the applicant;

B. For map amendments, the applicant shall provide title report and/or other documentation to provide evidence that the applicant is the owner of record, a purchaser under a recorded land sale contract, or the holder of an option to purchase property which is the subject of the application;

C. Address, legal description and Lincoln County assessor’s tax lot and map number of the property subject to a map amendment;

D. A map (Lincoln County assessor’s plat) showing the subject property and surrounding properties and a listing of current property owners within 100 feet of the property subject to this application for a map amendment;

E. Statement and supportive evidence indicating the precise manner in which the proposed amendment is in conformance with the comprehensive plan for the city of Lincoln City and each of the applicable provisions of this title together with any other data pertinent to the findings prerequisite to the granting of an amendment to this title, zoning map or comprehensive plan map and/or text as listed in LCMC 17.88.050(D);

F. The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the amount established by general resolution of the city council. No part of the filing fee is refundable. (Ord. 92-3 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 12.030)


17.88.040 Action by the planning commission.

A. Upon filing of the application for an amendment as described in LCMC 17.88.030, or upon motion of the city council or planning commission for the initiation of an amendment, the matter shall automatically be referred to the planning commission. The planning commission shall study the matter to the extent that it considers such study to be necessary, including the holding of a public hearing if it so desires, and shall, in open meeting, recommend the approval or disapproval of the amendment. The recommendation shall be reported to the city council by filing the recommendation with the city manager. The city manager shall, upon filing the recommendation, report the same to the city council at a subsequent regular city council meeting after the filing of the recommendations, by setting the matter for public hearing pursuant to LCMC 17.88.050.

B. The report and recommendations of the planning commission shall be made within 60 days after the filing of a complete application; provided, that such time limit may be extended upon the mutual agreement of the parties having an interest in the proceedings. Failure of the commission to so report within 60 days without the aforesaid agreement shall be deemed to be a recommendation of approval of the proposed amendment of the planning commission. If the commission deems it advisable, it may recommend that the area under consideration for change in classification or designation be enlarged or diminished, or reclassified to a district or category other than the district or category originally initiated. (Ord. 92-3 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 12.040)


17.88.050 Action by the city council.

A. Hearing Before City Council. Upon receipt of the report from the planning commission or upon the expiration of such 60 days as aforesaid, a public hearing is automatically set for the next regular city council meeting following the receipt of the report; provided, however, that the council may, by motion, set the date of such public hearing at such other time or at such other place it desires. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in Chapter 17.76 LCMC, and in the case of an amendment to property containing a mobile home park, notice shall also be provided to tenants of such mobile home park.

B. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the council may enact an ordinance granting the comprehensive plan and zoning map or textual amendment, or may by motion deny the granting of the amendment. The council shall in any event render its decision on any application within 60 days after the receipt of the report and recommendation of the planning commission or after the expiration of such 60 days as aforesaid; provided, however, that nothing shall prohibit the city council from, by motion, postponing disposition of the application to a definite time past the 60-day period, provided mutual agreement is made for such postponement by the parties having an interest in the proceedings. If the council fails to take action on an application for a zoning or comprehensive plan map amendment within 60 days as provided above, the application shall be deemed denied.

C. If the council proposes to adopt an amendment that is substantially altered from the recommendation of the commission, the council may refer the proposed amendment back to the commission for report and recommendation, which may include the holding of a joint meeting, before adoption. The commission shall consider the amendment within 15 days of the referral and report thereon at the next regular meeting of the city council. Failure to so report will be deemed to constitute approval by the planning commission.

D. Findings of Fact. In order for the city council to adopt an ordinance for an amendment to this title, comprehensive plan document and/or map, it must make and adopt findings as a part of said ordinance that are adequate to support the amendment proposal. The findings must be factual and must be supported by substantial evidence submitted into the record. The amendment must comply with and conform to the comprehensive plan goals, policies and land use map. For plan and land use regulation amendments, proposals must be consistent with provisions in the Oregon Transportation Planning Rule, OAR 660-012-0060. If statewide goals provide a more specific direction than is provided by the goals in the comprehensive plan, the findings must provide evidence that the proposed amendment is in conformance with statewide land use planning goals and policies. (Ord. 2016-21 § 17; Ord. 92-3 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 12.050)


17.88.060 Burden of proof.

The specific findings made by the city council, upon the recommendation of the planning commission, to adopt an ordinance for an amendment to this title, comprehensive plan text and/or map must be factual and supported by substantial evidence. The burden of producing substantial evidence to support the requisite findings is on the applicant seeking the amendment. If no evidence is produced concerning the requisite findings listed in LCMC 17.88.050(D), the application may be denied based upon improper or inadequate findings. The evidence produced must be referenced in the final order and findings of fact adopted as a part of the ordinance adopting the amendment proposal. (Ord. 92-3 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 12.060)


17.88.065 Notice.

A. Initial Notice to DLCD. At least 35 days before the first evidentiary hearing on a proposal to amend the comprehensive plan or this title, the department shall mail to the Director of the Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development a notice that includes the text of the proposed amendment and any supplemental information that the department believes is necessary to inform 



DLCD of the effect of the proposal. The notice shall include the date set for the first evidentiary hearing.

B. Initial Notice to Others. Notice of a hearing on a proposal to amend the comprehensive plan or this title shall be given to others in accord with LCMC 17.76.020.

C. Notice to DLCD Following Adoption. Not later than 20 days after adoption by the city council of an ordinance amending the comprehensive plan or this title, the department shall mail a notice that includes a copy of the ordinance, accompanied by materials to comply with ORS 197.615(2), to the Director of DLCD. If the adopted amendment is substantially different than the proposed amendment mailed to DLCD under subsection (A) of this section, the notice shall specify the substantial differences. The notice shall include a signed statement by the person mailing it, indicating the date of deposit in the mail.

D. Notice to Others Following Adoption. On the same date as the department’s mailing under subsection (C) of this section, notice of adoption by the city council of an ordinance amending the comprehensive plan or this title shall be given to others in accord with LCMC 17.76.030(G). In addition to the information set out in LCMC 17.76.030(G), the notice also shall:

1. Identify the place where and the hours during which a person may review the amendment; and

2. Include a signed statement by the person mailing the notice indicating the date of deposit in the mail. (Ord. 2012-12 § 1; Ord. 2000-06-A § 21; Ord. 84-2 § 12.065)


17.88.070 Limitation on new applications.

In a case where an application for an amendment is denied by the city council, the application shall not be eligible for resubmittal for one year from the date of the denial, unless the denial was specifically stated to be without prejudice. A new application affecting the same property must be, in the opinion of the planning commission and the city council, substantially different from the application denied to be eligible for consideration within one year from the date of denial, unless the first denial was denied without prejudice, or the planning commission finds that conditions have changed to an extent that further consideration is warranted. (Ord. 92-3 § 6; Ord. 84-2 § 12.070)


Chapter 17.90 COMPENSATION CLAIMS

Sections:

17.90.010    Purpose.

17.90.020    Definitions.

17.90.030    Process for determining just compensation for Measure 37 claims filed on or before June 28, 2007.

17.90.040    Determination of compensation and delegation of authority for claims regarding land use regulations adopted after January 1, 2007.

17.90.050    Claims for compensation for claims regarding land use regulations adopted after January 1, 2007.

17.90.060    Director report and city council review.

17.90.070    Burden of proof and record.

17.90.080    Effect of waiver.

17.90.090    Procedural error.

17.90.100    Recordation of waiver.

17.90.110    Reconsideration of waiver.

17.90.120    Appeals.

17.90.130    Availability of funds to pay demands.

17.90.140    Severability.

17.90.150    Applicable state law.


17.90.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this section is to adopt a procedure for evaluating claims that are provided for under Ballot Measure 49, including claims that were filed under Measure 37. (Ord. 2008-03 § 1)


17.90.020 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the definitions from Ballot Measure 49 apply, along with the following:

“Appraisal” means a written statement prepared by a person certified under ORS Chapter 674 or a person registered under ORS Chapter 308.

“Claim” means a written demand for compensation filed under Measure 49 and ORS 197.352, as in effect on and after the effective date of Measure 49.

“Claimant” means the person who has filed a claim. The claimant must be a current owner of the property that is the subject of the claim.

“Council” means the city council of Lincoln City.

“Department” means the Lincoln City planning and community development department, or successor entity designated by the council.

“Director” means the director of the Lincoln City planning and community development department or designee.

“Existing Lincoln City regulation” means a Lincoln City regulation that was enacted or adopted by Lincoln City with an effective date prior to December 2, 2004.

“Fair market value” as defined in Section 21(b) of Measure 49 means “the amount of money, in cash, that the property would bring if the property was offered for sale by a person who desires to sell the property but is not obligated to sell the property, and if the property was bought by a person who was willing to buy the property but not obligated to buy the property. The fair market value is the actual value of the property, with all of the property’s adaptations to general and special purposes. The fair market value of property does not include any prospective value, speculative value or possible value based upon future expenditures and improvements.”

“File” means to submit a document to Lincoln City.

“Interest” means the average interest rate for a one-year United States Government Treasury Bill on December 31st of each year of the period between the date the land use regulation was enacted and the date the claim was filed, compounded annually on January 1st of each year of the period.

“Land use application” means an application for a land use decision, a limited land use decision, or an expedited land division, as those terms are defined by ORS 197.015 and 197.360, or an application for a permit or zone change under ORS 227.160 through 227.187.

“Land use regulation” means a provision of Lincoln City’s comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance or land division ordinance that restricts the residential use of private real property zoned for residential use.

“Lincoln City Measure 37 waiver” means a decision by the city of Lincoln City that was made before December 6, 2007, under ORS 197.352 (2005) to modify, remove or not apply one or more Lincoln City land use regulations to allow a claimant to use the property for a use that was permitted when the claimant acquired the property.

“Measure 37 waiver” means a decision by a city, a county, metro or the state of Oregon that was made before December 6, 2007, under ORS 197.352 (2005) to modify, remove or not apply one or more land use regulations to allow a claimant to use the property for a use that was permitted when the claimant acquired the property.

“Measure 49” means the ballot measure enacted by the voters on November 6, 2007.

“Property” means the private real property described in a claim and contiguous private real property that is owned by the same owner, whether or not the contiguous property is described in another claim, and that is not property owned by the federal government, an Indian tribe or a public body, as defined in ORS 192.410.

“Reduction in fair market value” means the difference, if any, in the fair market value of the property from the date that is one year before the enactment of the land use regulation to the date that is one year after the enactment, plus interest. (Ord. 2008-03 § 1)


17.90.030 Process for determining just compensation for Measure 37 claims filed on or before June 28, 2007.

The city shall follow the procedure set forth in Measure 49 to evaluate Measure 37 claims that were filed with the city on or before June 28, 2007. Vested rights claims relating to Measure 37 waivers shall be determined pursuant to Chapter 17.94 LCMC and Measure 49. (Ord. 2008-03 § 1)


17.90.040 Determination of compensation and delegation of authority for claims regarding land use regulations adopted after January 1, 2007.

The city council shall determine the validity of any claim filed under Measure 49 after June 28, 2007. (Ord. 2008-03 § 1)


17.90.050 Claims for compensation for claims regarding land use regulations adopted after January 1, 2007.

A. Filing. All claims shall be filed with the director in person or by U.S. Mail. The filing date is the date the claim is received by the city.

B. Submittal Requirements.

1. Claimant shall file a complete Measure 49 claim form provided by the department including:

a. The name and address of each owner and the date when the property was acquired;

b. The address, if any, and the assessor’s map and tax lot number of the property that is the subject of the claim;

c. A statement of the person’s desired use of the property for residential use;

d. A specific reference to each land use regulation enacted after January 1, 2007, that is alleged to restrict the person’s desired use of the property and the date the land use regulations were enacted;

e. The amount of reduction in fair market value alleged for each regulation at issue plus interest;

f. Whether a permit was issued for development of the property including a description of the use and the case file number;

g. Whether a claim was filed for the subject property with the state or any other government;

h. Any other information reasonably related to the review and processing of the claim as required by the director of the planning and community development department or as provided on the Measure 49 claim form; and

i. All information required to be submitted by Measure 49 and any subsequent amendments to Measure 49.

2. Claimant shall also provide:

a. Evidence of the acquisition date of the claimant, including the instrument conveying the property to the claimant and a report from a title company identifying the person in which title is vested and the claimant’s acquisition date and describing exceptions and encumbrances to title that are of record;

b. The written and notarized consent of all of the owners if there is more than one owner;

c. An appraisal showing the fair market value of the property one year before the enactment of each land use regulation and the fair market value of the property one year after the enactment. The actual and reasonable cost of preparing the claim, including the cost of the appraisal, not to exceed $5,000, may be added to the calculation of the reduction in fair market value under this subsection. The appraisal must: (i) be prepared by a person certified under ORS Chapter 674 or a person registered under ORS Chapter 308; (ii) comply with the Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice, as authorized by the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989; and (iii) expressly determine the highest and best use of the property at the time the land use regulation was enacted; and

d. The applicable claim(s) review fee which shall be established by resolution of the city council.

3. Only one claim for each property may be filed for each land use regulation.

C. Claim Review Process. The city shall:

1. Deny a claim if:

a. It is not filed within five years from the date the land use regulation was enacted;

b. An application for a comprehensive plan or zoning amendment is approved for the subject property; or

c. The highest and best use of the property was not residential at the time the land use regulation was enacted;

2. Determine whether a claim is complete within 60 days after receiving the claim;

3. Notify the claimant of any missing information within 60 days after receiving the claim;

4. After providing notice of the missing information, deem the application complete if:

a. The claimant provides the missing information and the required fee; or

b. The claimant provides a written statement that some or all of the missing information will not be provided and the required fee;

5. Deem the application complete when filed if the city fails to notify the claimant of missing information within 60 days after receiving the claim;

6. Deem the application withdrawn if the claimant fails to provide the missing information, or fee, or a written statement that some or all of the missing information will not be provided within the time specified in the notice of missing information; and

7. Issue a final determination on a claim within 180 days from the date the claim is deemed complete. (Ord. 2008-03 § 1)


17.90.060 Director report and city council review.

A. Claims Review Process. Upon receipt of a filing, the director shall follow the claims review process under LCMC 17.90.050.

B. Review Criteria. The director shall determine whether to recommend to the city council to approve or deny the claim based on a demonstration by the owner that:

1. A Lincoln City land use regulation enacted after January 1, 2007, and after the property was acquired restricts the person’s desired residential use of the property;

2. The land use regulation has the effect of reducing the fair market value of the property;

3. The highest and best use of the property at the time the property was acquired is the person’s desired use of the property;

4. The land use regulation is not an exempt land use regulation under the terms of Measure 49;

5. The time limitations for filing a claim, as specified in Measure 49, have not been exceeded; and

6. All other requirements of law have been met.

C. Acquisition Date. The date the property was acquired is:

1. The date the claimant became the owner of the property as shown in the deed records of the county in which the property is located;

2. If there is more than one claimant for the same property under the same claim and the claimants have different acquisition dates, the acquisition date is the earliest of those dates;

3. If the claimant is the surviving spouse of a person who was an owner of the property in fee title, the claimant’s acquisition date is the date the claimant was married to the deceased spouse or the date the spouse acquired the property, whichever is later. A claimant or a surviving spouse may disclaim relief by using the procedure provided in ORS 105.623 through 105.649; and

4. If a claimant conveyed the property to another person and reacquired the property, whether by foreclosure or otherwise, the claimant’s acquisition date is the date the claimant reacquired ownership of the property.

5. A default judgment entered after December 2, 2004, does not alter a claimant’s acquisition date unless the claimant’s acquisition date is after December 2, 2004.

D. Notice of Hearing. If a claim is deemed complete and not rejected, the director shall draft a staff report and provide notice of opportunity to comment and to request a hearing.

1. Notice shall be sent to:

a. The claimant or representative and all owners of the subject property known to the city;

b. All property owners of record within 250 feet of the subject property;

c. The planning commission and city council and the recognized city neighborhood association in which the subject property is located; and

d. The Department of Land Conservation and Development.

2. The notice shall contain:

a. The address, if any, and the assessor’s map and tax lot number of the property that is the subject of the claim;

b. A statement of the person’s desired use of the property for residential use;

c. The number of dwellings, lots or parcels sought by the claimant, as well as the specific regulations alleged to restrict the use of the property;

d. A statement that the claim, staff report and any information submitted is available at the department for inspection or copying at cost and the phone number of a city staff contact;

e. A statement that all persons may submit written comments and/or request a hearing within 30 days from the date the notice is mailed;

f. A statement that if a hearing is requested, notice of hearing shall be by publication only, at least 20 days prior to the hearing;

g. A statement that judicial review of the final determination on the claim is limited to the written evidence and arguments submitted to the city;

h. A statement that prior to the end of the comment period, the claimant may request an additional seven days to respond to new evidence or to submit final arguments;

i. A statement that judicial review is available only for issues that are raised with sufficient specificity to afford the public entity an opportunity to respond; and

j. Any other information as deemed necessary by the director.

E. At least seven days prior to the city council initial action on the matter, the director shall prepare a staff report including a recommendation to approve or deny the claim, and including the appropriate relief to be granted, such as whether and how much to pay in compensation, or, in lieu thereof, a recommendation regarding the number of dwellings and lots that may be approved and the land use regulation(s) that should be waived. If in the opinion of the director the claim, if granted, has potential to significantly affect existing or future development in the city, the director may forward the claim and report to the planning commission and request the planning commission comment.

F. If no request for hearing is made, the claim shall be placed on the city council consent agenda for action.

G. If a request for hearing is made from a person entitled to notice or otherwise affected or aggrieved, the director shall schedule the matter for public hearing and publish notice of hearing at least 20 days prior to the hearing. No additional mailed notice is required.

H. In reviewing the claim, the city council shall consider such factors as the claimed reduction in fair market value; the nature of the proposed use or development, if any; and the impact of the proposed use or development including comments, if any, by the planning commission. The city shall consider comments on the record including any comments actually received by the conclusion of the comment period or public hearing, and such other information as the city deems relevant and material.

I. The city council shall issue a final decision after providing notice and a hearing within 180 days from the date the claim is deemed complete.

J. Final Decision. The city council may reject or approve the claim, and determine relief including payment of compensation, a waiver of regulations, or any combination of such remedies. The council may waive some regulations specified in the claim and deny waiver of others. The council is not limited to those regulations listed in the claim and may impose any conditions of approval that it deems reasonable and appropriate to protect the public interest. Failure to comply with any condition of approval is grounds for revocation of the approval of the compensation for the claim, grounds for recovering any compensation paid, and grounds for revocation of any other action taken under this chapter.

K. Notice of the council’s final decision shall be mailed to any person who submitted written comments prior to the close of the comment period or who appeared orally or in writing at the public hearing. The city shall send notice and a copy of the decision to the claimant. The notice shall contain a brief description of the decision including the relief granted. If relief includes a waiver, the description shall include a list of all regulations that the city council decided to not apply and the specific number of dwellings, lots or parcels authorized by the waiver. The notice shall also state that a claim has been, or may need to be, filed with the state. (Ord. 2008-03 § 1)


17.90.070 Burden of proof and record.

The claimant shall have the burden of proof on all matters under this chapter. The claimant bears sole responsibility for ensuring that the record before the city contains all information and evidence necessary to support the claim. The claimant shall be precluded from submitting information or raising new issues in any subsequent proceeding unless the claimant demonstrates that the information or issue could not reasonably have been entered into the record or raised before the city. (Ord. 2008-03 § 1)


17.90.080 Effect of waiver.

A. A decision of the city to waive a land use regulation shall in no way impact the property owner’s obligation to demonstrate compliance with any regulations not expressly provided for in the decision or to obtain any required approvals or permits.

B. A use authorized by a waiver has the legal status of a nonconforming use as provided by law. (Ord. 2008-03 § 1)


17.90.090 Procedural error.

No procedural defect in processing a claim shall invalidate any proceeding or decision unless the party alleging the error demonstrates prejudice to a substantial right. Inadvertent failure to provide notice or complete notice shall not be grounds for invalidating a decision. (Ord. 2008-03 § 1)


17.90.100 Recordation of waiver.

The city shall record a memorandum of any decision approving a claim for compensation, including any waiver of regulations, in the deed records for Lincoln County. (Ord. 2008-03 § 1)


17.90.110 Reconsideration of waiver.

The city council may, at its sole discretion, reconsider a decision on a claim if it appears that the decision is inconsistent with a subsequent court ruling, administrative rule or other change in the law relating to Measure 49. The decision to reconsider may be made without notice or hearing; but the decision on reconsideration shall be made only after notice and opportunity to be heard consistent with the requirements for claim and review provided under this chapter for council review, whichever is applicable. At the conclusion of the process, the council may affirm, modify, or revoke the earlier decision. If the council modifies or revokes a decision that resulted in payment of compensation, the council may institute an action for recovery. If the council modifies or revokes a decision to modify, remove, or not apply a land use regulation, it shall issue an order setting forth such remedy as it deems appropriate to protect the public interest. (Ord. 2008-03 § 1)


17.90.120 Appeals.

A. A person that is adversely affected by a final determination under this chapter may obtain judicial review of that determination as provided in Measure 49, under ORS 34.010 through 43.100. A person is adversely affected if the person is:

1. An owner of the property that is the subject of the final determination or;

2. A person who timely submitted written evidence, arguments or comments.

B. Judicial review of a decision under this chapter is:

1. Limited to evidence in the record at the time of the final determination; and

2. Available only for issues raised with sufficient specificity to afford an opportunity to respond. (Ord. 2008-03 § 1)


17.90.130 Availability of funds to pay demands.

Compensation can only be paid based on the availability and appropriation of funds for this purpose. (Ord. 2008-03 § 1)


17.90.140 Severability.

If any phrase, clause, or other part or parts of this chapter is found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining phrases, clauses and other part or parts shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 2008-03 § 1)


17.90.150 Applicable state law.

For all claims filed with the city of Lincoln City, the applicable state law is Measure 49 as amended, modified or clarified by subsequent amendments or regulations adopted by the Oregon State Legislature or Oregon State Administrative Agencies. Any claim that has not been processed completely under this chapter shall be subject to any such amendments, modifications, clarifications or other actions taken at the state level and this chapter shall be read in a manner so as not to conflict with such amendments, modifications, clarifications or other actions taken at the state level. This chapter is adopted solely to address claims filed under the authority of those provisions of Measure 49. (Ord. 2008-03 § 1)


Chapter 17.94 WAIVERS OF REGULATIONS

Sections:

17.94.010    Purpose.

17.94.020    Definitions.

17.94.030    Application.

17.94.040    Planning department report.

17.94.050    Public hearing.

17.94.060    Consent agenda.

17.94.070    Notice of public hearing.

17.94.080    City council final decision – Appeal.


17.94.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish a procedure for determining whether a property owner who was granted a waiver from land use regulations has a common law vested right to complete and continue the use described in the waiver. (Ord. 2008-02 § 1)


17.94.020 Definitions.

A. As used in this chapter, words and phrases shall have the same meaning as provided in Ballot Measure 49.

B. As used in this chapter, “planning director” means the city of Lincoln City planning and community development director or designee.

C. As used in this chapter, “waiver” or “Measure 37 waiver” refers to a waiver issued pursuant to a decision on a claim for compensation under Ballot Measure 37, codified at ORS 197.352 (2005) before the statute was amended by the adoption of Ballot Measure 49 (Chapter 424, Oregon Laws 2007), enacted by the voters on November 6, 2007. (Ord. 2008-02 § 1)


17.94.030 Application.

A. Any person who wishes to complete or continue any use of property allowed pursuant to a Measure 37 waiver shall file an application for a vested rights determination as required by Ballot Measure 49. Until the city council’s determination of vested rights has been made, no permits shall be issued, and, if the city of Lincoln City has issued permits, an order stopping work under those permits will be issued.

B. An application for a vested rights determination must be submitted to the planning department in the form prescribed by the planning director and signed by the owner. The complete application shall include the following information:

1. Name, address, telephone number and signature of the owner filing the application.

2. A copy of the conveyance document that shows the applicant’s interest in the real property and includes a legal description and physical address of the property.

3. A copy of the orders of city of Lincoln City and the state of Oregon approving a waiver for the property.

4. A copy of any land use approvals and construction permits issued that allow development of the property.

5. Identification of expenditures made to develop the property and the dates of those expenditures.

6. A written statement describing:

a. How the applicant’s use of the property is consistent with the waiver; and

b. How the applicant has a common law vested right to complete or continue the use described in the waiver.

7. An application fee to be established by separate resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2008-02 § 1)


17.94.040 Planning department report.

A. The planning director will prepare a staff report that describes the vested rights application, sets forth all pertinent facts, and makes a recommendation on how the application should be resolved.

B. The planning director’s report and recommendation shall be forwarded to the city council of Lincoln City for a public hearing. At any time, the planning director may refer a copy of the report and recommendation to the city of Lincoln City planning commission for comment; however, the planning commission is not required to review the matter or make a recommendation unless specifically requested to do so by the planning director or city council. (Ord. 2008-02 § 1)


17.94.050 Public hearing.

A. The city council shall conduct a public hearing on the application for a determination of vested rights.

B. After the public hearing, the city council shall make a decision as follows:

1. Whether the applicant’s use of the property complies with the waiver granted by city of Lincoln City and state of Oregon; and

2. Whether the applicant had a common law vested right on December 6, 2007, to complete and continue the use described in the waiver.

C. 1. The city council decision shall be based on the analysis of the staff report submitted by the planning director and the evidence and testimony contained in the record and the applicable laws.

2. The planning director’s recommendation and city council decision shall be consistent with Oregon appellate decisions addressing vested rights issues and shall be based on a multifactor test that will include consideration of the factors that the courts have identified as relevant to aid in the equitable balancing test required for a determination of vested rights:

a. The ratio of expenditures incurred to the total cost of the project;

b. The good faith of the owner;

c. Whether the owner had notice of the proposed change in law before starting the improvements;

d. The type of expenditures, i.e., whether the expenditures have any relation to the completed project or could apply to other various uses of the land;

e. The nature, location, and ultimate cost of the project;

f. Whether the actions rise beyond mere preparation; and

g. Other relevant factors.

D. A copy of the planning director’s report and recommendation shall be mailed to the applicant, the applicant’s representative, and any person who submitted a written request for a copy of the report and recommendation. The report and recommendation shall be mailed not less than 10 days prior to the date of the city council hearing on the application.

E. A copy of the planning director’s report and recommendation may be given at any time to the Lincoln City planning commission for comment. A copy of the Lincoln City planning commission comments on the application and recommendation, if any, shall be transmitted in writing to the city council and made a part of the record at the public hearing under “agency comments.” (Ord. 2008-02 § 1)


17.94.060 Consent agenda.

A. Notwithstanding this section and LCMC 17.94.050, if the planning director determines that an application establishes both compliance with the waiver and a vested right without the need for additional evidence or analysis, the application will be placed on the city council’s public meeting consent agenda for final action. If an applicant, any city councilor, or any member of the public requests a hearing on the application, it will be set for a public hearing before the city council pursuant to this section.

B. Notice that an application will be considered on the consent agenda will be mailed to the applicant and to the owners of real property within 250 feet of the subject property.

C. Notice shall be mailed not less than 10 days prior to the date the city council will consider the consent agenda. (Ord. 2008-02 § 1)


17.94.070 Notice of public hearing.

A. Notice of a public hearing before the city council shall be mailed to the applicant and to the owners of record of real property within 250 feet of the subject property. Notice shall be mailed not less than 10 days prior to the scheduled hearing.

B. The notice of the public hearing shall include a summary of the planning director’s report, if it was not included in a consent agenda notice.

C. The failure of any person to receive notice of a public hearing shall not affect or invalidate any proceeding under this chapter. (Ord. 2008-02 § 1)


17.94.080 City council final decision – Appeal.

A. The city council shall consider the planning director’s recommendation and all documents, evidence and testimony in the record. The city council shall enter an order determining whether the applicant’s use of the property complies with the waiver and whether the applicant had a common law vested right on December 6, 2007, to complete and continue the use described in the waiver.

B. If the city council determines that the applicant has a common law vested right to complete and continue the use, the city will issue land use and development permits in accordance with federal, state and city laws and regulations.

C. The decision of the city council will be subject to review by writ of review as provided in Ballot Measure 49, under ORS 34.010 through 34.102. (Ord. 2008-02 § 1)


Chapter 17.96 STATUTORY DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS

Sections:

17.96.010    Purpose and intent.

17.96.020    Applicability.

17.96.030    Definitions.

17.96.040    Required application materials.

17.96.050    Process of review and adoption of development agreement.

17.96.060    Minimum requirement for a development agreement.

17.96.070    Code provisions which can be modified, altered or waived or from which a development agreement is exempt.


17.96.010 Purpose and intent.

A. This chapter is intended to implement and be consistent with ORS 94.504 through 94.528, the Lincoln City comprehensive plan, and the Lincoln City Municipal Code.

B. The objective of this chapter is accomplished by providing procedures and standards for development agreements to be entered into between an owner/developer and the city of Lincoln City, Oregon. A development agreement provides certainty for the owner/developer obtaining development approval and thereby reduces the economic costs of development. A development agreement protects the city by memorializing the owner/developer’s voluntary agreement for the development of property, including commitments to provide needed public facilities or other project characteristics or needed amenities which are in the public interest.

C. The provisions of this chapter, in their interpretation and application, are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary to accomplish the stated intent, purposes and objectives of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as characterizing a development agreement as anything other than a discretionary, bilateral contract between the city and the owner/developer with consideration given by both parties to the contract. Under Oregon law, a development agreement is a land use decision. (Ord. 2019-30 § 1)


17.96.020 Applicability.

This chapter may be applied to all lands within the city limits of the city of Lincoln City and, when accompanied by an annexation, to other lands within the Lincoln City urban growth boundary. This chapter may only be used in development agreement qualifying future land use map (FLUM) designations identified in the Lincoln City comprehensive plan, together with the implementing zoning districts, or within qualifying “pearl” zoning districts. (Ord. 2019-30 § 1)


17.96.030 Definitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

“Council” means the city council of Lincoln City or council’s designee, such as a hearing officer.

“Department” means the Lincoln City planning and community development department, or successor entity designated by the council.

“Development agreement” or “agreement” means an agreement entered into between Lincoln City and an owner/developer of land, pursuant to ORS Chapter 94, the terms and conditions of this chapter, and the applicable substantive requirements of the comprehensive plan and code applicable to the development. A development agreement is typically used in conjunction with a qualifying zoning district (often with a concurrent planned unit development), and memorializes the land use decision in a binding written development agreement. A development agreement may be necessary to solve a public facility or other problem in order to facilitate approval of a development, including an annexation, which would otherwise require denial. A development agreement is a voluntary agreement; and neither the city nor the owner/developer is guaranteed maximum benefits by right.

“Planning director” or “director” means the director of the Lincoln City planning and community development department or designee. (Ord. 2019-30 § 1)


17.96.040 Required application materials.

A. A pre-application conference shall be a prerequisite to submission of a development agreement application.

B. A development agreement shall be submitted with an official application form and such associated fees as approved by council resolution.

C. No application for a development agreement shall be accepted as complete, or processed without submission of a standard form development agreement, and draft (proposed) development agreement terms with required exhibits. The contents of a development agreement shall specify the following:

1. Project components which define and detail permitted uses, residential densities, nonresidential densities and intensities and building sizes;

2. The amount and payment of system development charges and other fees imposed and agreed to in accordance with applicable provisions of the municipal code and state law, any proposed reimbursement provisions, other financial contributions by the property owner, and other fees;

3. Proposed dedications of amenities, buildings, land, common areas, proposed parks and open space land preservation or dedication;

4. Mitigation measures, development conditions and other requirements of ORS Chapter 94;

5. When appropriate, design standards such as architectural treatment, proposed setbacks, landscaping, drainage and water quality requirements or other development features;

6. Any proposals to meet workforce or affordable housing needs;

7. Proposed phasing and timetable of development;

8. Proposed build-out and vesting period for applicable standards;

9. Any other appropriate development conditions or proposed terms;

10. The application shall include draft findings of consistency with all applicable land development regulations or indicate where the regulations are proposed to be waived or modified, and the authority for such waiver or modification;

11. Dedications of land or offers to construct needed infrastructure shall be clearly identified and additional language proposing specific modifications to standards, special conditions or required dedications shall be set forth and highlighted or underlined for review purposes;

12. If a development agreement accompanies any other development application, the applications, fees and proposed findings for such concurrent applications shall accompany the development agreement. Concurrent applications are to be made at one time and not piecemeal.

D. Associated Applications.

1. Annexation. A development agreement may accompany a request for annexation. The application may be submitted with a requested land use designation, with or without a concurrent implementing zoning district. A zoning district which authorizes planned unit developments is recommended. An annexation development agreement without a concurrent zoning district will retain county zoning, if approved. Development is not authorized until a city zoning district is approved. A development agreement provides a vehicle for an applicant to contractually commit to meet public needs (e.g., public facility or housing needs) as consideration for the annexation. A development agreement may also restrict or limit use of property if needed based upon the availability of public facilities. A development agreement may not be used to provide relief from regulations unless such relief is specifically made available through use of the development agreement.

2. North Lincoln City Mixed Use FLUM. A development agreement may implement the North Lincoln City Mixed Use FLUM designation. A concept plan is required for such designation. A development agreement proposal to implement the NLMU may be submitted without a concurrent rezoning to one or more implementing PD zoning districts provided the timetable of development includes rezoning and master plan within two and four years respectively. Concept plans are typically implemented in phases with separate development agreements and planned unit developments preliminary or master plans for each discrete phase.

3. Planned Unit Development. A development agreement may accompany a planned unit development application (when the PD is proposed in a zoning district specifically authorizing development agreements). (Ord. 2019-30 § 1)


17.96.050 Process of review and adoption of development agreement.

A. Notice. Notice shall be in accordance with LCMC 17.76.020 or such greater notice provisions located in LCMC Title 16 (Subdivisions). Consideration of a development agreement that includes a proposed annexation shall also require mailed notice to the Lincoln County planning department. In addition to any other requirements, the notice shall state the time and place of the public hearing(s), and contain a brief statement of the major terms of the proposed development agreement, including a description of the area within the city or county that will be affected by the proposed development agreement [ORS 94.513(2)].

B. Planning Commission Review. If a development agreement is processed concurrently with a development application that normally receives a recommendation from the planning commission (e.g., annexation, comprehensive plan amendment, zone change, planned unit development), the planning commission shall similarly be required to hold a public hearing in accordance with notice and hearing requirements in subsection (A) of this section. The planning commission shall make a recommendation to council on the proposed development agreement and associated development approval(s). At the hearing, the planning commission shall focus on findings of consistency with the comprehensive plan, zoning code and land development regulations, including findings that modifications or waivers of regulations are properly authorized. A development agreement not accompanied by another application need only be approved by the governing body.

C. City Council Review. A development agreement requires notice and a hearing before the governing body. Notice and hearing shall be in accordance with requirements set forth in subsection (A) of this section. A development agreement cannot authorize deviations (including but not limited to uses, minimum and maximum densities, maximum gross floor area, or maximum structure height) allowed in the underlying zoning district unless such deviation is expressly authorized in the zoning code through a development agreement. The council may approve a development agreement based upon findings of consistency with the comprehensive plan and development code, consistent with LCMC 17.88.050(D), including findings that any modifications or waivers of regulations are properly authorized in the code or plan. Denial of a development agreement is the refusal to take a legislative act and is therefore not subject to appeal.

D. Ordinance Adoption. A development agreement shall be approved by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of the Lincoln City Charter [ORS 94.508(2)]. (Ord. 2019-30 § 1)


17.96.060 Minimum requirement for a development agreement.

Development agreement shall, at a minimum, include the following provisions:

A. Legal Description [ORS 94.528]. The development agreement must include a legal description of the land subject to the agreement [Exhibit A. “Legal Description”]. The legal description must be prepared by a licensed surveyor for the entire property subject to the agreement. The legal description should be submitted with the application but must be available (and certified) prior to written notice and publication for the required public hearing before council. The description shall include the total acreage of the property and will note all separately described parcels, easements, and other pertinent instruments or exceptions of record. If the property is to be conveyed in discrete phases, a boundary plat or plats is recommended.

B. Legal and Equitable Ownership [ORS 94.504(1)]. The agreement must include the names of the legal and equitable owners of subject property and be signed by the legal and equitable owners. The agreement must include an executed certification from an attorney or title company that record title to the property described in Exhibit A (Legal Description) is in the name of the person, persons, corporation or other entity entering into the agreement with the city [Exhibit B. “Certificate of Title”]. This certification should be submitted with the application, but must be on file prior to the notice of public hearing before city council.

C. Duration [ORS 94.504(2)(a)] and Timetable of Development [ORS 94.504(4)].

1. The duration of the agreement shall be specified and consistent with [Exhibit C. “Timetable of Development”]. A commencement date and completion date, including phase commencement and completion dates, shall be specified [ORS 94.504(4)]. No timetable of development shall exceed 15 years to completion [ORS 94.504(8)(a)].

2. A development agreement may specify timetables of development that are negotiated with the owner/developer and such timetables control over inconsistent provisions in the municipal code. Specifically, development agreements with the city may be up to 15 years to completion. Such agreements contemplate more lead time early in the project to obtain necessary discretionary land use approvals in accordance with the municipal code. A complete timetable of development must address the timing of all dedications and improvements and the timing of all discretionary and nondiscretionary approvals, including dates for individual or phased final plat approval(s), construction commencement, as well as phase and project completion. If the timetable of development does not otherwise specify, an implementing zoning district and PUD preliminary plan and plat approval is required within three years of approval of a development agreement. A final plan and plat are required within two years of a planned unit development preliminary plan approval, or every two years for phased projects. In the event the project has not complied with the negotiated construction commencement date (or dates for phased projects), the development shall cease to be authorized, and the agreement will be considered in breach. In the event an extension of the commencement date or completion date is sought, the amendment can be approved only if there is demonstrated compliance with all current laws and regulations, and a negotiated amendment is approved by the governing body.

D. Permitted Uses, Densities, Intensities and Maximum Building Height and Size [ORS 94.504(2)(b)(c)(d)]. The development permitted uses shall be briefly described in the body of the agreement and, if necessary, detailed in [Exhibit D. “Special Conditions”]. The requested uses shall be specified in the agreement and must be consistent with the implementing zoning district, underlying land use designation, and not adversely impact neighboring properties. The density and/or intensity of use, including property size, number of units and/or amount of square footage, residential density (gross units per acre), maximum building height and maximum size, shall be specified in the body of the agreement and, if necessary, detailed in Exhibit D.

E. Land Use and Implementing Zoning Designations. The body of the agreement shall specify the land use designation, and the implementing zoning district.

F. Public Facility Adequacy/Responsibility [ORS 94.504(2)(h)] and Funding [ORS 94.504(5) and (6)].

1. The development agreement shall include a description of public facilities (including interim facilities) that will service the development, including who shall provide such facilities, the date any new public facilities, if needed, will be constructed, and a schedule to assure public facilities are available prior to or concurrent with the impact of the development. Any public facilities to be designed and/or constructed by the developer or the city shall be in compliance with all applicable federal, state, county and/or city standards (depending on the service provider and the facility) to ensure the quality of the public facilities. The standards shall include, but not be limited to, guarantees of performance and quality, and project controls (including scheduling, quality controls, and quality assurances).

The assumptions of the parties regarding the adequacy of public services and the city and developer’s ability to provide services of facilities, and the impact of changed conditions, must be identified in the agreement. A development agreement may require financial assurances (e.g., bond, cash escrow agreement or letter of credit) for the construction of public facilities by the owner/developer, to ensure any required public facilities are provided pursuant to the terms of the development agreement. Capital improvement plans should be amended to recognize such secured capital improvement commitments. The agreement shall provide when, and if, developer constructed public facilities will be conveyed to the city and whether the developer will receive any SDC credit or other cost reimbursement.

2. The development agreement shall provide that all city obligations to expend moneys under the development agreement are contingent upon future appropriations as part of the local budget process. The agreement shall also provide that nothing in the agreement shall require a city to appropriate such moneys.

G. Public Facility Fees and Charges [ORS 94.504(2)(f)]. Exhibit D, “Special Conditions,” shall include a description of current fees and charges applied to development in the city. The agreement may “lock in” such fees and charges, if paid as part of the agreement (including installment payment), or may defer such payments and calculations of fees to the fees and charges in effect at a later stage of approval. Any authorized reduction, waiver, or deferral in fees must be noted in the agreement, together with the authority for the reduction, waiver or deferral.

H. Reservation or Dedication of Land [ORS 94.504(2)(e)]. The development agreement shall include a description of any reservation or dedications of land for public purposes. The agreement shall specify the timing of such dedications or reservations. A dedication of land may be deemed “commencement” by the city under ORS 94.504(4). The agreement shall provide when, and if, developer dedications or reservations of land for public purposes will be conveyed to the city and whether the developer will receive any SDC credit or other cost reimbursement for constructed improvements or dedications.

I. Future Discretionary Development Approvals [ORS 94.504(3)]. The development agreement shall set forth a description of all future discretionary development approvals required for the development, including the terms, conditions, restrictions and requirements for those discretionary approvals. The agreement shall specifically provide that all local development approvals and permits identified in this section shall be obtained at the sole cost and expense of the owner/developer and, that in the event that any such local development permits are not timely received, no further development of the property shall be authorized until such time as the city council has reviewed the matter and determined whether or not to terminate or cancel the development agreement, or to modify the development agreement in a manner consistent with the public interest.

J. Consistency with Comprehensive Plan and Development Code [ORS 94.508(1)/ORS 94.513(2)]. The development agreement shall include a finding that the development permitted or proposed in the development agreement is consistent with the applicable provisions of the Lincoln City comprehensive plan and Lincoln City Municipal Code. Detailed findings shall set forth compliance with all applicable criteria and shall note when modifications or waivers of regulations are granted and shall specify the code authority for such modification or waiver.

K. Compliance with Laws Not Identified in Development Agreement. The development agreement shall include a statement indicating that failure of the development agreement to address a particular permit, condition, term or restriction shall not relieve the owner/developer of the necessity of complying with the law governing said permitting requirements, conditions, terms or restrictions, and that any matter or thing required to be done under existing ordinances of the city of Lincoln City shall not be otherwise amended, modified or waived unless such modification, amendment or waiver is expressly provided for in the development agreement with specific reference to the provisions so waived, modified or amended. In no event shall delay in obtaining permits from other agencies be deemed as requiring or compelling an extension of time to this agreement, nor shall such delay be interpreted as requiring an extension of time to any existing approval.

L. Breach/Remedies [ORS 94.504(2)(j)]. The development agreement shall address which violation(s) of terms and conditions trigger a material breach of the development agreement. The agreement shall specify a procedure for notice of breach with an opportunity to cure. A material breach will result in cancellation or termination of the development agreement, unless an amendment is agreed to by the parties. All costs incurred by the city for breach proceedings as a result of breach by the owner/developer shall be paid by the owner/developer. If such costs are not paid, the city is empowered to place a lien against the property in the amount of the unpaid costs.

M. Local Laws and Policies Governing the Development Agreement [ORS 94.518]. The developer receives a degree of vesting with the approval of a development agreement. That is, unless otherwise provided in the development agreement, the city of Lincoln City’s comprehensive plan, laws, zoning code, land development laws and rules governing the development of the land at the time of execution of the development agreement shall govern the development of the land for the duration of the development agreement.

Notwithstanding the above, all Lincoln City development agreements shall provide that Lincoln City may unilaterally amend the agreement to apply subsequently adopted laws to an approved development that is subject to a development agreement if the city council holds a public hearing consistent with LCMC 17.96.050 and determines based on substantial competent evidence that any one of the following circumstances exist:

1. The new laws are not in conflict with the laws governing the development agreement and do not prevent development of the land uses, intensities or densities, in the agreement;

2. The new laws are essential to the public health, safety, or welfare, and expressly state that they shall apply to a development that is subject to a development agreement;

3. The new laws are specifically anticipated and provided for in the development agreement;

4. Lincoln City demonstrates that substantial changes have occurred in pertinent conditions existing at the time of approval of the development agreement which require the application of the new laws; or

5. It is demonstrated that the development agreement was based on substantially inaccurate information supplied by the owner/developer.

N. Conditions Necessary to Ensure Compliance with Code and Plan. The development agreement shall include such additional conditions, terms, limitations, restrictions or other requirements determined to be necessary by the city of Lincoln City to ensure compliance with the city’s zoning and land development code and consistency with the city comprehensive plan.

O. Covenant of Unified Control. The development agreement shall include an exhibit [Exhibit “E.” “Unified Control”] requiring all the property in Exhibit “A” to be held under single (unified) ownership which property shall not be transferred, conveyed, sold or otherwise divided in any unit other than in its entirety. A proposed covenant should be submitted with the application; but not later than the notice of hearing before city council. An executed covenant shall be recorded in the public records with the executed development agreement. The covenant may provide for specified conveyances, including but not limited to the following:

1. Conveyance of fully constructed subdivision lots, if any, to individual purchasers after approval of a final plat for the applicable lot or lots when all applicable requirements contained in the agreement, including the timetable and special conditions have been met; and

2. If the development is designed and planned to be constructed in phases, conveyance of a phase if the phase has complied with the applicable requirements contained in the agreement, including the timetable and special conditions. A phase may be conveyed separately only after final plat approval (including boundary plat) for that phase; and

3. Conveyance of fully constructed recreation areas, developed common areas and facilities or common open space areas to be minimally developed or retained in an undeveloped state, to the city, or, after approval of a final plat for the applicable common area tracts, to organizations conceived and organized to own and maintain the common areas, provided there is compliance with all applicable requirements contained in the agreement; and

4. Conveyance of other portions of the subject property that will be used or maintained by governmental, environmental, charitable or other organizations or agencies for such purposes as the city of Lincoln City may deem appropriate after compliance with all applicable requirements of the agreement.

Nothing in the covenant of unified control is intended to limit the owner, or their successors or assigns, from mortgaging or encumbering the entire property or an approved phase thereof. The covenant of unified control will be recorded in the public records of Lincoln County, Oregon.

P. Development “Concept Plan.” A reduced (eight and one-half inches by 11 inches) copy of the concept plan shall be attached to the agreement as [Exhibit “F.” “Concept Plan”]. The concept plan is not a preliminary development plan implementing a planned unit development or master plan approval but a framework for the submission of such plans. The concept plan must include traffic circulation, natural areas, proposed project uses, densities, and intensities and proposed project phasing, consistent with the timetable of development.

Q. Compliance Review [ORS 94.504(2)(g)]. The development agreement shall provide for compliance review and a procedure for such review. The planning director shall review the development subject to the development agreement every two years after the execution of the agreement. The review shall be initiated by the owner/developer’s submission of a report to the planning director on the two-year anniversary of the approval. The report shall be submitted prior to the scheduled review date for the duration of the agreement. If the planning director finds and determines that the owner/developer has complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the development agreement during the period under review, the review for that period is concluded. If the planning director makes a preliminary finding that there has been a failure to comply with the terms of the development agreement, the development agreement shall be referred to the city council (or designee), who shall conduct a public hearing at which the owner/developer may appear and demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement. If the council finds and determines during the public hearing, on the basis of substantial competent evidence, that the developer has not complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the development agreement during the period under review, the council may modify or revoke the agreement in the same manner as the agreement was approved.

R. Assignment [ORS 94.504(2)(k)]. The agreement shall provide the extent to which the agreement is capable of assignment. It is contemplated that approval of assignment between developers, builders, and their successors should not be unreasonably withheld, provided there is some demonstrated continuity in the development.

S. Annexation [ORS 94.504(2)(l)]. The agreement shall specifically address the effect, if any, on the applicability of the agreement or implementation of the agreement when the city of Lincoln City annexes all or part of the property subject to the development agreement. Compliance with city annexation standards shall be demonstrated.

T. Changes in Law [ORS 94.504(2)(i)]. The development agreement shall contain the following provision:

If federal, state or regional laws or rules are enacted after City approval of this agreement, which are applicable to and preclude either party’s compliance with the terms of this agreement, this agreement shall be modified, amended, cancelled or terminated, as is necessary, to comply with the relevant federal, state or regional laws or rules.

U. Amendment or Cancellation and Enforceability [ORS 94.504(7)]; [ORS 94.522]. The development agreement shall contain the following provision:

The terms of the Development Agreement are binding on the City and Owner/Developer for the duration of the Agreement. The Agreement is enforceable by any party to the Agreement. A Development Agreement may be amended or canceled as provided in the Agreement, or by mutual consent of the parties to the Agreement, including agreement with their successors in interest. The governing body of a city or county shall amend or cancel a Development Agreement by adoption of an ordinance declaring cancellation of the Agreement or setting forth the amendments to the Agreement.

V. Recording [ORS 94.528]. The agreement shall provide that within 10 calendar days after execution of the development agreement the city shall present the agreement for recording in the office of the county clerk. The agreement shall have a legal description of the property suitable for recording. If the development agreement is amended, canceled, modified, extended, or revoked, the city shall cause to be recorded appropriate notice of such action. A development agreement shall not be effective until it is properly recorded in the public records of Lincoln County. (Ord. 2019-30 § 1)


17.96.070 Code provisions which can be modified, altered or waived or from which a development agreement is exempt.

A. Except as authorized in this chapter, a development agreement shall be consistent with applicable development regulations. The authority to modify, alter or waive certain specified requirements in the Lincoln City zoning ordinance and associated development regulations (generally LCMC Titles 16 and 17) must be specific.

B. Comprehensive Plan. Modification of comprehensive plan goals and provisions is strictly prohibited.

C. Development Standards. A development agreement may adjust, waive or modify terms and conditions where such modification, waiver or adjustment is specifically identified in the subject municipal code; or in the following sections:

1. A timetable of development is a negotiated term of a development agreement and is bounded by ORS Chapter 94 and this chapter. Other timetables in the municipal code shall apply if not addressed, but anything inconsistent in the development agreement will control over the code timetable.

2. Permitted uses, setbacks, building heights, and the like, when specified as negotiable in the implementing zoning district, are negotiated terms of a development agreement. Unless otherwise specified in the development agreement, any approved development standards that differ from those in the code shall not require any further rezone, variance or other approval apart from the statutory development agreement approval. Subsequent discretionary approvals shall treat such matters as finally decided. The development agreement, including any revised development standards, shall govern the development of the property, and will control over other provisions of the code where the development agreement has addressed the matter.

3. The degree of vesting from the application of new laws, and exceptions thereto, is specified in the terms and conditions of the standard form development agreement.

4. A development agreement cannot authorize deviations from the requirements of LCMC Title 15 (Buildings and Construction). The building codes that apply are the building codes in effect at the time the complete building permit application is submitted. (Ord. 2019-30 § 1)



-----------------------------

The Lincoln City Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 2019-39, passed October 14, 2019.

Disclaimer: The city recorder’s office has the official version of the Lincoln City Municipal Code. Users should contact the city recorder’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: http://www.lincolncity.org/ City Telephone: (541) 996-2151

Code Publishing Company