


City of Myrtle Creek City Charter

1993 

(Amended 2005) 

Chapters:

Preamble

I    Names and Boundaries

II    Powers

III    Form of Government

IV    Council

V    Powers and Duties of Officers

VI    Elections

VII    Ordinances

VIII    Public Improvements

IX    Miscellaneous Provisions

PREAMBLE

We, the people of Myrtle Creek, Oregon, in order to avail ourselves of self-determination in municipal affairs to the fullest extent now or hereafter possible under the constitutions and laws of the United States and the State of Oregon, through this Charter confer upon the City the following powers, subject it to the following restrictions, prescribe for it the following procedures and governmental structure, and repeal all previous Charter provisions of the City.


Chapter I NAMES AND BOUNDARIES

Sections:

1    Title of Charter.

2    Name of City.

3    Boundaries.


Section 1. Title of Charter.

This Charter may be referred to as the 1993 Myrtle Creek Charter.


Section 2. Name of City.

The City of Myrtle Creek, Oregon, continues under this Charter to be a municipal corporation with the name City of Myrtle Creek.


Section 3. Boundaries.

The City includes all territory within its boundaries as they now exist or hereafter are modified pursuant to state law. The custodian of the City’s records shall keep an accurate, current description of the boundaries and make a copy of it available for public inspection in the City during regular City office hours.


Chapter II POWERS

Sections:

4    Powers of the City.

5    Construction of Powers.


Section 4. Powers of the City.

The City has all powers that the constitutions, statutes, and common law of the United States and of the State of Oregon now or hereafter expressly or impliedly grant or allow the City, as fully as though this Charter specifically enumerated each of those powers.


Section 5. Construction of Powers.

In this Charter, no specification of a power is exclusive or restricts authority that the City would have if the power were not specified. The Charter shall be liberally construed, so that the City may exercise fully all its powers possible under this Charter and under United States and Oregon law. All powers are continuing unless a specific grant of power clearly indicates the contrary.


Chapter III FORM OF GOVERNMENT

Sections:

6    Distribution of Powers.

7    Council.

8    Councilors.

9    Mayor.

10    Council President.

11    Terms of Office.

12    Appointive Offices.

13    Reimbursement.

14    Qualifications.


Section 6. Distribution of Powers.

Except as this Charter prescribes otherwise and as the Oregon Constitution reserves municipal legislative power to the voters of the City, all powers of the City are vested in the Council.


Section 7. Council.

The Council consists of a mayor and five Councilors nominated and elected from the City at large.

In case of one or more vacancies in the Council, the Council shall consist of those members whose offices are not vacant.


Section 8. Councilors.

The five Councilor positions shall be classified into positions which shall be designated as Position 1, Position 2, Position 3, Position 4 and Position 5. At the first regular Council meeting of the new year immediately following the adoption of this Charter, each of the five Councilors elected or appointed before the adoption of this Charter, or elected at the time of adoption of this Charter, shall determine by lot their position number, except that the three Councilors elected at the time of adoption of this Charter shall by such method be assigned to fill Position 1, Position 3, and Position 5. The two remaining Councilors shall by the same method be assigned to fill Position 2 and Position 4. The term of office of Councilors so chosen to fill Position 2 and Position 4 shall end on December 31, 1994. The term of office of the Councilors so chosen to fill Position 1, Position 3, and Position 5 shall end on December 31, 1996.

At the general election occurring in 1994 and every fourth year thereafter, Councilors for Position 2 and Position 4 shall be elected. At the general election occurring in 1996 and every fourth year thereafter, Position 1, Position 3, and Position 5 shall be elected.


Section 9. Mayor.

The term of office of the mayor in office when this Charter is adopted is the term of office for which the mayor was elected or appointed before adoption of the Charter. At the general election occurring in 1994 and every fourth year thereafter, a mayor shall be elected for a term of four years.


Section 10. Council President.

At the first regular Council meeting of the new year immediately following the adoption of this Charter, and at the first regular meeting of each new year thereafter, the Council shall elect a president from its Councilors.


Section 11. Terms of Office.

The term of office of an elective officer who is elected at a general election begins at the first Council meeting of the new year immediately following the election and continues until the successor to the office assumes the office.


Section 12. Appointive Offices.

A majority of the Council shall appoint and may remove a City administrator. A majority of the Council may:

(1) Create, abolish, and combine additional appointive City offices, and

(2) Except as the majority prescribes otherwise, fill such offices by appointment and vacate them by removal.


Section 13. Reimbursement.

The Council shall prescribe a plan for reimbursing City personnel, including employees, and elected and appointed personnel, for expenses that they incur in serving the City. No elected personnel, however, may receive compensation for serving in that capacity.


Section 14. Qualifications.

(1) An elective City officer shall be a qualified elector under the state constitution and shall have resided in the City during the 12 months immediately before being elected or appointed to the office. In this subsection “City” means an area inside the City limits at the time of the election or appointment.

(2) No person may be a candidate at a single election for more than one elective City office.

(3) An elective officer may be employed in a City position that is substantially volunteer in nature. Whether the position is so may be decided by the municipal court or in some other manner, whichever the Council prescribes.

(4) Except as subsection (3) of this section provides to the contrary, the Council is the final judge of the election and qualifications of its members.

(5) The qualifications of appointive officers of the City are whatever the Council prescribes or authorizes, except as this Charter provides to the contrary regarding the City administrator’s qualifications.


Chapter IV COUNCIL

Sections:

15    Meetings.

16    Quorum.

17    Record of Proceedings.

18    Rules.

19    Mayor’s Functions at Council Meetings.

20    Vote Required.


Section 15. Meetings.

The Council shall meet in the City regularly at least once a month at a time and place designated by Council’s rules, and may meet at other times in accordance with the rules.


Section 16. Quorum.

A majority of the Council constitutes a quorum for its business, but a smaller number of the Council may meet and compel attendance of absent Councilors as prescribed by Council rules.


Section 17. Record of Proceedings.

A record of Council proceedings shall be kept and authenticated in a manner prescribed by the Council.


Section 18. Rules.

The Council shall, by ordinance, prescribe rules to govern its meetings and proceedings.


Section 19. Mayor’s Functions at Council Meetings.

(1) When present at Council meetings the mayor shall:

(a) Preside over deliberations of the Council,

(b) Preserve order,

(c) Enforce Council rules, and

(d) Determine the order of business under the rules.

(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, the mayor may temporarily cease to chair a Council meeting and delegate the functions described in subsection (1) to another Council member.

(3) The mayor shall have no vote on all questions before the Council except in the event of a tie.

(4) The Council president shall function as mayor when the mayor is:

(a) Absent from a Council meeting, or

(b) Temporarily unable to function as mayor.


Section 20. Vote Required.

The express concurrence of a majority of the Council members present and constituting a quorum is necessary to decide affirmatively a question before the Council.


Chapter V POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS

Sections:

21    Mayor.

22    Municipal Court & Judge.

23    City Administrator.


Section 21. Mayor.

The mayor shall appoint:

(1) Members of committees established by Council rules, and

(2) Other persons required by the Council to be so appointed.


Section 22. Municipal Court & Judge.

(1) If the Council creates the office of municipal judge and fills it by appointment, the appointee shall hold, within the City at a place and times the judge or Council specifies, a court known as the Municipal Court for the City of Myrtle Creek, Douglas County, Oregon.

(2) Except as this Charter or City ordinance prescribes to the contrary, proceedings of the court shall conform to general laws of this State governing justices of the peace and justice courts.

(3) All areas within the City and, to the extent provided by state law, areas outside the City are within the territorial jurisdiction of the court.

(4) The municipal court has original jurisdiction over every offense that an ordinance of the City makes punishable. The court may enforce forfeitures and other penalties that such ordinances prescribe.

(5) The municipal judge may:

(a) Render judgments and, for enforcing them, impose sanctions on persons and property within the court’s territorial jurisdiction;

(b) Order the arrest of anyone accused of an offense against the City;

(c) Commit to jail or admit to bail anyone accused of such an offense;

(d) Issue and compel obedience to subpoenas;

(e) Compel witnesses to appear and testify and jurors to serve in the trial of matters before the court;

(f) Penalize contempt of court;

(g) Issue process necessary to effectuate judgments and orders of the court;

(h) Issue search warrants; and

(i) Perform other judicial and quasi-judicial functions prescribed by ordinance.

(6) The Council may authorize the municipal judge to appoint municipal judges pro tem for terms of office set by the judge or the Council.

(7) Notwithstanding this section, the Council may transfer some or all of the functions of the municipal court to an appropriate state court.


Section 23. City Administrator.

(1) The City administrator is the administrative head of the City government.

(2) A majority of the Council shall appoint and may remove the City administrator. The appointment shall be without regard to political considerations and solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications.

(3) The administrator need not reside in the City or the state when appointed, but shall within six months become, and during his or her tenure of office remain, a resident of the City.

(4) Upon accepting the appointment, the administrator and the Council shall enter into a written contract which prescribes the respective terms, conditions and obligations of the administrator and the City with respect to the administrator’s tenure of office, except to the extent that the terms of this Charter provide to the contrary. Upon mutual acceptance of the written contract, the administrator shall furnish the City a bond in an amount and with a surety approved by the Council. The City shall pay the bond premium.

(5) The administrator shall be appointed for a definite or indefinite term and may be removed by the Council at its pleasure. Within six consecutive months after a vacancy occurs in the office, Council shall fill the vacancy by appointment.

(6) The administrator shall:

(a) Attend all Council meetings unless excused by the Council or mayor;

(b) Keep the Council advised of the affairs and needs of the City;

(c) See that the provisions of all ordinances are administered to the satisfaction of the Council;

(d) See that all terms of franchises, leases, contracts, permits, and privileges granted by the City are fulfilled;

(e) Generally supervise and control all employees of the City in accordance with the personnel rules prescribed by Section 35 of this Charter;

(f) Organize and reorganize the departmental structure of City government;

(g) Prepare and transmit to the Council an annual City budget;

(h) Make all purchases;

(i) Supervise City contracts;

(j) Supervise operation of all City-owned public utilities and property; and

(k) Perform other duties as the Council prescribes consistent with this Charter.

(7) The administrator may not control:

(a) The Council;

(b) The municipal judge in the judge’s judicial functions; or

(c) Except as the Council authorizes, appointive personnel of the City whom the administrator does not appoint.

(8) The administrator and other personnel whom the Council designates may sit with the Council but may not vote on questions before it. The administrator may take part in all Council discussions.

(9) When the administrator is absent from the City or disabled from acting as administrator, or when the office of administrator becomes vacant, the mayor, or in his absence the Council president, shall act as administrator pro tem, or the Council may upon its own motion appoint an administrator pro tem, except that the administrator pro tem may appoint and remove personnel only with the approval of the Council. No person may be administrator pro tem more than six consecutive months.

(10) Except in Council meeting, no Council member may directly or indirectly, by suggestion or otherwise, attempt to influence the administrator or a candidate for the office of administrator in the appointment, discipline, or removal of personnel or in decisions regarding City property or contracts. A violator of this prohibition may be removed from office by a court of competent jurisdiction. In Council meeting, members of the Council may discuss with, or suggest to, the administrator anything pertinent to City affairs.


Chapter VI ELECTIONS

Sections:

24    State Law.

25    Oath.

26    Nominations.

27    Vacancies: Occurrence.

28    Vacancies: Filling.


Section 24. State Law.

Except as this Charter or a City ordinance prescribes to the contrary, a City election shall conform to state law applicable to the election.


Section 25. Oath.

Before assuming City office, an officer shall take an oath or shall affirm that he or she will faithfully perform the duties of the office and support the constitution and laws of the United States and of the State of Oregon.


Section 26. Nominations.

A person may be nominated in a manner prescribed by general ordinance to run for an elective office.


Section 27. Vacancies: Occurrence.

The office of an elective officer becomes vacant:

(1) Upon the incumbent’s:

(a) Death,

(b) Adjudicated incompetence, or

(c) Recall from the office; or

(2) Upon declaration by the Council of the vacancy in case of the incumbent’s:

(a) Failure, following election or appointment to the office, to qualify for the office within ten days after the time for his or her term of office to begin,

(b) Absence from the City for 30 days without first giving notice to the Council of the incumbent’s intentions,

(c) Absence from all meetings of the Council within a 60 day period without the express consent of the Council,

(d) Ceasing to reside in the City,

(e) Ceasing to be a qualified elector under state law,

(f) Conviction of a public offense punishable by loss of liberty, or

(g) Resignation from the office.


Section 28. Vacancies: Filling.

A vacancy in an elective office shall be filled by appointment by a majority of the remaining Council within 60 days of the office becoming vacant. A vacancy in the mayor’s office shall be filled by appointment from among the remaining Councilors. The appointee’s term of office runs from the time of his or her qualifying for the office after the appointment and until expiration of the term of the predecessor, who has left the office vacant. During a Council member’s disability to serve on the Council or during a member’s absence from the City, a majority of the other Council members may by appointment fill the vacancy pro tem.


Chapter VII ORDINANCES

Sections:

29    Ordaining Clause.

30    Adoption by Council.

31    Effective Date.


Section 29. Ordaining Clause.

The ordaining clause of an ordinance shall be “The City of Myrtle Creek ordains as follows:”.


Section 30. Adoption by Council.

(1) Except as subsection (2) of this section allows adoption at a single meeting and subsection (3) of this section allows reading by title only, an ordinance shall be fully and distinctly read in open Council meeting on two different days before being adopted by the Council.

(2) Except as subsection (3) of this section allows reading by title only, the Council may adopt an ordinance at a single meeting when an emergency is declared by the express unanimous vote of all Council members present, provided the ordinance is read first in full and then by title. An ordinance adopted to meet an emergency shall include a declaration stating that the immediate enactment of the ordinance is necessary to preserve the health, safety and general welfare of the City of Myrtle Creek.

(3) A reading of an ordinance may be by title only if:

(a) No Council member or other person present at the reading requests that the ordinance be read in full, and

(b) At least three days before the reading:

(i) A copy of the ordinance is provided to each Council member,

(ii) Copies of the ordinance are available for public inspection in the office of the custodian of City records, and

(iii) Notice of their availability is given by written notice posted at the City Hall.

(4) An ordinance read by title only has no legal effect if it differs substantially from its terms as it was filed prior to the reading unless each section so differing is read fully and distinctly in open Council meeting before the Council adopts the ordinance.

(5) Upon the adoption of an ordinance, the ayes and nays of the Council members shall be entered in the record of Council proceedings.

(6) Within three days of adoption of an ordinance, the mayor shall sign it and the custodian of City records shall endorse it with its date of adoption and endorser’s name and title of office.


Section 31. Effective Date.

A non-emergency ordinance takes effect on the thirtieth day after its adoption or on a later day the ordinance prescribes. An ordinance adopted to meet an emergency may take effect as soon as adopted.


Chapter VIII PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

Sections:

32    Procedure.

33    Special Assessments.


Section 32. Procedure.

(1) The procedure for making, altering, vacating, or abandoning a public improvement shall be governed by general ordinance or, to the extent not so governed, by applicable state law. Proposed action on a public improvement that is not declared by two-thirds of the Council present to be needed at once because of an emergency shall be suspended for six months upon remonstrance by owners of a majority of the property to be specially assessed for the improvement. A second such remonstrance suspends the action only with the consent of the Council.

(2) In this section “owner” means the record holder of legal title or, as to land being purchased under a land sale contract that is recorded or verified in writing by the record holder of legal title, the purchaser.


Section 33. Special Assessments.

The procedure for fixing, levying and collecting special assessments against real property for public improvements or other public services shall be governed by general ordinance.


Chapter IX MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Sections:

34    Debt.

35    Compensation and Merit System.

36    Political Rights.

37    Continuation of Ordinances.

38    Repeal.

39    Severability.

40    Time of Effect.


Section 34. Debt.

The City’s indebtedness may not exceed debt limits imposed by state law. A City officer or employee who creates or officially approves indebtedness in excess of this limitation is jointly and severally liable for the excess. A Charter amendment is not required to authorize City indebtedness.


Section 35. Compensation and Merit System.

The Council shall prescribe a schedule of salaries and compensation for employees. Subject to all collective bargaining agreements between the City and one or more groups of its employees, the Council shall prescribe rules governing recruitment, selection, promotion, transfer, demotion, suspension, layoff, and dismissal of City employees, all of which shall be based on merit and fitness.


Section 36. Political Rights.

By ordinance the Council may affirm the rights of City personnel to participate in political activities and may limit those activities to the extent necessary for orderly and effective operation of the City government, except to the extent that those rights are protected by statutory and constitutional law.


Section 37. Continuation of Ordinances.

Insofar as consistent with this Charter, and until amended or repealed, all ordinances in force when the Charter takes effect retain the effect they have at that time.


Section 38. Repeal.

All Charter provisions adopted before this Charter takes effect are hereby repealed.


Section 39. Severability.

The terms of this Charter are severable. If a part of the Charter is held invalid, that invalidity does not affect another part of the Charter, except as the logical relation between the two parts requires.


Section 40. Time of Effect.

This Charter takes effect January 1, 1993.

	1992 CHARTER REVIEW COMMITTEE MEMBERS

	Anita Winetrout, Chairman	Robert M Cotterell, Mayor

	Bill Leming	Ron March, Councilor

	Frank Tyner	Jeredith Bartley, Councilor

	Jean Norton	Roy Brogden, Councilor

	Sharon Scherer	Randy Leming, Councilor

	Ken Brouillard	Ken McCoy, Councilor

	1992 STAFF

	Leroy Blodgett, City Administrator

	Charity Hays, City Recorder

	Ronald Schofield, City Planner

	Dave Oelrich, Police Chief

	The Charter Review Committee recommended, to the voters of Myrtle Creek, amendments to the City’s 1953 Charter. Those amendments were approved by the voters on November 3, 1992, by a margin of 856 to 328. The amendments are now incorporated into this Charter which became effective on January 1, 1993.

 


Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.05    Trial by Jury

1.10    Municipal Court Defendant Assessments


Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION

Sections:

1.01.010    Adoption.

1.01.020    Title, citation and reference.

1.01.030    Purpose of code.

1.01.040    Proof of ordinances.

1.01.050    Codification authority.

1.01.060    Authority of recorder and Code Publishing to make minor editorial corrections to amendments, updates, and revisions.

1.01.070    Title, chapter and section wording, headings and/or catch lines.

1.01.080    Reference applies to all amendments.

1.01.090    Citations to ordinances.

1.01.100    Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

1.01.110    Effect of repeal.

1.01.120    Inconsistent ordinances.

1.01.130    Severability.


1.01.010 Adoption.

There is hereby adopted the “Myrtle Creek Municipal Code” as revised, reformatted, indexed, codified, compiled, edited, and published by Code Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. [Ord. 792 § 1, 2013].


1.01.020 Title, citation and reference.

This code shall be known as the Myrtle Creek Municipal Code. It shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the Myrtle Creek Municipal Code or the MCMC or the Myrtle Creek Code in any prosecution for the violations of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or in equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction of or repeal of the city of Myrtle Creek Code or Myrtle Creek Municipal Code or the MCMC. Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the code and such references shall apply to those numbered titles, chapters, sections or subsections as they appear in the code. [Ord. 792 § 2, 2013].


1.01.030 Purpose of code.

The provisions of this code and all proceedings under it are to be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote substantial justice. [Ord. 792 § 3, 2013].


1.01.040 Proof of ordinances.

Copies of such code in published form shall be received as the ordinances of permanent and general effect of the city of Myrtle Creek without further proof by all courts and administrative tribunals of the state. [Ord. 792 § 4, 2013].


1.01.050 Codification authority.

Code Publishing Company shall have the following specific authority as to editing, rearranging, and/or grouping of ordinances:

(1) Editing ordinances to the extent deemed necessary or desirable for the purpose of modernizing and clarifying the language of such ordinances, but without changing the substance or meaning of any such ordinance;

(2) Substituting for the term “this ordinance,” where necessary, the term “section,” “part,” “code,” “chapter,” or “title,” or reference to specific section or chapter numbers, as the case may require;

(3) Correcting manifest errors in reference to other ordinances, laws and statutes, and manifest spelling, clerical or typographical errors, additions, or omissions;

(4) Dividing long sections into two or more sections and rearranging the order of sections to ensure a logical arrangement of subject matter;

(5) Changing the wording of section captions, if any, and providing captions to new chapters and sections;

(6) Striking provisions manifestly obsolete and eliminating conflicts and inconsistencies so as to give effect to the legislative intent. [Ord. 792 § 5, 2013].


1.01.060 Authority of recorder and Code Publishing to make minor editorial corrections to amendments, updates, and revisions.

The purpose of this section is to grant nonsubstantive editorial authority to format future ordinances, amendments, and revisions to this code so that textual changes are uniform to the provisions of this code.

(1) The city recorder and/or Code Publishing Company shall provide for a uniform style and form of the Myrtle Creek Municipal Code by making minor corrections or revisions to any ordinances submitted for filing which do not affect their sense, meaning, effect or substance.

(2) Such changes include renumbering, relettering, capitalizing, punctuating, dividing provisions of the code, providing new headings and catch lines, or correcting omissions or captions.

(3) The city recorder or Code Publishing Company may substitute a current title of an agency, bureau, committee, or commission to conform to changes to titles or duties enacted by law or ordinance.

(4) The city recorder or Code Publishing Company may substitute references to a title, chapter, or section of the Myrtle Creek Municipal Code to conform to changes to the Douglas County Code enacted by ordinance.

(5) The city recorder or Code Publishing Company may also make minor editorial changes consistent with those outlined in MCMC 1.01.050.

(6) Changes are subject to the approval of the Myrtle Creek city attorney. [Ord. 792 § 6, 2013].


1.01.070 Title, chapter and section wording, headings and/or catch lines.

Title, chapter and section wording, headings and/or catch lines contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section of this code. [Ord. 792 § 7, 2013].


1.01.080 Reference applies to all amendments.

Whenever a reference is made to this code as the Myrtle Creek Municipal Code or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now, or hereafter made. [Ord. 792 § 8, 2013].


1.01.090 Citations to ordinances.

Reference to the Myrtle Creek Municipal Code in documents and matters of record prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions of the code adopted in this chapter. [Ord. 792 § 9, 2013].


1.01.100 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance shall affect the prosecution for ordinance violations that were committed prior to the effective date of this code adoption. The adoption of this code shall not be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, penalty, debt, forfeiture or obligation due and unpaid to the city or state on the date this code takes effect. All rights, fines, entitlements, duties, and proceedings existing pursuant to any ordinance on the date of the adoption of this code shall remain in effect unless specifically repealed in this code adoption. No bonds or cash required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance shall in any way be made invalid by this code adoption. [Ord. 792 § 10, 2013].


1.01.110 Effect of repeal.

The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of such ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. [Ord. 792 § 11, 2013].


1.01.120 Inconsistent ordinances.

All general ordinances of the city that are inconsistent with this code are hereby superseded, rather than repealed, and in the event any portion of this code is for any reason found or held to be invalid, the superseded ordinance shall be revitalized and shall prevail. [Ord. 792 § 12, 2013].


1.01.130 Severability.

If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases have been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. [Ord. 792 § 13, 2013].


Chapter 1.05 TRIAL BY JURY

Sections:

1.05.010    Right to trial by jury.

1.05.020    Number of jurors.

1.05.030    Jury selection.

1.05.040    Trial jury.

1.05.050    Peremptory challenges.

1.05.060    Verdicts.

1.05.070    Payment of jurors.

1.05.080    Costs and disbursements.


1.05.010 Right to trial by jury.

Every person charged with any offense defined and made punishable by the ordinances of the city that carries the possibility of a sentence of imprisonment shall have the right to trial by jury if written notice is given to the municipal judge within six business days, excluding legal holidays, prior to the date set for trial. [Ord. 627 § 1, 1993].


1.05.020 Number of jurors.

The jury shall consist of six persons duly sworn to try the case for which they are called and selected as provided by this chapter. [Ord. 627 § 2, 1993].


1.05.030 Jury selection.

During the first regular business week of January of each year, and every four months thereafter, the court clerk shall make a jury list of citizens of the city competent under the laws of Oregon to serve as jurors in a circuit court, who shall serve as jurors in the municipal court until a new list is selected. The jury list shall be made and selected by lot from the voter registration list, and the list shall contain the names of not less than 50 such qualified persons. The court clerk shall give to each person on the jury list notice that they have been selected. [Ord. 627 § 3, 1993].


1.05.040 Trial jury.

The court clerk shall keep a secured jury box. After the jury list has been made, the court clerk shall prepare and deposit in the jury box separate papers containing the name and place of residence of each person on the jury list. At least three business days, excluding legal holidays, prior to the trial date, the defendant or the defendant’s attorney and the city attorney shall appear before the judge for the selection of the jury. The municipal judge shall designate the time and place of the selection, and so notify the defendant, the defendant’s attorney, and the city attorney. The judge shall then select, by lot, 12 names of persons from the jury list. When 12 names have been selected, they shall be notified to appear at the trial at the appointed time and place. Upon request, the municipal judge may, for good cause, excuse a juror from jury duty. [Ord. 627 § 4, 1993].


1.05.050 Peremptory challenges.

At the time and place set for the trial, the defendant and the city shall select the jury by each striking from the list three names, alternately, commencing with the defendant. The six names remaining shall constitute the trial jury. If any of the jurors are found to be disqualified by challenge for cause, their places on the jury shall be filled by drawing additional names from the jury box. [Ord. 627 § 5, 1993].


1.05.060 Verdicts.

The verdict of the jury shall be unanimous. [Ord. 627 § 6, 1993].


1.05.070 Payment of jurors.

Jurors who appear at the trial and are sworn and serve as jurors shall receive as compensation for their services the sum of $10.00 for each day of attendance. Jurors who appear at the trial and are not selected to serve as jurors shall receive as compensation for their services the sum of $5.00 for each day of attendance. [Ord. 627 § 7, 1993].


1.05.080 Costs and disbursements.

In all cases tried in the municipal court, the municipal judge may add costs and disbursements to the fine, penalty, or sentence imposed. [Ord. 627 § 8, 1993].


Chapter 1.10 MUNICIPAL COURT DEFENDANT ASSESSMENTS

Sections:

1.10.010    Collected when.

1.10.020    Deposits.

1.10.030    Forfeitures.


1.10.010 Collected when.

Whenever the judge of the municipal court of the city of Myrtle Creek imposes a fine upon entering a judgment of conviction or orders a bail forfeiture as a penalty for violation of an ordinance of the city including any violation of state law punishable in municipal court, an assessment in addition to such fine or bail forfeiture shall be collected. Assessments shall be established by the city of Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges. [Ord. 560 § 1, 1987].


1.10.020 Deposits.

When any deposit of bail or security deposit is made for an offense to which this chapter applies, the person making such deposit shall also deposit an amount equal to the above assessment, treating the amount of the bail required as the amount of the fine or forfeiture in the above schedule. [Ord. 560 § 2, 1987].


1.10.030 Forfeitures.

If bail is forfeited, the above described assessment shall also be forfeited. If bail is returned, the assessment made thereon shall also be returned. [Ord. 560 § 3, 1987].


Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL

Chapters:

2.01    City Council

2.05    Fire Department

2.10    Park Commission

2.15    Planning Commission

2.20    Elections

2.25    Urban Renewal Agency


Chapter 2.01 CITY COUNCIL

Sections:

2.01.010    Granting and vesting of powers.

2.01.020    Code adoption.

2.01.030    Council-manager form of government.

2.01.040    Role of council members.

2.01.050    Role of mayor.

2.01.060    Meeting schedules.

2.01.070    Meeting procedures.

2.01.080    Interaction with city staff/officials.

2.01.090    Roles and information flow.

2.01.100    Legal advice.


2.01.010 Granting and vesting of powers.

The city council operates under a charter which was voted on and approved by the citizens of Myrtle Creek, which requires the council to follow the laws and ordinances of the city, and the laws of the state of Oregon and the United States Government. Unless the Charter provides to the contrary, all powers of the city are vested in the city council, the representative legislative body of the city. Any revision or amendment to the Myrtle Creek City Charter requires a vote of the electors. [Ord. 766 § 1, 2008].


2.01.020 Code adoption.

The Myrtle Creek Municipal Code is a compilation of regulatory and penal ordinances, and certain administrative ordinances of the city, as adopted by the council and approved by the mayor. The code may only be amended by an ordinance adopting such amendment. [Ord. 766 § 2, 2008].


2.01.030 Council-manager form of government.

(1) Council. The city of Myrtle Creek is a council-manager form of government. Basically, with this structure, the city council’s role is to establish city policies and priorities. The council appoints a city administrator to implement those policies and undertake the administration of the organization.

(2) Manager. The administrator is appointed by the city council to enforce its laws, to direct the daily operations of city government, to prepare and monitor the principal budget, and to implement the policies and programs initiated by the city council. [Ord. 766 § 3, 2008].


2.01.040 Role of council members.

Council members are collectively responsible for establishing policy, adopting a budget and providing vision and goals to the city administrator. The following outline is a brief description of the various duties of council members. The description is not intended to be comprehensive, but rather it is an effort to summarize the primary responsibilities of the council.

(1) Establish Policy.

(a) Adopt goals and objectives.

(b) Establish priorities for public services.

(c) Approve/amend the city budget.

(d) Adopt resolutions.

(2) Enact Local Laws.

(a) Adopt ordinances.

(3) Supervise Appointed Officials.

(a) Appoint city administrator.

(b) Evaluate performance of city administrator.

(c) Establish advisory commissions and committees.

(d) Make appointments and/or removals to advisory bodies.

(e) Provide direction to advisory bodies.

(4) Provide Public Leadership.

(a) Relate wishes of constituents to promote representative governance.

(b) Mediate conflicting interests while building a consensus.

(c) Call special elections as necessary.

(d) Communicate the city’s vision and goals to constituents.

(e) Represent the city’s interests at regional, county, state and federal levels.

(5) Decision-Making.

(a) Study problems.

(b) Review alternatives.

(c) Determine the best course of public policy. [Ord. 766 § 4, 2008].


2.01.050 Role of mayor.

The mayor serves as the presiding officer and acts as chair at all meetings of the city council. The mayor shall have the responsibility to act as the city council’s ceremonial representative at public events and functions. As prescribed in the City Charter the mayor shall:

(1) Preside over deliberations of the council;

(2) Preserve order;

(3) Enforce council rules;

(4) Determine the order of business under the rules; and

(5) Have no vote on all questions before the council except in the event of a tie. [Ord. 766 § 5, 2008].


2.01.060 Meeting schedules.

(1) Regular Council Meetings. The council shall meet at 5:30 p.m. on the first and third Tuesdays of each month in the City Hall Council Chambers or at any place that the council may direct. In the event a regularly scheduled meeting falls on an official holiday, the meeting shall be held at the same hour on the next following day which is not a holiday.

(2) Special Meetings. The mayor, or in the mayor’s absence, the presiding officer may call a special meeting of the council. Three councilors may also call a special meeting by filing a request with the city recorder. Notice shall be given to each councilor at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Notice may be given in writing, in person, by telephone or by electronic communication. No business other than that for which a special meeting is called can be transacted at a special meeting.

(3) Executive Sessions. An executive session (a meeting closed to the public) may be held in accordance with the Oregon Public Meetings Law. The presiding officer may call any regular, special or emergency meeting into executive session by citing the specific provision of ORS 192.660 which authorizes the session. Executive sessions may also be separately scheduled pursuant to the requirements for special meetings.

(a) Attendance at Executive Sessions. The presiding officer shall determine which persons other than council shall attend an executive session. No matter discussed during executive session may be disclosed by any person present during such session.

(b) Media Attendance. Representatives of recognized news media may attend executive sessions, other than those pursuant to ORS 192.660(2)(d) (deliberations with persons designated to carry on labor negotiations). The presiding officer shall instruct any media representatives present not to disclose the substance of any discussion during executive session.

(c) Final Decision Prohibited. No final decision shall be made in executive session. To make a final decision, the presiding officer shall either call the meeting into open session or place the decision on the agenda of a future open session.

(4) Workshop Meetings. Workshop meetings may be scheduled as necessary by the mayor or at the request of a majority of the members of council. Workshop meetings are informal sessions to review upcoming issues, receive special reports, conduct goal setting sessions and for special training purposes. All discussions and conclusions held during a workshop are of an informal nature. No vote or final action is taken while in a workshop meeting. No audience participation is allowed during the course of a workshop, unless permitted by the consent of a majority of the council present.

(5) Emergency Meetings. An emergency meeting of the council may be called on less than 24 hours’ notice; provided, that an actual emergency exists. The minutes of such meeting must describe the emergency justifying less than 24 hours’ notice, and the council must be able to point to some reason why the meeting could not be delayed. The Public Meetings Law requires that such notice as is appropriate to the circumstances be given in the event of such emergency meeting. The council or its designee must attempt to contact the media and other interested persons to inform them of the meeting. Only the matter creating a need for an emergency meeting may be discussed during the meeting called for such reason. [Ord. 791, 2013; Ord. 766 § 6, 2008].


2.01.070 Meeting procedures.

(1) Robert’s Rules Adopted. Unless otherwise provided by law or modified by these rules, the procedure for council meetings shall be governed by Robert’s Rules of Order. The council has an obligation to the citizens to be clear and simple in its procedures and in the consideration of the questions coming before it.

(2) The Presiding Officer. The mayor shall chair all meetings of the council, but shall not vote, except in the case of a tie vote of the council.

(a) Council President. At the first meeting of each calendar year, the council shall elect a president from its tenure membership. In the event of the mayor’s absence from any council meeting, the council president shall act as the presiding officer. Whenever the mayor is unable, on account of absence, illness or other cause, to perform the functions of the office, the council president shall act as mayor pro tem.

(b) Temporary Presiding Officer. In event of the absence of the mayor and council president, the city recorder shall call the council to order and call the roll of the members. If a quorum is present, those councilors present shall elect, by majority vote, a temporary presiding officer for that meeting. Should the mayor or council president arrive, the temporary presiding officer shall relinquish the chair immediately upon the conclusion of the item of business then in consideration before the council.

(c) Privileges Not Affected by Status. The presiding officer may debate and vote on any issue and shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a council member by reason of acting as the presiding officer.

(3) Quorum Requirements. The presiding officer shall call the meeting to order at the time designated for a scheduled meeting. Except to adjourn, a quorum is necessary to conduct business at any meeting of the city council. Quorum is defined by charter as a majority of council.

(4) Order of Business and Agenda Items. The order of business for all regular meetings of the council shall be as follows:

(a) Call to Order. Mayor calls the meeting to order.

(b) Roll Call. Attendance of members is noted.

(c) Pledge of Allegiance.

(d) Announcements, awards and proclamations.

(e) Audience Participation. For items of discussion not on the agenda. Discussion items or presentations should be limited to five minutes. Persons wishing to speak during audience participation are encouraged to sign the speaker’s roster with the person’s name and address and the topic upon which the person wishes to speak, not later than the end of the opening exercises. The presiding officer shall ask those interested in speaking to sign the speaker’s roster. Those persons who signed the speaker’s roster will have first opportunity to speak.

(f) Consent Agenda. In order to expedite the council’s business, the approval of minutes, and other routine agenda items shall be placed on the consent calendar. All items on the consent calendar will be approved by a single motion, unless the item is pulled for further consideration. Any item on the consent calendar may be removed for separate consideration by any member of the council. For the purposes of this rule, separate consideration means any proposal to adopt a different course of action than that recommended in the staff report, or a determination that debate on a proposed course of action is deemed desirable, any questions to staff on any item, and any item where a councilor must declare a conflict of interest.

(g) Council Consideration. These are items placed on the agenda which normally require action of some kind by the council.

(h) Resolutions and ordinances.

(i) Department reports.

(j) Good of the order.

(k) Executive session (if necessary).

(l) Adjournment.

The mayor or presiding officer has authority to adjust the agenda items and order of business.

The mayor and the city administrator shall prepare an agenda of the business to be presented for all meetings of the council. The agenda packet shall be available for the city council and the public not later than the Friday before the Tuesday council meeting. A councilor may request that an item be placed on a future agenda by bringing the item forward during a council meeting. The decision to place the matter on the next agenda shall be made by a majority vote from council. The city administrator may place routine items and items referred by staff on the agenda without council action.

(5) Public Hearings. The presiding officer shall announce prior to each public hearing the nature of the matter to be heard as it is set forth on the agenda. The presiding officer may, with the approval of council, limit the time and number of speakers at each public hearing. In such event, the presiding officer shall announce such restriction prior to beginning of the hearing. Public hearing order of business is as follows:

(a) Open the public hearing.

(b) Announce nature and purpose of hearing.

(c) Staff/presenter report.

(d) Public testimony.

(e) Council questions.

(f) Close hearing.

(g) Council deliberation.

(6) Motions and Voting Procedures. All motions shall require a second by another councilor prior to being put to a vote. The mayor shall state the name of the councilor who made the motion and the name of the councilor who made the second. Any motion failing to receive a second shall be considered failed. When the council concurs or agrees to an item that does not require a formal motion, the mayor shall summarize the agreement at the conclusion of the discussion.

(7) Duty to Vote. The mayor shall call for the vote on each motion receiving a second. Upon a call for the vote, each councilor shall respond by a show of hands or roll call. After a vote has been taken the presiding officer shall announce the results of the vote, and, unless the vote is unanimous, the vote of the members by name. Every member present when a question is called shall vote, unless the council, by unanimous consent, excuses a member for a special reason or unless a member has a conflict of interest under applicable law, in which case no consent is required. There shall be no debate on such a request. Unless excused pursuant to this rule, if any member refuses or fails to vote, and the result of such refusal creates a tie, that member’s vote shall be counted as an aye; in all other situations, that member’s vote shall be counted with the majority. If a member is excused from voting as provided by this rule, that member may be counted toward making up a quorum, but shall not be counted toward the minimum number of votes required to pass or reject a motion. Any councilor responding “abstain” must state the reason for such abstention from the vote. An abstention shall not count as either an affirmative or a negative vote and shall not be counted toward the number of votes required to pass or reject a motion. Except to the degree allowed a member of the public, no councilor shall discuss or vote upon any matter in which the councilor has declared a conflict of interest.

(8) Reconsideration of Actions Taken. Any councilor who voted with the majority may move for a reconsideration of an action at the same or the next following regular meeting and may be seconded by any member. Once a matter has been reconsidered at the same meeting, no motion for further reconsideration shall be made without unanimous consent of the council.

(9) Tie Vote. In accordance with the City Charter, the mayor shall have no vote on all questions before the council except in the event of a tie. In case of a tie in votes on any proposal, in the absence of the mayor, the proposal shall be considered lost. In the absence of the mayor, if a tie vote occurs in the appeal of any quasi-judicial matter, the decision by the lower level decision maker shall be affirmed.

(10) Rules of Order.

(a) Councilor Presentations. Every councilor desiring to speak shall address the presiding officer and upon recognition by the presiding officer, shall confine their remarks to the question under debate.

(b) Questioning of Staff. Councilors desiring to question the administrative staff may direct the inquiry to the city administrator or the person designated by the city administrator to answer the inquiry during the council meeting.

(c) Administrative Staff, City Employees Addressing Council. City administrative staff and other city employees desiring to address the council shall first be recognized by the presiding officer and shall address such remarks to the presiding officer. The staff shall respond to questions or comments by council or members of the public with permission of the presiding officer, and shall do so in a polite, tactful manner.

(d) Citizen Question or Discussion.

(i) No person shall enter into any discussion without being recognized by the presiding officer. Any citizen desiring to address the council should come to the designated location to address the council and be recognized by the presiding officer. After being recognized by the presiding officer, the person shall state their name and address for the record and their remarks shall be limited to the question under discussion.

(ii) Any citizen addressing the council shall be limited to five minutes unless further time is granted by the presiding officer. No citizen shall be allowed to speak more than once upon any one subject until every other citizen choosing to speak has had an opportunity.

(iii) After a motion has been made, no citizen shall address the council without first securing permission from the presiding officer.

(11) General Decorum.

(a) Presiding Officer. The presiding officer shall preserve decorum and decide all points of order, subject to appeal to the council.

(b) Councilors. Councilors shall preserve order and decorum during council meetings, and shall not, by conversation or other action, delay or interrupt the proceedings or refuse to obey the orders of the presiding officer or these rules. Councilors shall, when addressing staff or members of the public, confine themselves to questions or issues then under discussion, shall not engage in personal attacks, shall not impugn the motives of any speaker, and shall at all times conduct themselves in a manner appropriate to the dignity of their office.

(c) Staff and Public. Members of the administrative staff, employees of the city and other persons attending council meetings shall observe the same rules of procedure, decorum and good conduct applicable to the members of the council.

(d) Improper Conduct. The following items are not condoned by the city council and may be cause for the presiding officer to have the person(s) removed from the Council Chambers:

(i) Using or making of loud or disruptive language, noise or conduct which obstructs the work or the conducting of the business of the council.

(ii) Engaging in violent or distracting action.

(iii) Willful injury of furnishing or of the interior of the Council Chambers or other meeting place.

(iv) Refusal to obey any rules of conduct, including the limitations on occupancy and seating capacity.

(v) Refusal to obey an order of the presiding officer or an order issued by a councilor which has been approved by a majority of the councilors present.

(e) Sergeant-at-Arms.

(i) Removal of Any Person. Any person who demonstrates improper conduct while addressing the council or attending a council meeting shall be removed from the room if the sergeant-at-arms is so directed by the presiding officer. In case the presiding officer should fail to act, any member of the council may obtain the floor and move to require enforcement of this rule; upon affirmative vote of the majority of the council present, the sergeant-at-arms shall be authorized to remove the person or persons, as if the presiding officer so directed.

(ii) Enforcement of Decorum. The city administrator, or such member or members of the police department as the city administrator shall designate, shall serve as the sergeant-at-arms of the council meetings and shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum. [Ord. 766 § 7, 2008].


2.01.080 Interaction with city staff/officials.

City council policy is implemented through dedicated and professional staff. Therefore, it is critical that the relationship between council and staff be well understood by all parties so policies and programs may be implemented successfully. To support effective relationships, it is important that roles are clearly recognized.

(1) City Administrator. The city administrator is responsible to the city council, rather than to individual council members, and directs and coordinates the various departments. The city administrator is responsible for appointing all department directors and authorizing all other personnel positions. The city council authorizes positions through the budget process; based upon that authorization, the city administrator makes the appointments.

(2) City Council Noninterference. The city council is to work through the city administrator when dealing with administrative services of the city. In no manner, either directly or indirectly, shall a council member become involved in, or attempt to influence, personnel matters that are under the direction of the city administrator. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members will deal with the administrative service solely through the city administrator or designee, and neither the council nor any committee or member of a committee shall give orders to any subordinate of the city administrator. [Ord. 766 § 8, 2008].


2.01.090 Roles and information flow.

(1) Council Roles. The full city council retains the authority to accept, reject, or amend the staff recommendations on policy matters. Members of the city council must avoid intrusion into those areas that are the responsibility of staff. Individual council members may not intervene in staff decision-making, the development of staff recommendations, scheduling of work, and executing department priorities without the prior knowledge and approval of the city council as a whole. This is necessary to protect staff from undue influence and pressure from individual council members, and to allow staff to execute priorities given by management and the council as a whole without fear of reprisal. If a council member wishes to influence the actions, decisions, recommendations, workloads, work schedule, or priorities of staff, that member must prevail upon the council to do so as a matter of council policy.

(2) Access to Information. The city administrator is the information liaison between council and city staff. Requests for information from council members are to be directed to the city administrator and will be responded to promptly. The information requested will be copied to all members of council so that each member may be equally informed. The sharing of information with city council is one of the city administrator’s highest priorities. City staff will make every effort to respond in a timely and professional manner to all requests for information or assistance made by individual council members; provided, that in the judgment of the city administrator, the request is not of a magnitude, either in terms of workload or policy, which would require that it would be more appropriately assigned to staff through the direction of the full city council. [Ord. 766 § 9, 2008].


2.01.100 Legal advice.

Requests to the city attorney for advice requiring legal research shall not be made by a councilor except with the concurrence of the council. [Ord. 766 § 10, 2008].


Chapter 2.05 FIRE DEPARTMENT

Sections:

2.05.010    Established.

2.05.020    Members.

2.05.030    Officers.

2.05.040    Meetings.

2.05.050    Duties.

2.05.060    Rules and regulations.

2.05.070    Property.

2.05.080    Authority of chief.

2.05.090    Enforcement.

2.05.100    Exempt firefighters.

2.05.110    Board of fire commissioners.


2.05.010 Established.

For the prevention and extinguishment of fires within the corporate limits of the town of Myrtle Creek and for the preservation of property endangered by fire, there is hereby created and established a fire department to be known as Myrtle Creek volunteer fire department, and which fire department shall be composed of the board of fire commissioners hereinafter provided for, together with a chief and assistant chief, as hereinafter provided, and such volunteer firefighters as may be admitted under the rules and regulations hereinafter and by said fire department established. [Amended during 2012 recodification; Ord. 121 § 1, 1935].


2.05.020 Members.

At the first meeting of the council immediately following the annual election of officers and after the new council has been organized, the mayor shall appoint, subject to confirmation by the council, three members from the council who shall constitute the board of fire commissioners and who shall hold office for the term of one year and until their successors are appointed and confirmed. [Ord. 121 § 2, 1935].


2.05.030 Officers.

The said fire department shall elect annually, at such time as it may fix by its bylaws, from among its membership the following officers:

(1) Chief;

(2) Assistant chief;

(3) Secretary;

(4) Treasurer;

(5) Moderator;

and such other officers as the department may from time to time prescribe by its bylaws. The secretary and treasurer may be one and the same person. The moderator must be a member of said board of fire commissioners. [Ord. 121 § 3, 1935].


2.05.040 Meetings.

The fire department shall hold its meetings at such times and places as it shall provide by its bylaws; provided, that there shall be at least four regular meetings each year, and not more than three months apart. [Ord. 121 § 4, 1935].


2.05.050 Duties.

The duties of the officers of the fire department shall be such as it may provide by its bylaws, or its rules and regulations not inconsistent herewith, except that the moderator of the fire department shall have general supervision and inspection of the fire apparatus of the town of Myrtle Creek as provided by the Charter, including the efficiency of the water pressure, hydrants, hose, hose carts, ladders, reservoirs, and any and all equipment belonging to the department. He shall make regular reports quarterly to the council of the town of Myrtle Creek, specifying to the council any needs and requirements of the fire department for efficient service. He shall bring to the notice of the fire department and the council any violation of any laws, ordinances or resolutions with reference to fire protection, and any and all matters that may come to his attention pertaining to the welfare of the fire department and the protection of property from fire hazards. He shall be the official means of communication between the fire department and the council. [Ord. 121 § 5, 1935].


2.05.060 Rules and regulations.

The fire department may make such bylaws, rules and regulations as it may deem expedient and to the best interest of the organization as to the admission to membership, the eligibility thereto, and the dues, fines, duties and penalties attendant thereupon; provided, that no person under the age of 18 years shall become a member of said fire department. [Ord. 121 § 6, 1935].


2.05.070 Property.

The title to all property of the fire department shall be and remain in the town of Myrtle Creek. No member of the fire department, or any of its officers, or the fire department itself, shall have power to bind the town of Myrtle Creek in any contract or incur any indebtedness against the town of Myrtle Creek, unless expressly authorized to do so by ordinance or resolution of the council. The fire department shall have the exclusive right to expend and appropriate such moneys as are raised within said department by admission fees, dues, fines, etc., but not otherwise without the express authorization of the council as hereinbefore set forth. [Ord. 121 § 7, 1935].


2.05.080 Authority of chief.

The chief shall be the executive officer of the fire department. It shall be his duty and that of the assistant chief to see that the laws, orders, rules and regulations concerning the department, including ordinances of the council, are carried into effect, and to see that all laws, rules and regulations established to secure protection against fire are enforced. It shall also be the duty of the chief to enforce the rules and regulations made from time to time to secure discipline in said fire department, and he shall have power to suspend any subordinate officer or member for violation of the same, and shall further report such action in writing with his reasons therefor to the fire department for its action. In case of fire he shall be in absolute control and command of all members of the fire department.

The chief of the fire department shall have full power and authority to enter into any building or buildings, by force, if necessary, for the purpose of protecting property against fire, and to tear away any fence or other obstruction which he deems necessary in order to protect property in case of fire. In cases of absolute necessity, he may order that any building be blown up, torn down or moved, in order to stop the progress of fire. In case of fire, the chief shall have absolute control and command of all engines, hose, hooks, ladders and all apparatus belonging to the fire department. [Ord. 121 § 8, 1935].


2.05.090 Enforcement.

Any person, officer or member of the fire department who shall willfully violate any of the rules of the department or any of the provisions of this chapter, or who shall refuse to obey the lawful commands or orders of the chief of the fire department, or any officer in command, shall be censured, suspended, removed from office, or expelled from the department in such manner as said fire department may from time to time by its rules and regulations provide. [Ord. 121 § 9, 1935].


2.05.100 Exempt firefighters.

Any person who may have been an active firefighter in the fire department of the town of Myrtle Creek for seven years immediately preceding the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be entitled to enjoy all the privileges and immunities now enjoyed by exempt firefighters of said town of Myrtle Creek. Any such person shall upon application and satisfactory proof of such service and payment of the fee established for such purpose receive a certificate as an exempt firefighter, to be voted by said fire department, and such certificate to be signed by the chief, the moderator, and the secretary of said fire department; and any person who in the future shall have served as an active firefighter of said fire department for the period of seven consecutive years shall be entitled to such certificate as an exempt firefighter. [Amended during 2012 recodification; Ord. 121 § 10, 1935].


2.05.110 Board of fire commissioners.

Immediately upon the taking effect of this chapter, the mayor shall appoint, with the approval of the council, the said board of fire commissioners, who shall serve until their successors are elected and qualified as hereinbefore provided; and immediately upon the appointment of said commission, the said board of fire commissioners shall call a meeting of the present fire department of the town of Myrtle Creek, to be held in the City Hall at 7:30 p.m. on June 12, 1935. Notice of said meeting shall be given by posting notice thereof on the front door of the City Hall at least five days before said meeting. At said meeting the fire commissioners shall determine what persons present are members in good standing of the present fire department, and such members so determined by said fire commissioners, together with the members of said fire commission, shall be entitled to vote at said meeting.

The said meeting of the fire department, or any adjournment thereof, shall proceed to adopt bylaws for the government of said fire department, which bylaws shall become effective immediately upon their approval by the board of fire commissioners, and fire commissioners, and upon such approval all present bylaws, rules and regulations of said fire department shall be automatically repealed. There shall be no specified number required as a quorum at said organization meeting of said fire department. Thereafter, the fire department shall be composed of a minimum of seven firefighters in addition to said fire commissioners. If at any time the active members of said fire department shall be less than seven, said fire commissioners are hereby given full power to increase said membership by appointment up to the number of seven, it being the intent hereby that the active firefighters shall at all times be maintained to a minimum of seven members. The maximum membership, if any, may be fixed by the fire department. [Amended during 2012 recodification; Ord. 121 § 11, 1935].


Chapter 2.10 PARK COMMISSION

Sections:

2.10.010    Appointment.

2.10.020    Officers and records.

2.10.030    Meetings and quorum.

2.10.040    Rules and procedures.

2.10.050    Advisory capacity.

2.10.060    Responsibilities.

2.10.070    Conducting activities.

2.10.080    Solicitation of funding.

2.10.090    Appropriation of funds.

    Legislative history: Ords. 705 and 746.


2.10.010 Appointment.

The mayor of the city of Myrtle Creek shall appoint, with the approval of the council, a commission to be known as the park commission consisting of seven members, one of whom shall be a council person of the city. At least five of the commission members shall reside in the city of Myrtle Creek. The members of the park commission shall hold office at the pleasure of the council, with three of the original commission being appointed for a term of two years, and four members being appointed for a term of three years. Thereafter, all members shall be appointed for three-year terms; except that, in the event of a vacancy during a term of office, the appointment shall be only for the unexpired portion thereof. [Ord. 502 § 1, 1981].


2.10.020 Officers and records.

The members of the park commission shall serve without pay. Said commission shall, each year, select one of its members as chairperson and another of its members as secretary, who shall keep a permanent record of the proceedings of the commission, a copy of which record shall be placed in the office of the city recorder as one of the public records of that office. [Ord. 502 § 2, 1981].


2.10.030 Meetings and quorum.

The park commission shall hold regular meetings at least once every other month, or more often if the need exists as determined by the commission. The commission may have a special meeting when three of its members issue a request for a meeting, filed with the city administrator, who shall call such a meeting and notify the chairperson thereof. The city administrator may call special meetings by notifying the commission members when special or unusual business must be decided before regularly scheduled meetings. At meetings, a majority of commission members shall constitute a quorum for conducting business. All meetings shall be open to the public. [Ord. 502 § 3, 1981].


2.10.040 Rules and procedures.

The park commission shall adopt rules for its own organization and procedure. Such rules adopted by the commission shall be filed with the city recorder after adoption. [Ord. 502 § 4, 1981].


2.10.050 Advisory capacity.

The park commission shall act in an advisory capacity to the city council on matters pertaining to the operation, maintenance, improvements, facilities, and recreation activities under the jurisdiction of the city. [Ord. 502 § 5, 1981].


2.10.060 Responsibilities.

The responsibilities of the commission shall consist of the power and duty to advise the city council and administrator concerning the management, care, improvements and control of the public parks and recreation facilities now in existence and those which may hereafter be established. More specifically:

(1) Define the objectives of park facilities and services and make plans and general policies harmonizing with them.

(2) Recommend the form of recreation or cultural activities which should be conducted on park facilities.

(3) Recommend park policy and regulations.

(4) Recommend park development goals and time tables.

(5) Keep the public informed of park and recreation needs and programs.

(6) Make recommendations as to the rate or amount of any necessary service charges required for the use of any recreation facilities under the jurisdiction of the city.

(7) Be responsible for scheduling recreational and cultural activities at city parks.

(8) Coordinate recreation programs with other organizations.

(9) Coordinate volunteer park improvement projects.

(10) Seek alternative funding sources for park development.

(11) Recommend sound fiscal plans to achieve park development goals.

(12) Review annual budget for park development with the city administrator or his designee prior to submittal to budget committee.

(13) Any other activities which are consistent with the above responsibilities. [Ord. 502 § 6, 1981].


2.10.070 Conducting activities.

Recreational activities planned by the commission may be conducted on properties under the control of the city of Myrtle Creek, on other public properties with the consent of the authorities responsible for the same, and on private properties with the consent of the owners and approval of the council. [Ord. 502 § 7, 1981].


2.10.080 Solicitation of funding.

The commission may solicit or receive any gifts or bequests of money or other personal property, or any donation to be applied, principal or income, for either temporary or permanent use of the playgrounds or other recreational purposes. [Ord. 502 § 8, 1981].


2.10.090 Appropriation of funds.

All funds budgeted and appropriated by the city of Myrtle Creek for public facilities shall be expended in the same manner as are other city funds. Any amounts contributed by other public agencies or individuals in furtherance of the recreation program shall likewise be expended by the city for park development purposes. [Ord. 502 § 9, 1981].


Chapter 2.15 PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections:

2.15.010    Creation of planning commission.

2.15.020    Membership of commission.

2.15.030    Term of office.

2.15.040    Election of officers.

2.15.050    Financial interests and participation limitations.

2.15.060    Schedule of meetings and quorum.

2.15.070    Powers and duties.

2.15.080    Recommendations to city council.

2.15.090    Expenditures.

    Legislative history: Ords. 345, 350, 425 and 623.


2.15.010 Creation of planning commission.

There is hereby created a planning commission (hereinafter referred to as the commission) for the city of Myrtle Creek, Oregon. [Ord. 324 § 1, 1967].


2.15.020 Membership of commission.

The commission shall consist of five members to be appointed by the city council, not more than one of whom may be nonresidents of the city of Myrtle Creek, but who shall be residents of the urban growth area. Commission members shall receive no compensation, but shall be reimbursed for duly authorized expenses. No more than two members may engage principally in the buying, selling or developing of real estate for profit. No more than two members shall be engaged in the same kind of occupation, business, trade or profession. [Ord. 09-005, 2009; Ord. 324 § 2, 1967].


2.15.030 Term of office.

Except for appointments to fill an unexpired term, all members of the commission shall be appointed for a term of four years each. Each member shall be assigned to one of five positions which shall be numbered Position 1 through Position 5. Members serving on the commission on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall continue in the position to which they were assigned when appointed to the commission. A member of the commission may be removed by the city council, after hearing, for misconduct or nonperformance of duty. Any vacancy shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired portion of the term. [Ord. 09-005, 2009; Ord. 324 § 3, 1967].


2.15.040 Election of officers.

The commission, at its first meeting of each new year, shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman, who shall be voting members and who shall hold office during the pleasure of the commission. [Ord. 324 § 4, 1967].


2.15.050 Financial interests and participation limitations.

A member of the commission shall not participate in any commission proceedings or action in which any of the following has a direct or substantial financial interest:

The member or the spouse, brother, sister, child, parent, father-in-law, mother-in-law of the member, any business in which the member is then serving or has served within the previous two years, or any business with which the member is negotiating for or has an arrangement or understanding concerning prospective partnership or employment.

Any actual or potential interest shall be disclosed at the meeting of the commission where the action is being taken. [Ord. 324 § 5, 1967].


2.15.060 Schedule of meetings and quorum.

All meetings of the planning commission shall be public and shall be scheduled and conducted in accordance with state statutes relating to public meetings. Three members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. The commission may make and alter rules and regulations for its governance and procedures consistent with laws of this state and with the City Charter and ordinances. Special meetings may be called at any time by notice served upon each member of the commission at least 24 hours before the time specified for the proposed meeting. [Ord. 09-005, 2009; Ord. 324 § 6, 1967].


2.15.070 Powers and duties.

The commission shall have all the powers which are now or hereafter granted to it by ordinances of the city or by general laws of the state of Oregon. [Ord. 324 § 7, 1967].


2.15.080 Recommendations to city council.

All recommendations and suggestions made to the city council by the planning commission shall be in writing. [Ord. 324 § 8, 1967].


2.15.090 Expenditures.

The commission shall have no authority to make expenditures on behalf of the city, or to obligate the city for the payment of any sums of money, except as the same may be authorized by the city council or pursuant to budget appropriations and pursuant to administrative methods by which said funds shall be drawn and expended. [Ord. 324 § 9, 1967].


Chapter 2.20 ELECTIONS

Sections:

2.20.010    Nominations.

2.20.020    Filing of petition.

2.20.030    Acceptance of nomination.


2.20.010 Nominations.

A qualified elector who shall have resided in the city during the 12 months immediately preceding the election may be nominated for an elective city office. Nomination shall be by petition specifying the position sought on forms prescribed by state law. The petition shall be signed by not fewer than 25 electors who are legal residents of the city.

No elector shall sign more than one petition for the same elective position. If an elector signs more than one such petition, only the signature on the first petition filed with the city elections officer shall be valid.

No person shall be qualified to accept nomination or be a candidate for more than one city office to be filled in the same election. No person shall be qualified to hold more than one elective city office at a time. [Ord. 622 § 1, 1993].


2.20.020 Filing of petition.

All nomination papers comprising a petition shall be assembled and filed with the city elections officer not earlier than 90 days nor later than 70 days before the election. The elections officer shall record on the face of each paper comprising a petition the exact time and date the petition is filed.

The elections officer shall determine whether the petition contains the required number of signatures of qualified electors and whether the petition otherwise conforms to law, and upon such determination shall so notify the candidate in writing within five days after the filing. If the elections officer determines that the petition does not contain the required number of signatures or does not otherwise conform to law, the elections officer shall immediately return it to the person who filed it, certifying in writing wherein the petition is insufficient. A deficient petition may be amended and filed again as a new petition, or a different petition for the same candidate may be filed, within the regular time for filing nomination petitions. The elections officer shall not accept any petition, including an amended petition, after 5:00 p.m. on the seventieth day before the election. [Ord. 622 § 2, 1993].


2.20.030 Acceptance of nomination.

A qualified candidate shall, within five regular business days after being notified of their nomination, file with the city elections officer a signed acceptance of nomination in such form as the elections officer shall require. Upon receipt of such acceptance of nomination the elections officer shall cause the qualified candidate’s name to be printed on the election ballots.

The original petition of nomination for a successful candidate at an election shall be preserved in the official city records until the term of office for which the candidate is elected expires. [Ord. 622 § 3, 1993].


Chapter 2.25 URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY

Sections:

2.25.010    Creation of urban renewal agency.

2.25.020    Membership of agency.

2.25.030    Term of office.

2.25.040    Election of officers.

2.25.050    Financial interests and participation limitations.

2.25.060    Schedule of meetings and quorum.

2.25.070    Powers and duties.

2.25.080    Recommendations to city council.

2.25.090    Expenditures.


2.25.010 Creation of urban renewal agency.

Pursuant to ORS 457.035, the Myrtle Creek city council hereby finds and declares that blighted areas, as defined in ORS 457.010, exist within the city. Given the blighted conditions, the city council declares and recognizes that there is a need for an urban renewal agency to function within the city of Myrtle Creek and hereby creates an urban renewal agency. The corporate name of the agency created by this chapter shall be, and said agency shall be known as, the Myrtle Creek urban renewal agency. [Ord. 818 § 4, 2018].


2.25.020 Membership of agency.

The city council declares the agency membership shall be the same as that of the city council. Agency members shall receive no compensation, but shall be reimbursed for duly authorized expenses. [Ord. 818 § 4, 2018].


2.25.030 Term of office.

The term of office shall be the same as that of the city council. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term. [Ord. 818 § 4, 2018].


2.25.040 Election of officers.

At its first meeting of each calendar year, the agency shall elect a chairperson and vice chairperson to serve one-year terms. The city administrator or other staff member designated by the city administrator shall keep accurate records of all agency proceedings. [Ord. 818 § 4, 2018].


2.25.050 Financial interests and participation limitations.

A member of the agency shall not participate in any agency proceedings or action in which any of the following has a direct or substantial financial interest:

The member or the spouse, brother, sister, child, parent, father-in-law, mother-in-law of the member, any business in which the member is then serving or has served within the previous two years, or any business with which the member is negotiating for or has an arrangement or understanding concerning prospective partnership or employment.

Any actual or potential interest shall be disclosed at the meeting of the agency where the action is being taken. [Ord. 818 § 4, 2018].


2.25.060 Schedule of meetings and quorum.

Meetings shall occur on the regularly scheduled city council meeting dates unless a special meeting is required. All meetings of the agency shall be public and shall be scheduled and conducted in accordance with state statutes relating to public meetings. A majority of the members of the agency shall constitute a quorum. The agency shall meet at least once a month unless the chairperson and city administrator jointly agree that there is no business to be conducted. Special meetings will be duly noticed as required state statutes relating to public meetings. [Ord. 818 § 4, 2018].


2.25.070 Powers and duties.

The city council further declares, pursuant to ORS 457.045(3), that all of the rights, powers, duties, privileges, and immunities granted to and vested in an urban renewal agency by the laws of the state of Oregon shall be exercised by and vested in the agency of the city of Myrtle Creek; provided, however, that any act of the governing body acting as the urban renewal agency shall be and shall be considered the act of the agency only and not of the city council. [Ord. 818 § 4, 2018].


2.25.080 Recommendations to city council.

All recommendations and suggestions made to the city council by the agency shall be in writing. [Ord. 818 § 4, 2018].


2.25.090 Expenditures.

The agency shall have no authority to make expenditures on behalf of the city, or to obligate the city for the payment of any sums of money, except as the same may be authorized by the city council or pursuant to budget appropriations and pursuant to administrative methods by which said funds shall be drawn and expended. [Ord. 818 § 4, 2018].


Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE

Chapters:

3.05    Public Contracting

3.10    Local Improvements and Special Assessments

3.15    Reimbursement Districts

3.20    System Development Charges

3.25    Repealed


Chapter 3.05 PUBLIC CONTRACTING

Sections:

3.05.010    Adoption of rules.

3.05.020    Definitions.

3.05.030    Exemptions from competitive procurement.

3.05.040    Personal services contracts rules.

3.05.050    Disposition of surplus personal property.

3.05.060    Negotiations.

    Legislative history: Ord. 688.


3.05.010 Adoption of rules.

The following (hereinafter “these rules”) shall be public contracting rules for the city of Myrtle Creek. Except as provided within these rules, public contracting by the city shall be governed by the public contracting code and the model rules. The Myrtle Creek city council is the city’s contract review board (board). Except as otherwise provided in these rules, the powers and duties of the contract review board will be exercised by the city council and the powers and duties given or assigned to contracting agencies will be exercised by the city council. The city council may, through formal action, from time to time delegate its powers to conduct certain procurements to various members of its staff.

The city administrator is authorized to contract for personal, professional and consulting services and to purchase goods and services pursuant to this chapter without prior approval of the city council when the amount of the contract is less than $10,000. [Ord. 11-005, 2011; Ord. 739 § 1, 2005].


3.05.020 Definitions.

As used herein, the following phrases have the following meanings. (All words and phrases not defined herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the public contracting code or in the model rules.)

“Contracting agency” means the city and includes any person authorized by the city council to conduct a procurement on behalf of the city.

“Personal services contract” means a contract for services that require specialized technical, artistic, creative, professional or communication skills or talent, unique and specialized knowledge, or the exercise of discretionary judgment skills, and for which the service depends on attributes that are unique to the service provider, other than contracts for an architect, engineer, land surveyor or provider of related services as defined in ORS 279C.100. Contracts for personal services include but are not limited to the following contracts or classes of contracts:

(1) Accountants and auditors;

(2) Appraisers;

(3) Computer consultants;

(4) Lawyers;

(5) Insurance consultants;

(6) Training consultants;

(7) Investigators;

(8) Management system consultants. [Ord. 739 § 2, 2005].


3.05.030 Exemptions from competitive procurement.

The following contracts and classes of contracts are exempt from the competitive procurement requirements of the public contracting code and the model rules and may be awarded as provided herein, or otherwise in any manner which the contracting agency deems appropriate including by direct appointment or purchase:

(1) Contracts up to $5,000. Any procurement of goods or services or any combination thereof not exceeding $5,000 may be awarded in any manner deemed practical or convenient by the contracting agency, including by direct selection or award. Procurements shall not be artificially divided or fragmented so as to constitute a smaller procurement than specified in this section.

(2) Contracts up to $150,000. Any procurement of goods or services or any combination thereof, other than public improvement contracts, exceeding $5,000 but not exceeding $150,000, may be awarded using the following procedures for informal solicitation in lieu of the procedures set forth in the model rules:

(a) Solicitation of Offers. When authorized by these regulations, an informal solicitation may be made by general or limited advertisement to a certain group of vendors, by direct inquiry to persons selected by the contracting agency, or in any other manner which the contracting agency deems suitable for obtaining competitive quotes or proposals. The contracting agency shall deliver or otherwise make available to potential offerors a written scope of work, a description of how quotes or proposals are to be submitted and description of the criteria for award.

(b) Award. The contracting agency shall attempt to obtain a minimum of three written quotes or proposals before making an award. If the award is made solely on the basis of price, the contracting agency shall award the contract to the responsible offeror that submits the lowest responsive quote. If the award is based on criteria other than, or in addition to, price, the contracting agency shall award the contract to the responsible offeror that will best serve the interest of the city, based on the criteria for award.

(c) Records. A written record of all persons solicited and offers received shall be maintained. If three offers cannot be obtained, a lesser number will suffice; provided, that a written record is made of the effort to obtain the quotes.

(3) Equipment Repair. Contracts for equipment repair or overhauling may be awarded without competition, provided the service or parts required are unknown and the cost cannot be determined without extensive preliminary dismantling or testing.

(4) Sole Source Contracts. Contracts for goods or services which are available from a single source may be awarded without competition.

(5) Renewals. Contracts that are being renewed in accordance with their terms are not considered to be newly awarded contracts and are not subject to competitive procurement procedures.

(6) Temporary Extensions or Renewals. Contracts for the temporary extension or renewal of a single period of one year or less of an expiring and nonrenewable, or recently expired, contract, other than a contract for public improvements, are not subject to competitive procurement procedures.

(7) Contracts Required by Emergency Circumstances.

(a) In General. When an official with authority to enter into a contract on behalf of the contracting agency determines that immediate execution of a contract within the official’s authority is necessary to prevent substantial damage or injury to persons or property, the official may execute the contract without competitive selection and award, but, where time permits, the official shall attempt to use competitive price and quality evaluation before selecting an emergency contractor.

(b) Reporting. An official who enters into an emergency contract shall, as soon as possible, in light of the emergency circumstances, (i) document the nature of the emergency, the method used for selection of the particular contractor and the reason why the selection method was deemed in the best interest of the contracting agency and the public; and (ii) notify the city council of the facts and circumstances surrounding the emergency execution of the contract.

(c) Emergency Public Improvement Contracts. A public improvement contract may only be awarded under emergency circumstances if the contracting agency has made a written declaration of emergency. Any public improvement contract award under the emergency conditions must be awarded within 60 days following the declaration of an emergency unless the contracting agency grants an extension of the emergency period. Where the time delay needed to obtain a payment or performance bond for the contract could result in injury or substantial property damage, the contracting agency may waive the requirement for all or a portion of required performance and payment bonds.

(8) State Law Exemptions. There shall be an exemption for any other contract or class of contract exempted by the public contracting code or the model rules.

(9) Other Exemptions Adopted in Future. There shall be an exemption for any other contract or class of contracts expressly exempted from competitive procurement requirements pursuant to procedures permitted by the public contracting code or the model rules.

(10) Public Improvements. Public improvement contracts estimated by the contracting agency not to exceed $100,000, or not to exceed $50,000 in the case of a contract for a highway, bridge or other transportation project, may be awarded by competitive quotes under the following procedures:

(a) The contracting agency shall informally solicit at least three price quotes from prospective contractors. If three prospective contractors are not available, then fewer quotes may be solicited, and the contracting agency shall maintain records of the attempts to obtain quotes.

(b) The contracting agency shall award the contract to the prospective contractor whose quote will best serve the interests of the contracting agency, taking into account price and other applicable factors, such as experience, specific expertise, past record of performance and conduct, availability, familiarity with local area and access to local resources, project understanding, contractor capacity, and contractor responsibility. If the contract is not awarded on the basis of the lowest price, the contracting agency shall make a written record of the basis for the award.

(c) A procurement may not be artificially divided or fragmented to qualify for the informal contract award procedures provided by this section. [Ord. 11-005, 2011; Ord. 739 § 3, 2005].


3.05.040 Personal services contracts rules.

Personal services contracts (other than a personal services contract for an architect, engineer, land surveyor or provider of related services) are subject to the rules established by this section:

(1) All personal services contracts shall contain all contract provisions mandated by state law. These provisions may be incorporated in the personal services contract by reference to state law, unless state law provides otherwise. The attorney for contracting agency when requested will prepare model contract provisions for use in personal services contracts.

(2) The following procedures shall be observed in the selection of personal services contractors:

(a) For personal services contracts involving an anticipated fee of $20,000 per annum, the contracting agency may negotiate a contract for such services with any qualified contractor the contracting agency selects.

(b) For personal services contracts involving an anticipated fee of more than $20,000 per annum, the contracting agency shall solicit prospective contractors who shall appear to have at least minimum qualifications for the proposed assignment, notify each prospective contractor in reasonable detail of the proposed assignment, and determine the prospective contractor’s interest and ability to perform the proposed assignment.

(c) The contracting agency may arrange for any or all interested prospective contractors to be interviewed for the assignment by an appropriate employee or by an interview committee.

(d) Following a review of the qualifications and interview, where conducted, of the interested prospective contractors, the contracting agency shall select the prospective contractor, and shall prepare a personal services contract.

(3) Some or all of the following criteria shall be considered in the evaluation and selection of a personal services contractor:

(a) Experience in the type of work to be performed.

(b) Familiarity with the local area and access to local resources.

(c) Capacity and capability to perform the work, including any specialized services within the time limitations for the work.

(d) Educational and professional record, including past record of performance on contracts with governmental agencies and private parties with respect to cost control, quality of work, ability to meet schedules, and contract administration, where applicable.

(e) Any other factors relevant to the particular contract.

(4) The above provisions regarding selection procedures and criteria do not apply to renewals, amendments or modifications of existing personal services contracts.

(5) The selection procedures described in this section may be waived by the contracting agency at its discretion where an emergency exists that could not have been reasonably foreseen and requires such prompt execution of a contract to remedy the situation that there is not sufficient time to permit utilization of the selection procedures. [Ord. 739 § 4, 2005].


3.05.050 Disposition of surplus personal property.

Disposition of surplus personal property may be made, at the discretion of the contracting agency, under provisions of the public contracting code or the model rules or under the provisions of this section:

(1) General Methods. Surplus property may be disposed of by any of the following methods upon a determination by the contracting agency that the method of disposal is in the best interest of the city. Factors that may be considered by the contracting agency include costs of sale, administrative costs, and public benefits to the city. The contracting agency shall maintain a record of the reason for the disposal method selected, and the manner of disposal, including the name of the person to whom the surplus property was transferred.

(a) Governments. Without competition, by transfer or sale to another city department or public agency.

(b) Auction. By publicly advertised auction to the highest bidder.

(c) Bids. By publicly advertised invitation to bid.

(d) Liquidation Sale. By liquidation sale using a commercially recognized third-party liquidator selected in accordance with rules for the award of personal services contracts.

(e) Fixed Price Sale. The contracting agent may establish a selling price based upon an independent appraisal or published schedule of values generally accepted by the insurance industry, schedule and advertise a sale date, and sell to the first buyer meeting the sales terms.

(f) Trade-In. By trade-in, in conjunction with acquisition of other price-based items under a competitive solicitation. The solicitation shall require the offer to state total value assigned to the surplus property to be traded.

(g) Donation. By donation to any organization operating within or providing a service to residents of the city which is recognized by the Internal Revenue Service as an organization described in Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.

(2) Disposal of Property with Minimal Value. Surplus property which has a value of less than $500.00, or for which the costs of sale are likely to exceed sale proceeds, may be disposed of by any means determined to be cost-effective, including by disposal as waste. The official making the disposal shall make a record of the value of the item and the manner of disposal.

(3) Restriction on Sale to City Employees. City employees shall not be restricted from competing, as members of the public, for the purchase of publicly sold surplus property, but shall not be permitted to offer to purchase property to be sold to the first qualifying bidder until at least three days after the first date on which notice of the sale is first publicly advertised. [Ord. 739 § 5, 2005].


3.05.060 Negotiations.

If bids or quotes are solicited for a public improvement contract, and all bids or quotes exceed the budget for the project, the contracting agency may, prior to contract award, negotiate for a price within the project budget under the following procedures:

(1) Negotiations will begin with the lowest responsive and responsible bidder or proposer. If negotiations are not successful, then the contracting agency may begin negotiations with the second lowest responsive bidder or proposer, and so on.

(2) Negotiations may include value engineering and other options to attempt to bring the project cost within the budgeted amount.

(3) A contract may not be awarded under this section if the scope of the project is significantly changed from the description in the original solicitation or bid documents.

(4) The contracting agency will adhere to the provisions of ORS 279C.340 in applying this section. [Ord. 739 § 6, 2005].


Chapter 3.10 LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS

Sections:

3.10.010    Initiating improvements.

3.10.020    City administrator’s report.

3.10.030    Action of city administrator’s report.

3.10.040    Resolution and notice of hearing.

3.10.050    Hearing.

3.10.060    Calls for bids.

3.10.070    Assessment ordinance.

3.10.080    Notice of assessment.

3.10.090    Lien record and foreclosure proceedings.

3.10.100    Error in assessments calculation.

3.10.110    Supplemental assessments.

3.10.120    Rebates.

3.10.130    Remedies.

3.10.140    Abandonment of proceedings.

3.10.150    Curative provisions.

3.10.160    Reassessment.

3.10.170    Rebonding.

    Legislative history: Ord. 662.


3.10.010 Initiating improvements.

(1) When the city council considers it necessary to require that improvements to a street, sewer, water, sidewalk, parking, curbing, drain, or other public improvement defined in ORS 223.387 be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment according to benefits conferred, the council shall declare by resolution that it intends to make the improvement and direct the city administrator to make a survey of the improvement and file a written report with the recorder.

(2) When owners of two-thirds of the property that will benefit by improvements defined in subsection (1) of this section request by written petition that the council initiate an improvement, the council shall declare by resolution that it intends to make the improvement and direct the city administrator to make a survey of the improvement and file a written report with the recorder.

(3) For the purpose of this chapter, “owner” means the record holder of legal title or, as to land being purchased under a land sale contract that is recorded or verified in writing by the record holder of legal title, the purchaser. [Ord. 662 § 1, 1994; Ord. 525 § 1, 1983].


3.10.020 City administrator’s report.

Unless the council directs otherwise, the city administrator’s report shall contain the following:

(1) A map or plat showing the general nature, location and extent of the proposed improvement and the land to be assessed for payment of the cost.

(2) Plans, specifications and estimate of work to be done. If the proposed project is to be carried out in cooperation with another governmental agency, the city administrator may adopt plans, specifications and estimate of that agency.

(3) An estimate of probable cost of the improvement, including legal, administrative and engineering costs.

(4) An estimate of unit cost of the improvement to the benefited properties, calculated on a per square foot, per front foot, or another unit of cost basis.

(5) A recommendation concerning the method of assessment to be used to arrive at a fair apportionment of the whole or a portion of the cost of the improvement to benefited properties.

(6) A description of each lot, parcel of land, or portion of land to be benefited, with names of the record owners and, when readily available, names of contract purchasers as shown on books and records of the Douglas County tax department. To describe each lot or parcel of land under provisions of this section, it shall be sufficient to use the tax account number assigned to the property by the tax department or the book and page designations shown on books and records of the Douglas County clerk.

(7) A recommendation on the rate of interest to be paid on assessments bonded under the Bancroft Bonding Act and Chapter 223 ORS. [Ord. 662 § 2, 1994; Ord. 525 § 2, 1983].


3.10.030 Action of city administrator’s report.

After the city administrator’s report is filed with the recorder, the council may by resolution approve the report, modify the report and approve it as modified, require the city administrator to supply additional or different information for the improvement, or abandon the improvement.

(1) The council, in adopting the city administrator’s report, may:

(a) Use any just and reasonable method to determine the extent of an improvement district consistent with the benefits derived.

(b) Use any just and reasonable method to apportion the sum to be assessed among the benefited properties.

(c) Authorize payment by the city of all or part of the cost of an improvement when in the opinion of the council the topographical or physical conditions, unusual or excessive public travel, or other character of the work warrants only partial payment or no payment of the cost by owners of benefited properties.

(d) Make any changes to the city administrator’s report consistent with the city’s current planning, engineering and construction standards.

(2) Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the council from using other means of financing improvements, including federal and state grants-in-aid, sewer, or other legal means of finance. If other means of finance are used, the council may levy special assessments according to benefits derived to cover any remaining cost.

(3) The council may approve the city administrator’s report, modify the report and approve it as modified, require the city administrator to provide additional information, or abandon the improvement project. [Ord. 525 § 3, 1983].


3.10.040 Resolution and notice of hearing.

After the council has approved the city administrator’s report as submitted or as modified, the council shall declare by resolution that it intends to make the improvement and direct the recorder to give notice of the council’s intent by two publications, one week apart, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and by mailing of written notice to the property owners affected. The notice shall contain the following:

(1) That the report of the city administrator is on file in the office of the recorder and is subject to public examination.

(2) That the council will hold a public hearing on the proposed improvement on a specified date, which shall be not less than 10 days after the first publication of notice, at which objections and remonstrance to the improvement will be heard by the council, and that the improvement will be abandoned or suspended for not less than six months if written remonstrance are filed before or during the hearing by owners of a majority of the property to be assessed.

(3) A description of the property to be benefited by the improvement, owners of the property as shown on books and records of the Douglas County tax department, and the city administrator’s estimate of total cost of the improvement to be paid by special assessments to benefited properties. For purposes of this section, it shall be sufficient to describe the property to be benefited by the tax account number assigned to the property and used by Douglas County tax department or the book and page designations shown on books and records of the Douglas County clerk. [Ord. 525 § 4, 1983].


3.10.050 Hearing.

After the hearing, the council may, by resolution, approve the city administrator’s report, modify the report and approve it as modified, require the city administrator to provide additional information, suspend the project for six months if required to do so by remonstrance, or abandon the project.

Upon modification of the city administrator’s report, the council shall direct the city administrator to prepare a modified report to be placed on file with the city recorder.

Following the decision to make the proposed improvements, the council shall direct the city administrator to prepare plans and specifications for the improvements. [Ord. 525 § 5, 1983].


3.10.060 Calls for bids.

The council may direct the city administrator to advertise for bids for construction of all or part of the improvement project. If part of the improvement work is to be done under contract bids, the council shall proceed in accordance with procedures of city ordinance and state law for public contracting.

If the lowest acceptable bid exceeds the city administrator’s estimate by more than 10 percent, the council shall call another public hearing, in accordance with MCMC 3.10.040, or reject all bids and abandon the project. [Ord. 525 § 6, 1983].


3.10.070 Assessment ordinance.

(1) The council shall direct the city administrator to prepare proposed assessments based on the estimated cost of construction, or after construction is completed, on the actual construction costs. The proposed assessments shall be based on the methods adopted in the city administrator’s report.

(2) Notice of the proposed assessment shall be mailed to the owner of each lot proposed to be assessed at the address shown on the Douglas County tax assessor’s roll. The notice shall state the amount of assessment proposed on the property and fix a date by which time objections shall be filed with the recorder. An objection shall state the grounds for the objection.

(3) At the hearing the council shall:

(a) Consider objections and may adopt, correct, modify or revise the assessment against each lot in the district according to special and peculiar benefits accruing to it from the improvement.

(b) By ordinance, spread the assessment. [Ord. 525 § 7, 1983].


3.10.080 Notice of assessment.

(1) Within 10 days after the ordinance levying assessments has been passed, the recorder shall send a notice of assessment to each owner of assessed property by registered or certified mail and publish notice of the assessment twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The first publication of notice shall be not later than 20 days after the date of the assessment ordinance.

(2) The notice of assessment shall include the name of the property owner, a description of the assessed property, the amount of the assessment, and the date of the assessment ordinance, and shall state that interest will begin to run on the assessment and the property will be subject to foreclosure unless the owner either makes application to pay the assessment in installments within 10 days after the date of the first publication of notice or pays the assessment in full within 30 days after the date of the assessment ordinance. [Ord. 525 § 8, 1983].


3.10.090 Lien record and foreclosure proceedings.

(1) After the assessment ordinance is adopted, the recorder shall enter into the docket of liens a statement of the amount assessed on each lot, parcel of land or portion of land, a description of the improvement, names of property owners, and the date of the assessment ordinance. On entry into the lien docket the amounts shall become liens and charges on the lots, parcels of land or portions of land that have been assessed for improvement.

(2) Assessment liens of the city shall be superior and prior to all other liens or encumbrances on property insofar as state law permits. The assessment ordinance shall be recorded at the Douglas County clerk’s office.

(3) Thirty days after the date of the assessment ordinance, interest shall be charged at a rate of two percent more than the interest rate in MCMC 3.10.020(7), and the city may foreclose or enforce collection of assessment liens in the manner provided by state law.

(4) The city may enter a bid on property being offered at a foreclosure sale. The city bid shall be prior to all bids except those made by persons who would be entitled under state law to redeem the property. [Ord. 525 § 9, 1983].


3.10.100 Error in assessments calculation.

Claimed errors in the calculation of assessments shall be called to the attention of the recorder, who shall determine whether there has been an error. If there has been an error, the recorder shall recommend to the council an amendment to the assessment ordinance to correct the error. On enactment of the amendment, the recorder shall make the necessary correction in the docket of liens and send a corrected notice of assessment by registered or certified mail. [Ord. 525 § 10, 1983].


3.10.110 Supplemental assessments.

If an assessment is made before the total cost of the improvement is determined, and if the amount of the assessment is insufficient to defray expenses of the improvement, the council may declare the insufficiency by motion and prepare a proposed supplemental assessment. The council shall set a time for hearing objections to the supplemental assessment and direct the city recorder to publish one notice of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. After the hearing the council shall make a just and equitable supplemental assessment by ordinance, which shall be entered in the docket of liens as provided by MCMC 3.10.090. Notice of the supplemental assessment shall be published and mailed, and collection of the assessment shall be made, in accordance with MCMC 3.10.090 and 3.10.100. [Ord. 525 § 11, 1983].


3.10.120 Rebates.

On completion of the improvement project, if the assessment previously levied on any property is found to be more than sufficient to pay the cost of the improvement, the council shall determine the excess and declare it by ordinance. When declared, the excess amount must be entered in the lien docket as a credit on the appropriate assessment. If an assessment has been paid, the person who paid it or that person’s legal representative shall be entitled to payment of the rebate credit. [Ord. 525 § 12, 1983].


3.10.130 Remedies.

Subject to curative provisions of MCMC 3.10.150 and rights of the city to reassess as provided in MCMC 3.10.160, proceedings for writs of review and other appropriate equitable or legal relief may be filed as provided by state law. [Ord. 525 § 13, 1983].


3.10.140 Abandonment of proceedings.

The council may abandon proceedings for improvements made under this chapter at any time before final completion of the improvements. If liens have been placed on property under this procedure, they shall be canceled and payments made on assessments shall be refunded to the person who paid them or to that person’s legal representative. [Ord. 525 § 14, 1983].


3.10.150 Curative provisions.

(1) An improvement assessment shall not be rendered invalid by reason of:

(a) Failure of the city administrator’s report to contain all information required by MCMC 3.10.020.

(b) Failure to have all the required information in the improvement resolution, assessment ordinance, lien docket, or notices required to be published and mailed.

(c) Failure to list the names of or mail notice to an owner of property as required by this chapter.

(d) Any other error, mistake, delay, omission, irregularity or other act, jurisdictional or otherwise, in the proceedings or steps specified, unless it appears that the assessment is unfair or unjust in its effect on the person complaining.

(2) The council shall have authority to remedy and correct all matters by suitable action and proceedings. [Ord. 525 § 15, 1983].


3.10.160 Reassessment.

When an assessment, supplemental assessment, or reassessment for an improvement made by the city has been set aside, annulled, declared or rendered void, or its enforcement restrained by a court of this state or by a federal court having jurisdiction, or when the council doubts validity of the assessment, supplemental assessment, reassessment, or any part of it, the council may make a reassessment in the manner provided by state law. [Ord. 525 § 16, 1983].


3.10.170 Rebonding.

(1) Pursuant to Chapter 223 ORS, the owner of property assessed for local improvements where the assessment is bonded and entered in the city’s bonded lien docket and not fully paid, may file with the city recorder an application for rebonding the original assessment in the amount due and unpaid thereon. All applications for rebonding shall be submitted to the city council for review and appropriate action. In case there is more than one such bonded original assessment on the same piece of property, the owner may combine the bonded assessments in one application, provided the total amount to be rebonded against any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be $100.00 or more, and provided the owner shall tender and pay with the application all accrued interest due on the bonded asset or assessments to the first of the month preceding the date of application for rebonding.

(2) No application for rebonding shall be received by the city recorder unless all taxes due on the property have been paid and the applicant produces satisfactory evidence showing all taxes paid.

(3) The amount of the assessment or assessments to be rebonded shall constitute a new principal to be paid in 20 equal semi-annual installments with interest at the rate set by the city council. The amount of unpaid rebonded assessment or assessments, with interest at a rate set by city council, against each lot, tract or parcel of land, shall stand, after rebonding, as a lien in favor of the city until the rebonded assessment or assessments and interest are paid. The lien shall be superior and prior to all other liens or encumbrances on the property insofar as state law permits, priority as all other city liens. [Ord. 525 § 17, 1983].


Chapter 3.15 REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICTS

Sections:

3.15.010    Purpose.

3.15.020    Definitions.

3.15.030    Initiation.

3.15.040    City administrator’s report.

3.15.050    Establishing the reimbursement district.

3.15.060    Reimbursement charge.

3.15.070    Challenges to resolution establishing reimbursement district or to final reimbursement resolution.

3.15.080    Imposition of reimbursement charge.

3.15.090    Petition for relief.

3.15.100    Administration.


3.15.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide a method to reimburse a person who finances the construction of a public improvement that has the capacity to serve development other than that for which it is built. The person financing the development must be deemed to pay a whole or disproportionately large part of the improvement. This chapter is intended to mitigate the cost of financing such public improvements by distributing some of its costs to other development that benefits from such public improvements when the benefited development makes use of the improvements.

The charge paid by the benefited property should be proportional to the use the benefited property makes of the public improvement. This chapter provides developers with a mechanism that may be used solely to finance capital construction needs of the city. [Ord. 714 § 1, 2001].


3.15.020 Definitions.

“Administrative fee,” as used in this chapter, means the amount of money charged by the city for the costs of administering this chapter, including, but not limited to, producing the city administrator’s report, public meeting support, other personnel costs, mailing fees, legal fees and the costs to account, track and assess reimbursement charges to future development.

“Development” occurs when a structure or other use of land connects to or otherwise makes use of a sewer, water, stormwater or street improvement. As used in this chapter, “makes use of a stormwater improvement” means activities sufficient to trigger the requirements of MCMC 18.155.050. As used in this chapter, “makes use of a street improvement” means the construction or installation of an improvement or a change in the use of a property that increases traffic or congestion on the street improvement for which the reimbursement district is formed.

“Finance” (the/an improvement) includes, without limitation, being assessed in a local improvement district. A reimbursement district may be established hereunder concurrently with formation of a local improvement district pertaining to the same public improvement, which local improvement district may contain properties near the reimbursement district.

“LGIP” means local government investment pool.

“Reimbursement district” means an area of properties set forth in a reimbursement resolution and subject to reimbursement charges as set forth herein, which charges may without limitation be for the purpose of reimbursing other property owners within a local improvement district containing properties near the reimbursement district.

As used herein the singular includes the plural and vice versa. [Ord. 714 § 2, 2001].


3.15.030 Initiation.

(1) Any person may choose or may be required as a condition of a land use decision approval to construct a public street, water, sewer or stormwater improvement that costs in excess of the current threshold amount. If this person finances the improvement, in whole or disproportionately large part, and the improvement will or could provide service to development other than the development owned by that person, that person may apply to the city to form a reimbursement district for the benefit of him/herself as well as other persons similarly situated.

(2) An application or reapplication to establish a reimbursement district shall be in writing, shall be filed with the city administrator, and shall be accompanied by a processing fee sufficient to cover the administrative review and notice costs of processing the application or reapplication, as established by resolution of the city council.

(3) The application shall include the following:

(a) A description of the location, type and capacity of the public improvement proposed to be the basis for the reimbursement district;

(b) A narrative statement explaining why the person financing the public improvement believes all or part of the cost of the public improvement is eligible for reimbursement pursuant to this chapter. This statement shall clearly indicate that only the costs of improvements not benefiting the person’s property are subject to reimbursement;

(c) A map showing the area proposed to be included in the proposed reimbursement district as well as any other area, if any, proposed to be reimbursed by the reimbursement charges and indicating the following information:

(i) The comprehensive plan designation, and zoning for each property in the proposed reimbursement district;

(ii) The frontage length and square footage of each property within the proposed reimbursement district, or other similar data necessary for calculating the apportionment of the costs; and

(iii) Identification of the properties owned by the person applying for the reimbursement district and others similarly situated;

(d) Mailing labels for notice to all parties entitled under MCMC 3.15.050 to receive mailed notice of the application. The person applying for the reimbursement district shall use the names and addresses of property owners within the notice area indicated on the most recent property tax roll. This may require the person applying for the reimbursement district to resubmit additional labels depending on the final city administrator report recommendations;

(e) A proposed methodology for calculating costs to future development in the reimbursement district. The city administrator may be able to provide possible methodologies to the person applying for the reimbursement district; however, use of a methodology suggested by the city administrator shall not guarantee approval of either the methodology or the reimbursement district;

(f) The estimated cost of the public improvement to be reimbursed as evidenced by bids, projections of the cost of labor and materials, or other evidence satisfactory to the city administrator; and

(g) The date the public improvement is estimated to be complete.

(4) The initial application for formation of a reimbursement district shall be made before city approval of specific reimbursement district portions of construction plans and authorization to proceed with the construction of the portions of street, water, sewer or stormwater improvements. The person applying for the reimbursement district may proceed at their own risk with the construction of the public improvements prior to the city council authorizing the reimbursement district. The city staff or city council may abandon the proceedings per MCMC 3.15.050 or the city council may not authorize or authorize in full the reimbursement district. In these cases, the person applying for the reimbursement district shall be responsible for the full cost of the subject public improvement or for such cost differential not provided for in such authorization.

(5) If the person applying for the reimbursement district desires to reapply after the reimbursement district proceedings are abandoned under MCMC 3.15.050, that person shall submit a reapplication and processing fee as established by resolution of the city council. [Ord. 714 § 3, 2001].


3.15.040 City administrator’s report.

The city administrator or his designee shall review the application for the establishment of a reimbursement district and recommend whether a district should be established. The city administrator may request the submittal of other relevant information from the person applying for the reimbursement district in order to assist in the evaluation.

The city administrator or his designee shall prepare a written report for the city council that:

(1) Recommends whether or not the reimbursement district should be formed;

(2) Explains whether the person applying for the reimbursement district proposes to finance some or all of the cost of a street, water, sewer, or stormwater improvement to make service available to property, other than property owned by the person applying for the reimbursement district;

(3) Recommends the area that should be included in the reimbursement district as well as any other area, if any, to be reimbursed by the reimbursement charges;

(4) States the estimated cost of the street, water, sewer or stormwater improvement to be included in the proposed reimbursement district and the portion of the cost for which the person applying for the reimbursement district should be reimbursed. Unless special circumstances exist, the cost to be reimbursed to the person applying for the reimbursement district shall not include the following:

(a) Costs for that portion of the improvement that specially benefits the person’s property;

(b) Costs of improvements that will not be dedicated to and accepted by the city as a public improvement;

(c) Costs for a public improvement that is required as a condition of development approval, except in cases where the nature and degree of the public improvement is disproportionate to the impacts of the development, or where the city requires an oversized or additional improvement beyond that which is roughly proportional to the impacts of the development;

(d) Costs for relocation of electrical, telephone, cable television, natural gas or other utility relocation across the person’s subject frontage;

(e) Costs for extra work or materials required to correct construction deficiencies to bring an otherwise noneligible improvement up to city standards;

(f) Costs for sewer, water, stormwater or street improvements that are the city standards to serve the person’s property;

(g) Costs for street realignment, except for the cost of right-of-way acquisition beyond the limits of the development frontage along the improved street; and

(h) Costs for administering the reimbursement agreement between the city and the person applying for the reimbursement district;

(5) States the estimated administrative fee and includes a recommendation on whether the city council should alter late fees on reimbursement charges that are not paid within 30 calendar days of the date the reimbursement charge is imposed;

(6) Recommends a just and reasonable methodology for allocating the cost of the public improvement to future development in the reimbursement district. The methodology shall consider, as relevant, the cost of the public improvement, contributions by property owners, the value of the unused capacity, the benefit the unused capacity will have to future development, rate-making principles employed to finance public improvements and any other factors deemed relevant by the city administrator; and

(7) Recommends the amount to be charged by the city for administration of the agreement between the city and the person applying for the reimbursement district. The administrative fee shall be fixed by the city council and shall be included in the resolution approving and forming the reimbursement district. [Ord. 714 § 4, 2001].


3.15.050 Establishing the reimbursement district.

(1) The city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed reimbursement district, at which time any person may comment on the proposal.

(2) If, prior to or during the public hearing, written objections are received from persons who own a majority of the area proposed to be included in the reimbursement district, then the proceedings to create a reimbursement district shall be abandoned. If reimbursement district proceedings are abandoned, the property within the area proposed to be included in the reimbursement district shall not be subject to a reapplication for a reimbursement district for at least six months. The six-month period shall begin on the date the city receives the final written objection totaling a majority of the ownership of the proposed reimbursement district. Abandonment of a reimbursement district shall not preclude persons from submitting applications requesting formation of other reimbursement districts for other public improvements.

(3) Following the public hearing, if the city does not receive sufficient objections as described in subsection (2) of this section, the city council shall have the sole discretion to decide whether a resolution approving and forming the reimbursement district shall be adopted.

(4) The city shall provide mailed notice of the public hearing on the proposal to the person applying for the reimbursement district and all owners of property within the proposed district as recommended by the city administrator’s report. Notice shall be deemed effective on the date of mailing. Failure of any person to receive the notice shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the public hearing or the formation of the reimbursement district. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed by regular mail at least 14 calendar days before the date of the hearing. The notice shall:

(a) State that a reimbursement district under this chapter has been proposed and that the proposed district includes the property or residence of the person receiving notice;

(b) Briefly describe the reimbursement district, the street, water, sewer or stormwater improvement to be reimbursed, the estimated amount of the reimbursement charges and the circumstances under which the charges will be imposed;

(c) Include a copy of the city administrator’s report;

(d) State the time, date and place of the public hearing;

(e) Explain the procedure for filing written comments before the public hearing; and

(f) Explain the process for submitting written comments at the public hearing.

Notice shall also be published in like manner as for a local improvement district.

(5) After the public hearing is held, the city council shall approve, reject or modify the recommendations contained in the city administrator’s report. If a reimbursement district is established, the city council shall pass a resolution establishing the area included in the reimbursement district, the estimated cost of the public improvements, the methodology for allocating the costs to future development, and the administrative fee charged by the city. If areas not proposed by the city administrator to be included in the district are added by the city council, the hearing shall be continued. Residents and property owners of the additional area added by the city council shall be entitled to mailed notice of a continued hearing at least 14 calendar days prior to such continued hearing. No additional notice is required if the city council excludes a property from a proposed reimbursement district; however, the hearing shall be continued.

(6) The resolution shall instruct the city administrator to enter into an agreement with the person applying for the reimbursement district pertaining to the public improvements authorized by the reimbursement district resolution. Unless otherwise ordered by the city council, the agreement, at a minimum, shall contain the following provisions:

(a) The public improvements shall meet all applicable city standards;

(b) The amount of estimated potential reimbursement to the person applying for the reimbursement district and others similarly situated;

(c) The person applying for the reimbursement district shall provide a maintenance guarantee, approved by the city attorney, on the public improvements for a period of 24 months after the date the city accepts the public improvements for ownership and operation;

(d) The person applying for the reimbursement district shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city from any and all losses, claims, damage, judgments or other costs or expenses arising as a result of or related to the city’s establishment and administration of the reimbursement district;

(e) The person applying for the reimbursement district shall acknowledge that the city is not obligated to collect the reimbursement fee from affected developers, and that the right to reimbursement shall be derived solely under the provisions of this chapter; and

(f) The person applying for the reimbursement district shall agree to abide by all other city, state and federal laws including, but not limited to, public contracting laws. [Ord. 714 § 5, 2001].


3.15.060 Reimbursement charge.

(1) After the project is completed, the person responsible for constructing the improvement shall submit to the city administrator the final costs of the public improvement and such supporting material as deemed necessary by the city administrator to evaluate compliance with this chapter. The city administrator shall then prepare a proposed final reimbursement resolution that identifies:

(a) The actual reimbursement charge for future development in the reimbursement district;

(b) The late fees, if different from that imposed by this chapter, that shall be imposed and collected if the reimbursement charge is not paid within 30 calendar days of the date the reimbursement charge is imposed; and

(c) The proposed apportionment and disbursement or use of reimbursement charges collected.

(2) The city shall provide mailed notice of the proposed final reimbursement resolution to the person applying for the reimbursement district and all residents and owners of property within the reimbursement district. Notice shall be deemed effective on the date of mailing. Notice shall be mailed by regular mail at least 14 calendar days before the date of the city council’s action on the reimbursement resolution. The notice shall set forth:

(a) The time, date, and place of the city council’s action;

(b) The amount of the final reimbursement charges for future development; and

(c) The interest rate for future installment payments as described in MCMC 3.15.080(3).

Notice shall also be published in like manner as for a local improvement district.

(3) The city administrator shall submit the final costs and the proposed final reimbursement resolution to the city council for approval. The city council may approve the proposed final reimbursement resolution or adjust the reimbursement charges, costs and late fees, if they are not deemed just and reasonable, and adopt a final reimbursement resolution accordingly. If the final reimbursement resolution or any action necessary for the adoption of such a resolution is adjudged invalid, in whole or in part, by an agency or court of competent jurisdiction, the city may take such action as is necessary to provide for the imposition and collection of the costs of the administration of the reimbursement district, including the city’s costs in defending the same, from the person applying for the reimbursement district.

(4) The city shall notify all residents and property owners within the reimbursement district and the person applying for the reimbursement district of the adoption of a final reimbursement resolution. The notice shall be mailed by regular mail and shall be effective on the day of mailing. The notice shall include a copy of the reimbursement resolution, the date it was adopted, and a short explanation of when a developer is obligated to pay a reimbursement charge and the amount of the charge, including late fees, if applicable.

(5) The city recorder shall record the final reimbursement resolution in the office of the county recorder within 30 calendar days of the date the resolution is adopted so as to provide notice to potential developers of property within the reimbursement district. The recording shall not create a lien. Failure to make such a recording shall not affect the lawfulness of the reimbursement resolution or obligation to pay the reimbursement charge. [Ord. 714 § 6, 2001].


3.15.070 Challenges to resolution establishing reimbursement district or to final reimbursement resolution.

Any legal action intended to contest the formation of the reimbursement district or the reimbursement charge, including the amount of the charges for future development, shall be filed pursuant to ORS 34.010 to 34.100 (writ of review) within 60 calendar days following adoption of the resolution being challenged. The writ of review shall be the sole and exclusive remedy for any challenge to proceedings under this chapter. [Ord. 714 § 7, 2001].


3.15.080 Imposition of reimbursement charge.

(1) No reimbursement charge shall be imposed, and there shall be no obligation to pay any reimbursement charge identified in a final reimbursement resolution and reimbursement agreement, unless and until development occurs that connects to, or otherwise makes use of, the public improvement that was the subject of the reimbursement district.

(a) The reimbursement charge will be imposed when a development within the reimbursement district connects to, or otherwise makes use of, the sewer, water, stormwater or street improvement.

(i) As used in this subsection, “makes use of the stormwater improvement” means activity sufficient to trigger the requirements of MCMC 18.155.050 at the time of, or following construction of, the stormwater improvement for which the reimbursement district is formed.

(ii) As used in this subsection, “makes use of the street improvement” means the construction or installation of an improvement or a change in the use of the property at the time of or following construction of the street improvement that increases traffic or congestion on the street improvement for which the reimbursement district is formed.

(2) The reimbursement charge is imposed and becomes due and payable as a precondition of receiving the first city permit applicable to the development activity undertaken or, in the case of a connection to a line, as a precondition of receiving the connection permit.

(3) The reimbursement charge may be paid in annual installments over a period of 10 years unless extended by process described in MCMC 3.15.100. If a person chooses to pay the reimbursement charge installments, the installments will bear interest from the time the reimbursement charge is imposed. The interest rate will be calculated using the local government investment pool rate in effect at the time the charge is imposed plus one and one-quarter percent for administration.

(4) If the reimbursement charge is paid in installments, a late fee of one and one-half percent of the overdue payment per month may be assessed for any late payments. The amount of the late fees may be altered by city council resolution. [Ord. 714 § 8, 2001].


3.15.090 Petition for relief.

A person subject to a reimbursement charge may petition the city council for relief from the payment of the charge. Such relief may be granted by the city council only in extraordinary circumstances when payment of the reimbursement charge would be inequitable or otherwise unlawful. A petition under this section is a mandatory administrative step required before any party may seek redress through the court system. A petition for relief must be filed within 30 days of the date the charge is imposed and must explain how the charge is inequitable or otherwise unlawful and it must set forth with particularity the grounds for relief. In response to a properly filed petition for relief, the city council may hold an evidentiary hearing and shall issue a decision in writing, which shall be final when signed by the mayor. The city shall withhold the issuance of building permits and all other permits for the development on which a petition for relief has been filed until the petition is conclusively resolved, including any judicial review. [Ord. 714 § 9, 2001].


3.15.100 Administration.

(1) A right to reimbursement shall terminate 10 years after the reimbursement district is created unless the person who is eligible for reimbursement renews their eligibility for reimbursement. Eligibility for reimbursement may be renewed for two additional five-year periods. In order to renew eligibility for reimbursement, the person who is eligible for reimbursement must file a written declaration of renewal with the city administrator within 90 calendar days of the date the eligibility for reimbursement would otherwise terminate. Failure to file a timely declaration shall result in the termination of any eligibility for reimbursement. In no event may the eligibility for reimbursement exceed 20 years.

(2) Eligibility for reimbursement does not obligate the city to seek or pay the reimbursement charge.

(3) The right of reimbursement is assignable and transferable after the person who is eligible for reimbursement delivers written notice to the city, advising the city where to send future payments received by the city on behalf of the person or the person’s assignee.

(4) The city shall establish separate accounts for each reimbursement district. Upon receipt of a reimbursement charge, the city shall cause a record to be made of the payment and remit or apply the charge as provided in the reimbursement resolution or agreement after deduction of administrative fees. The person eligible for reimbursement or that person’s assignee shall notify the city within 30 calendar days of any mailing address change. [Ord. 714 § 10, 2001].


Chapter 3.20 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGES

Sections:

3.20.010    Findings.

3.20.020    Purpose.

3.20.030    Scope.

3.20.040    Definitions.

3.20.050    System development charge established.

3.20.060    Methodology.

3.20.070    Authorized expenditures.

3.20.080    Expenditure restrictions.

3.20.090    Improvement plan.

3.20.100    Collection of charge.

3.20.110    Installment payment.

3.20.120    Exemptions.

3.20.130    Credits.

3.20.140    Notice.

3.20.150    Segregation and use of revenue.

3.20.160    Appeal procedure.

3.20.170    Prohibited connection.

3.20.180    Penalty.

3.20.190    Construction.

3.20.200    Classification.

    Legislative history: Ord. 728.


3.20.010 Findings.

The Oregon Legislature, through the enactment of ORS 223.297 to 223.314, has authorized local governments in Oregon to establish system development charges (SDC) on new development.

(1) The imposition of SDCs ensures that new development bears a proportionate share of the cost of providing essential capital facilities and improvements necessary to accommodate such development as determined in a methodology as outlined in ORS 223.297.

(2) SDCs established by this chapter are derived from, and based upon, and do not exceed the cost of maintaining the existing level of services necessitated by the new development for which the fee is levied. [Ord. 704 § 1, 1998].


3.20.020 Purpose.

The purpose of system development charge is to impose a portion of the cost of capital improvements for water, wastewater, drainage, streets, flood control, and parks upon those developments that create the need for, or increase the demands on, capital improvements. [Ord. 704 § 2, 1998].


3.20.030 Scope.

The system development charge imposed by this chapter is separate from and in addition to any applicable tax, assessment, charge, or fee otherwise provided by law or imposed as a condition of development. [Ord. 704 § 3, 1998].


3.20.040 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

“Capital improvements” means public facilities or assets used for (1) water supply, treatment or distribution or any combination, (2) wastewater collection, transmission, treatment or disposal or any combination, (3) drainage and flood control, (4) transportation, or (5) parks and recreation.

“Development” means conducting a building or mining operation, making a physical change in the use or appearance of a structure or land, dividing land into two or more parcels (including partitions and subdivisions) and creating or terminating a right of access.

“Improvement fee” means a fee for cost associated with capital improvements to be constructed after the date the fee is adopted pursuant to MCMC 3.20.050.

“Land area” means the area of a parcel of land as measured by projection of the parcel boundaries upon a horizontal plane with the exception of a portion of the parcel within a recorded right-of-way or easement subject to a servitude for a public street or scenic or preservation purposes.

“Owner” means the owner or owners of record title or the purchaser or purchasers under a recorded sales agreement, and other persons having an interest of record in the described real property.

“Parcel of land” means a lot, parcel, block or other tract of land that is occupied or may be occupied by a structure or structures or other use, and that includes the yards and other open spaces required under the zoning, subdivision, or other development ordinances.

“Qualified public improvements” means a capital improvement that is (1) required as a condition of residential development approval, (2) identified in the plan adopted pursuant to MCMC 3.20.090, and (3) located in whole or in part or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval and required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project to which the improvement fee is related.

“Reimbursement fee” means a fee for the cost associated with capital improvements constructed or under construction on the date the fee is adopted pursuant to MCMC 3.20.050.

“System development charge” means a reimbursement fee, an improvement fee, or a combination thereof. An SDC will be collected at the time of increased usage of a capital improvement, at the time of issuance of a development permit or a building permit, or at the time of connection to the capital improvement. “System development charge” includes that portion of the sewer or water system connection charge that is greater than the amount necessary to reimburse the city for its average cost of inspecting and installing connections with water and sewer facilities. “System development charge” does not include fees assessed or collected as part of a local improvement district or a charge in lieu of a local improvement district assessment, or the cost of complying with requirements or conditions imposed by a land use decision. [Ord. 704 § 4, 1998].


3.20.050 System development charge established.

(1) System development charges shall be established and may be revised by resolution of the council. The resolution shall set the amount of the charge, the type of permit to which the charge applies and, if the charge applies to a geographic area smaller than the entire city, the geographic area subject to the charge.

(2) Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this chapter or other local or state law, a system development charge is hereby imposed upon all development within the city, upon the act of making a connection to the city water or sewer system within the city, and upon all development outside the boundary of the city that connects to or otherwise uses the sewer facilities, storm sewers or water facilities of the city. [Ord. 704 § 5, 1998].


3.20.060 Methodology.

A methodology for establishing the improvement fee or the reimbursement fee, or both, shall be contained in a resolution adopted by the city council. Any changes or amendments to the methodology shall be made by resolution.

(1) The methodology used to establish or modify the reimbursement fee shall consider the cost of then-existing facilities including without limitation design, financing and construction costs, prior contributions by then-existing users, gifts or grants from federal or state government or private persons, the value of unused capacity available to future system users, rate-making principles employed to finance publicly owned capital improvements, and other relevant factors identified by the council. The methodology shall promote the objective that future system users shall contribute no more than an equitable share of the cost of then-existing facilities.

(2) The methodology used to establish or modify the improvement fee shall consider the estimated cost of projected capital improvements needed to increase the capacity of the systems to which the fee is related. The methodology shall be calculated to obtain the cost of capital improvements for the projected need for available system capacity for future system users. [Ord. 704 § 6, 1998].


3.20.070 Authorized expenditures.

(1) Reimbursement fees shall be applied only to capital improvements associated with systems for which the fees are assessed, including expenditures relating to repayment of indebtedness.

(2) Improvement fees shall be spent only on capacity increasing capital improvements, including expenditures relating to repayment of future debt for the improvements. An increase in system capacity occurs if a capital improvement increases the level of performance or service provided by existing facilities or provides new facilities. The portion of improvement funded by improvement fees must be related to demands created by current or projected development.

(3) A capital improvement being funded wholly or in part from revenues derived from the improvement fee shall be included in the plan adopted by the city pursuant to MCMC 3.20.090.

(4) Notwithstanding subsections (2) and (3) of this section, system development charge revenues may be expended on the direct cost of complying with the provisions of this chapter, including the cost of developing system development charge methodologies and providing an annual accounting of system development charge expenditures. [Ord. 704 § 7, 1998].


3.20.080 Expenditure restrictions.

System development charges shall not be expended for costs associated with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an incidental part of other capital improvements.

System development charges shall not be expended for costs of operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements. [Ord. 704 § 8, 1998].


3.20.090 Improvement plan.

Prior to the establishment of a system development charge, the council shall adopt a plan that (1) lists the capital improvements that may be funded with improvement fee revenues; (2) lists the estimated cost and time of construction of each improvement; and (3) describes the process for modifying the plan. In adopting this plan, the council may incorporate by reference all or a portion of any public facilities plan, master plan, capital improvement plan or similar plan that contains the information required by this section. The council may modify such plan and list at any time. A change in the amount of a reimbursement fee or an improvement fee is not a modification of the system development charge if the change in the amount is based on the periodic application of an adopted specific cost index or a modification to any of the factors related to the rate that are incorporated in the established methodology. [Ord. 704 § 9, 1998].


3.20.100 Collection of charge.

(1) Applicable system development charges are payable upon issuance of (a) a building permit or a development permit, (b) a land use permit or action not requiring the issuance of a building permit, (c) a development permit for development not requiring the issuance of a building permit, (d) a permit or approval to connect to the water system, (e) permit or approval to connect to the sewer system, or (f) a right-of-way access permit.

(2) If no building, development, or connection permit is required, the system development charge is payable at the time the usage of the capital improvement is increased.

(3) If development is commenced or connection is made to the water and sewer system without an appropriate permit, the system development charge is immediately due and payable.

(4) The city shall collect the applicable system development charge from the permittee when a permit that allows building or development of a parcel is issued or when a connection to the water or sewer system of the city is made.

(5) The city shall not issue such permit or allow such connection until the charge has been paid in full or until provision for installment payments has been made pursuant to MCMC 3.20.110, or unless an exemption is granted pursuant to MCMC 3.20.120. [Ord. 704 § 10, 1998].


3.20.110 Installment payment.

(1) When a system development charge of $25.00 or more is due and collectible, the owner of the parcel of land subject to the development charge may apply for payment in 20 semi-annual installments, to include interest on the unpaid balance, in accordance with ORS 223.208.

(2) The city shall provide application forms for installment payments, which shall include a waiver of all rights to contest the validity of the lien, except for the correction of computation errors.

(3) An application for installment payments shall have the burden of demonstrating the applicant’s authority to assent to the imposition of a lien on the parcel and that the interest of the applicant is adequate to secure payment of the lien.

(4) The city shall record the amount of the system development charge, the dates on which the payments are due, the name of the owner, and the description of the parcel.

(5) The city shall docket the lien in the lien docket and record the installment payment contract in the county lien records. From that time, the city shall have a lien upon the described parcel for the amount of the system development charge, together with interest on the unpaid balance at the rate established by council. The lien shall be enforceable in the manner provided in Chapter 223 ORS. [Ord. 704 § 11, 1998].


3.20.120 Exemptions.

Structures and uses established and existing on or before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are exempt from a system development charge, except water and sewer charges, to the extent of the structure or use then existing and to the extent of the parcel of land as it is constituted on that date. Structures and uses affected by this subsection shall pay the water and sewer charges pursuant to the terms of this chapter upon the receipt of a permit to connect to the water or sewer system.

(1) Additions to single-family dwellings that do not constitute the addition of a dwelling unit, as defined by the State Uniform Building Code, are exempt from all portions of the system development charge.

(2) An alteration, addition, replacement or change in use that does not increase the parcel’s or structure’s use of the public improvement facility is exempt from all portions of the system development charge.

(3) A project financed by city revenues is exempt from all portions of the system development charge. [Ord. 704 § 12, 1998].


3.20.130 Credits.

When development occurs that is subject to a system development charge, the system development charge for the existing use, if applicable, shall be calculated; and if it is less than the system development charge for the use that will result from the development, a credit shall be issued.

(1) A credit shall be given for the cost of a qualified public improvement associated with a residential development. If a qualified public improvement is located partially on and partially off the parcel that is subject to developmental approval, the credit shall be given only to the portion of the improvement required as a condition of development.

(2) Credit provided for under this subsection shall be limited to the improvement fee. No credit shall exceed the improvement fee even if the cost of the capital improvement exceeds the applicable improvement fee.

(3) Credit shall not be transferable from one development to another.

(4) Credit shall not be transferred from one type of capital improvement to another. [Ord. 704 § 13, 1998].


3.20.140 Notice.

(1) The city shall maintain a list of persons who have made a written request for notification prior to adoption or amendment of a methodology for any system development charge. Written notice shall be mailed to persons on the list at least 90 days prior to the final hearing to adopt or amend a system development charge. The methodology supporting the adoption or amendment shall be available at least 60 days prior to the first hearing to adopt or amend a system development charge. The failure of a person on the list to receive a notice that was mailed shall not invalidate the action of the city.

(2) The city may periodically delete names from the list, but at least 30 days prior to removing a name from the list, the city must notify the person whose name is to be deleted that a new written request for notification is required if the person wishes to remain on the notification list.

(3) The city shall advise a person who makes a written objection to the calculation of a system development charge of the right to petition for review pursuant to ORS 34.010 to 34.100. [Ord. 704 § 13A, 1998].


3.20.150 Segregation and use of revenue.

All funds derived from a particular type of system development charge are to be segregated by accounting practices from all other funds of the city. Use of system development charge revenues shall be in strict accordance with MCMC 3.20.070.

The city recorder shall provide an annual accounting by January 1st of each year, for system development charges showing the total amount of the system development charge revenues collected for each type of facility and the projects funded from each account in the previous fiscal year. A list of the amount spent on each project funded, in whole or in part, with system development charge revenues shall be included in the annual accounting. [Ord. 704 § 14, 1998].


3.20.160 Appeal procedure.

A person aggrieved by a decision required or the action of the city recorder under this chapter, or a person challenging a specific use of system development charge revenues, may appeal to the city council by filing a written request with the city recorder describing their complaint and requesting an appeal.

(1) Appeal of a specific revenue use must be filed within two years of the date of the alleged improper use. Appeals on any other decision must be filed within 10 days of the date of the decision.

(2) The council shall decide all appeals made pursuant to this section. If the council determines that there has been an improper expenditure of system development charge revenue, the council shall direct that a sum equal to the misspent amount shall be deposited within one year to the credit of the account or fund to replace the misspent money. The decision of the council shall be judicially reviewed only as provided in ORS 34.010 to 34.100.

(3) A legal action challenging the methodology adopted by the council pursuant to MCMC 3.20.050 shall not be filed later than 60 days after the adoption. A person shall contest the methodology used for calculating a system development charge only as provided in ORS 34.010 to 34.100, and not otherwise. [Ord. 704 § 15, 1998].


3.20.170 Prohibited connection.

No person may connect to the water or sewer systems of the city unless the appropriate system development charge has been paid, or the lien or installment payment method has been applied for and approved. [Ord. 704 § 16, 1998].


3.20.180 Penalty.

Violation of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $250.00. Each day a violation continues shall be a separate violation punishable by a separate fine for each day. [Ord. 704 § 17, 1998].


3.20.190 Construction.

The rules of statutory construction contained in Chapter 174 ORS are hereby adopted, and by this reference made a part of this chapter. [Ord. 704 § 18, 1998].


3.20.200 Classification.

The council determines that any fees, rates or charges imposed by this chapter or resolution pursuant to this chapter are not taxes subject to limitations of Article XI, Section 11 or 11(b) of the Oregon Constitution. [Ord. 704 § 20, 1998].


Chapter 3.25 MARIJUANA AND MARIJUANA-INFUSED PRODUCT TAX

(Repealed by Ord. 802)


Title 4 (Reserved)


Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS

Chapters:

5.05    Business Licenses

5.10    Social Gaming

5.15    Taxicabs

5.20    Tobacco Vending Machines

5.25    Recreational Marijuana Tax


Chapter 5.05 BUSINESS LICENSES

Sections:

5.05.010    Purpose.

5.05.020    Definitions.

5.05.030    Exemptions.

5.05.040    License required.

5.05.050    Application for license.

5.05.060    License fees.

5.05.070    Transfers and relocations, terms of license.

5.05.080    Approval, denial, revocation or suspension of license.

5.05.090    Appeal.

5.05.100    Disclaimers, exceptions and general requirements.

5.05.110    Special requirements.

5.05.120    Violations and penalties.


5.05.010 Purpose.

This chapter is enacted, except as otherwise specified, to provide revenue for municipal purposes and to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Myrtle Creek through regulation of business, occupations and trade. [Ord. 729 § 1, 2003].


5.05.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, certain words, terms and phrases are defined as follows:

“Applicant” means the owner or agent of the named business.

“Business” means any profession, trade, occupation, shop and every type of calling wherein a charge is made for goods, materials or services.

“City” means the city of Myrtle Creek, Oregon; and, for the administrative purposes of this chapter, the city recorder or the city administrator, or their designees, are authorized to act for the city.

“License” means the permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation within the city limits.

“Licensee” means the business as specified and named by the applicant.

“Nonprofit organization” means a bona fide organization with tax exempt status.

“Peddler” means a person or persons, including all persons in attendance, traveling from place to place selling and delivering at the same time any article or thing of value. Term shall not include regular commercial vendors employed by wholesale houses and selling for the purpose of resale goods, wares, merchandise or services to licensed merchants within the city, nor to newspaper vendors, and shall not include common labor.

“Person” means all public and private corporations, including domestic and foreign corporations, firms, partnerships of every kind, associations, organizations, syndicates, joint ventures, societies, and any other group acting as a unit, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business within the city.

“Revocation” means withdrawal of approval to operate a business.

“Solicitor” means one who travels from place to place, not carrying his goods with him, but taking orders for future delivery. Term shall not include regular commercial vendors employed by wholesale houses and selling for the purpose of resale goods, wares, merchandise or services to licensed merchants within the city, nor to newspaper vendors, and shall not include common labor.

“Suspension” means an official order to suspend business operations pending correction or ceasing of certain conditions or practices.

“Transient merchant” means one who occupies a mobile or temporary fixed location, which provides goods or services in the city, and does business in much the same manner as a permanent business; includes Oregon licensed construction and landscape contractors, towing services and roadside vendors. [Ord. 729 § 2, 2003].


5.05.030 Exemptions.

(1) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on business within the city which is exempt from taxation or regulation by the city by virtue of the Constitution of the United States or the state of Oregon.

(2) No person whose income is based solely on a wage or salary shall, for the purpose of this chapter, be deemed a person transacting or carrying on any business in the city, and it is the intention that all license fees will be borne by the employer.

(3) Any business paying a franchise fee under any city ordinances or resolutions now existing is exempt from the requirements of this chapter.

(4) Wholesalers making deliveries or taking orders from duly licensed retail outlets within the city are exempt from this chapter.

(5) Any person 16 years or younger who operates a business on a part-time basis, which business has an annual gross income of less than $1,500, is exempt from this chapter.

(6) Except as provided in MCMC 5.05.110, nonprofit organizations are exempt from this chapter. [Ord. 729 § 3, 2003].


5.05.040 License required.

(1) A license fee is hereby imposed on any business not licensed by other ordinances of the city, and it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any such business within the city without first having obtained a license for the current fiscal year as provided under this chapter.

(2) The agent, or agents, of a nonresident proprietor engaged in any business for which a license is required by this chapter shall be liable for any failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or for any penalty assessed under this chapter, to the extent, and with like effect, as if such agent or agents were themselves the proprietors or owners of the business.

(3) A person engaged in business in more than one location, or in more than one business licensed under this chapter, shall make a separate application and pay a separate license fee for each business or location, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

(4) A person representing themselves, or exhibiting any sign or advertisement that they are engaged in a business within the city for which a business license is required by this chapter, shall be deemed to be actually engaged in such business and shall be liable for the payment of such license fee and subject to the penalties for failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter.

(5) The city may require proof of bonding or state registration. An applicant shall possess any county or state license required or shall be awaiting final approval by the county or state, if city approval is a prerequisite, before a city license will be issued.

(6) All persons requesting a city business license under a fictitious name shall provide proof of current name registry from the Secretary of State, State of Oregon. [Ord. 729 § 4, 2003].


5.05.050 Application for license.

(1) Application for a new business license, or for renewal of an existing business license, shall be made to the city upon forms furnished by the city. Each application shall state and show:

(a) Name of business.

(b) Brief description of type of business.

(c) Name and address of the applicant.

(d) Street address and mailing address of the business.

(e) Signature of the applicant.

(f) Copy of photo identification.

(g) Copy of current and appropriate federal, state, county, and city licenses, bonds and insurances.

(2) The city may require the applicant to supply any additional information necessary to determine under MCMC 5.05.080 that the applicant meets all other requirements for the license. Review of an application shall not begin until all requested information has been provided. [Ord. 729 § 5, 2003].


5.05.060 License fees.

All business license fees shall be determined by resolution of the city council. All city licensed vendors and contractors providing or selling goods and services solely limited to the city of Myrtle Creek (local government) are exempt from licensing fees. [Ord. 729 § 6, 2003].


5.05.070 Transfers and relocations, terms of license.

(1) Transfer of License. In the event of the transfer of ownership of any business, the applicable business license may be transferred by application to the city. The city may approve the transfer upon finding that the new applicant meets the requirements of this chapter.

(2) Relocation of an Existing Business. In the event a business relocates, the licensee shall reapply to the city to transfer the business license. The city may issue the license upon finding that the new location meets the requirements of this chapter.

(3) Permanent License. A business license issued under this chapter shall be valid from the date of issuance until the following June 30th.

(4) Temporary License. A temporary business license may be issued for a period not exceeding five business days. [Ord. 729 § 7, 2003].


5.05.080 Approval, denial, revocation or suspension of license.

(1) Approval of Application. A business license shall be issued within 10 days of submission of a complete application and the required fee upon a finding that the applicant has met all requirements of this chapter. The city shall notify the applicant in writing of any special conditions or limitations placed on the license which the city deems necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare which are required by this chapter.

(2) Denial, Revocation, or Suspension of License. The city may deny, suspend or revoke a business license upon finding that:

(a) The licensee fails to meet the requirements of, or is doing business in violation of, any law or requirement of this chapter; or

(b) The applicant has provided false or misleading material information, or has omitted disclosure of a material fact on the application, related materials, or license; or

(c) The applicant’s past or present violation of a law or ordinance presents a reasonable doubt about their ability to perform the licensed activity without endangering property or the public health or safety; or

(d) The information given on the application does not indicate that the applicant has the special knowledge or skill required to perform the licensed activity; or

(e) There is reason to believe that the licensed activity would endanger property or the public health or safety.

(3) Notice. The city shall provide written notice to the applicant or licensee of a denial, suspension or revocation. The notice shall state the reason for the action taken and shall inform the applicant of the right to appeal under MCMC 5.05.090. The notice shall be given at least 15 days before the revocation becomes effective. If the violation ends within the 15 days, the city may discontinue the revocation proceedings.

(4) Summary Suspension. Upon determining that a licensed activity or device represents an immediate danger to persons or property, the city may summarily suspend the license for the activity. The suspension takes effect immediately upon notice of the suspension being received by the licensee, or being delivered to the licensee’s business address as stated on the licensee’s application for the license being suspended. Such notice shall state the reason for the suspension and inform the licensee of the provision for appeal under MCMC 5.05.090. Within 10 days of a summary suspension the city council shall review the pertinent facts which resulted in the suspension and shall determine whether said facts deem it necessary to continue the suspension in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Myrtle Creek, or to otherwise ensure that the requirements of this chapter are complied with. The city council may continue suspension as long as the reason for the suspension exists or until a determination on appeal regarding the suspension is made under MCMC 5.05.090. [Ord. 729 § 8, 2003].


5.05.090 Appeal.

In the event an applicant for a license under this chapter is denied such license, or in the event a license is suspended or revoked, the applicant or license holder shall have the right of appeal. A written notice of appeal to the city council shall be filed with the city within 15 days after the denial of the license or license suspension or revocation. The city council shall hear and make a determination in regards to the appeal within 10 days of the filing of the notice of appeal. The decision of the city council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. [Ord. 729 § 9, 2003].


5.05.100 Disclaimers, exceptions and general requirements.

(1) Disclaimers and Exceptions. The collection of a license fee upon any business shall not be construed to be a license or permit by the city to the person engaged therein in the event such business be unlawful, illegal or prohibited by the laws of the state of Oregon or the United States, or the ordinances of the city of Myrtle Creek. Nothing herein contained shall be taken or construed to vest any right in any license as a contract obligation on the part of the city. Business license fees, as set by resolution of the city council, may be increased or decreased at any time by the city council. No person having paid the fee required, and having made application for a business license, shall be entitled to any refund.

(2) General License Requirements. In addition to any other requirement of this chapter, each licensee shall:

(a) Conform to all federal, state and local laws and regulations, the provisions of this chapter, and any rules adopted hereunder.

(b) Notify the city within 10 days of any change in material information contained in the application, related materials, or license.

(c) Display a business license upon request to any person with whom they are dealing as part of the licensed activity or to an officer or employee of the city.

(d) Display a business license at all times in a public place. [Ord. 729 § 10, 2003].


5.05.110 Special requirements.

(1) Security Services, Merchant Police and Similar Businesses. The owner, and the applicant if different than the owner, of any private security service, merchant police or similar business, and every individual employed by the licensed business who will be working in the city of Myrtle Creek, shall agree to a complete background check by the chief of police to determine their qualification and reliability. The city may require a bond and such insurance as may be deemed proper. The license shall be issued only upon the police chief’s approval of each person involved, such approval to be based on the complete background check.

(2) Peddlers and Solicitors. The applicant shall supply all business information as required by all business operations; and period of operations within the city; and identify all vehicles used together with license number or other means of identification; and the names, addresses, dates of birth, and any other pertinent information regarding each individual intending to take part in the solicitation or peddling at the time of application.

Each individual peddler and/or solicitor shall submit the appropriate fee as required in the Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges and agree to a complete background check by the chief of police to determine the qualifications and reliability of the individual. The city may require a bond and such insurance as may be deemed proper. The license shall be issued only upon the police chief’s approval of each person involved, such approval to be based on an individual’s complete application and background check.

Any applicant for peddler or solicitor business license shall deposit with the city recorder a cash or surety bond in the sum of $5,000 or an amount equal to 10 percent of estimated annual city sales, whichever is greater. Any person aggrieved by an action of any peddler shall have a right of action on the bond for the recovery of money or damages or both. Such bond shall remain on deposit for a period of 90 days after the expiration of such license, unless sooner released by the city council.

(3) Nonprofit Organizations. A nonprofit organization which will conduct any type of business within the city on a continuous basis throughout the year, regardless of whether such business is open to the general public, shall make application to the city for the license to carry on the activity for the current fiscal year. After once issued, the licensed activity is subject to all the provisions of this chapter, except that such nonprofit organization will not be required to pay the license fee. [Ord. 729 § 11, 2003].


5.05.120 Violations and penalties.

(1) Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $250.00 for any one offense, each day constituting a separate offense.

(2) Inspection and Right of Entry. Whenever they shall have cause to suspect a violation of any provisions of this chapter, or when necessary to investigate an application for, or revocation of, a license under any of the procedures prescribed in this chapter, officials responsible for enforcement or administration of this chapter, or their duly authorized representatives, may enter on any site, or into any structure, for the purpose of investigation providing they do so in a reasonable manner. No secured building shall be entered without the consent of the owner or occupant unless under authority of a lawful warrant.

(3) Abatement. Any business which is established, operated, moved, altered, enlarged or maintained contrary to the licensing requirements shall be, and is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance, and may be abated as such.

(4) Legal Proceedings by City Attorney. In addition to the enforcement provision of this chapter, upon request by the city council, the city attorney may institute any additional proceedings, including, but not limited to, seeking injunctive relief to enforce the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 729 § 12, 2003].


Chapter 5.10 SOCIAL GAMING

Sections:

5.10.010    Social games permitted.

5.10.020    Definitions.

5.10.030    License required for social games.

5.10.040    Application for license and investigation.

5.10.050    Application renewal.

5.10.060    License fee.

5.10.070    Standards for issuance of license.

5.10.080    License not transferable.

5.10.090    Responsibilities of licensee.

5.10.100    Terms of license.

5.10.110    Revocation of license.

5.10.120    Suspension of license.

5.10.130    Penalties.


5.10.010 Social games permitted.

Social games, other than a lottery, between players in a private business, private club or in a place of public accommodation where no house player, house bank or house odds exist and there is no house take (meaning no house income from the operation of the social game), are hereby permitted as provided herein. [Ord. 748 § 1, 2006].


5.10.020 Definitions.

Unless the context requires otherwise, all terms set forth in this chapter shall have the same meaning as set forth in ORS 167.117. [Ord. 748 § 2, 2006].


5.10.030 License required for social games.

Any person(s), business, private club, nonprofit organization or place of public accommodation desiring to permit members, patrons or invitees to engage in any social game within the city of Myrtle Creek shall acquire and maintain a valid license from the city. Licenses shall be granted only upon application to the city and upon approval by the city administrator. [Ord. 748 § 3, 2006].


5.10.040 Application for license and investigation.

Before a license for social gaming may be granted by the city administrator, an applicant must submit an application for a license to the city administrator with the following information and allow an investigation to be made thereon. A completed application form must include the true names, dates of birth, and addresses of all persons financially interested in the business and all persons who are on the board of directors of or hold offices in the entity or organization. The term “persons financially interested in the business” shall include all persons who share in the profits of the business where the social gaming activity is located, on the basis of gross or net revenue, including landlords, lessors, lessees, and the owners of the building, fixtures or equipment used in the social game. The application shall also include all names, dates of birth, and addresses of any tournament sponsors if different from persons financially interested in the business. [Ord. 748 § 4, 2006].


5.10.050 Application renewal.

The grantee of a social gaming license must notify the city administrator within 10 days of any change in persons financially interested in the business or in the names of any persons who are either on the board of directors of or hold offices in the entity or organization and request a renewal of its license. At the time of such request, the applicant shall submit the information required by MCMC 5.10.040. [Ord. 748 § 5, 2006].


5.10.060 License fee.

For each business or other entity or organization licensed, a $100.00 fee shall be required upon each application for issuance of a license and each license renewal. The city council may modify this fee at any time. [Ord. 748 § 6, 2006].


5.10.070 Standards for issuance of license.

The city administrator shall either approve the application and grant the license applied for, or deny the application and refuse to grant the license. The license shall not be granted, or it shall be temporarily revoked or suspended, if any applicant or any person(s) financially interested in the business, entity or organization have:

(1) Supplied any false or misleading information in the application or omitted any requested information from the application;

(2) Pleaded no contest to or been convicted of any felony within the last 10 years;

(3) Had a license in his/her name which was revoked or suspended three times by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission, either of which was in the last five years;

(4) Been convicted and is currently on parole for any crime involving or related to gambling;

(5) Had two or more convictions within five years for gambling-related activities; or

(6) Violated any provision of this chapter. [Ord. 748 § 7, 2006].


5.10.080 License not transferable.

No license shall be assigned or transferred; any such attempt shall void the license. [Ord. 748 § 8, 2006].


5.10.090 Responsibilities of licensee.

It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to ensure that:

(1) No form of unlawful gambling is permitted upon the licensed premises.

(2) Social games are conducted consistent with the provisions of state law, city ordinances and this section.

(3) There shall be no house player, house bank or house odds, and there shall be no house income from the operation of the social game.

(4) There are no off-premises signs advertising gambling, card playing, or social games.

(5) No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to participate in a social game.

(6) No charge shall be collected from a player for the privilege of participating in a game.

(7) No participant in a social game shall be charged a price for any consumer goods which is higher or lower than the price charged nonparticipants.

(8) The rules for the social games and the social gaming licenses are posted in a conspicuous place near the area where the games are being played.

(9) The room or enclosure where the social games take place is open to free and immediate access by law enforcement officers. Doors leading into the room or enclosure remain unlocked during all hours of operation.

(10) No social game is conducted between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. [Ord. 748 § 9, 2006].


5.10.100 Terms of license.

All licenses issued hereunder shall be for a period of up to one year and shall be renewed on the first business day of January of each year. Licenses are nontransferable and must be reapplied for at least 30 days prior to the renewal date each year accompanied by the appropriate fee. All persons securing a license after the first business day of January each year shall be required to pay the total annual fee of $100.00. All renewals shall be approved by the city administrator. [Ord. 748 § 10, 2006].


5.10.110 Revocation of license.

A license is subject to revocation at any time for violation of this chapter or any of the provisions of state law related to gambling. If at any time facts arise or become known to the city administrator which are sufficient to show violation of this chapter or state law, the city administrator shall notify the licensee in writing that the license is to be revoked and that all social gaming activities must cease within 15 days. The violations need not lead to a conviction, but must establish a reasonable doubt about the licensee’s ability to perform the licensed activity without danger to property or public health or safety. The notice of revocation shall state the reason for the revocation, set a period of no less than 30 days before social gaming activities can recommence and inform the licensee of the procedures for filing an appeal. [Ord. 748 § 11, 2006].


5.10.120 Suspension of license.

Upon determining that a licensed activity presents an immediate danger to persons or property, the city administrator may suspend the license for the activity. The suspension shall take effect immediately on notice being received by the licensee, or being delivered to the licensee’s business address as stated on the licensee’s application for the license that is being suspended. The notice shall be mailed to the licensee and state the reason for the suspension and inform the licensee of the procedures for filing an appeal. The city administrator may continue the suspension for as long as the reason for the suspension exists or until a decision by the appellate authority on an appeal regarding the suspension concludes the matter. [Ord. 748 § 12, 2006].


5.10.130 Penalties.

In addition to the suspension or revocation of any license hereunder, any licensee, firm, corporation, association or person(s) associated with the licensee who violates any provision of this chapter may, upon conviction, be fined in the amount not to exceed $500.00 for each violation. Each day that a violation is permitted to occur is considered a separate violation. [Ord. 748 § 13, 2006].


Chapter 5.15 TAXICABS

Sections:

5.15.010    License required.

5.15.020    Taxi service – Responsibilities of owner.

5.15.030    Taxicab drivers – Certification required.

5.15.040    Taxicab service – Responsibilities of driver.

5.15.050    Penalty.


5.15.010 License required.

It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on the occupation of taxi service within the corporate limits of the city of Myrtle Creek until such person shall have secured a license authorizing such person to engage in and carry on such occupation. Such license shall be issued by the chief of police. [Ord. 574 § 1, 1988].


5.15.020 Taxi service – Responsibilities of owner.

(1) An owner shall:

(a) Obtain $300,000 in combined single limit (for bodily injury and property damage) liability insurance and obtain by January 1, 1989, increased coverage to $500,000.

(b) Within three months of beginning operation within the city, shall qualify for and offer service through the Douglas County taxi ticket program.

(c) Issue to each driver in his/her employ an identification card with the driver’s photograph, name in printed form and signature, and the owner’s business name, address and telephone number and retrieve the identification card from the driver immediately upon termination of employment.

(d) Conspicuously display in each vehicle a schedule of rates for service in a manner that can be easily read from both inside and outside the vehicle. The schedule shall be printed in machine lettering not less than one-quarter-inch high on cards not less than four inches by six inches.

(e) Maintain all vehicles according to manufacturer’s instructions.

(f) Maintain for a period of three years complete maintenance records for each vehicle, and make the records and the vehicles available for inspection by the city upon request.

(g) Maintain records on each driver during the term of employment and for six months thereafter. Each record shall contain the driver’s:

(i) Name and aliases.

(ii) Current and prior three addresses (for the past five years).

(iii) Physical description.

(iv) Date of birth.

(v) Oregon driver’s license number.

(h) Equip each vehicle with an ABC-rated fire extinguisher.

(i) Comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.

(j) Employ as drivers only those persons who hold a valid taxi driver certification card issued by the city.

(k) Report to the city in writing within seven days any known or suspected conviction of a driver for any felony or misdemeanor described in MCMC 5.15.030.

(l) Not permit any driver to operate a vehicle unless the driver’s identification card is displayed in full view of the passenger compartment.

(2) An owner shall be strictly liable for any violations of this chapter committed by an agent or employee.

(3) A taxicab owner shall:

(a) Prominently display on the exterior of each taxicab the word “taxi” or “taxicab,” and the business name under which the taxicab operates.

(b) If a taximeter is used to calculate the taxicab fare:

(i) Place and illuminate the taximeter so that its numbers are visible from the passenger compartment; and

(ii) Keep the taximeter accurate.

(c) If zones are used to calculate taxicab fare, maintain in the passenger compartment a map of the area on which each zone is delineated and on which rates are printed in machine lettering. [Ord. 574 § 2, 1988].


5.15.030 Taxicab drivers – Certification required.

(1) No person shall act or be employed as a driver without first obtaining a taxi certification card issued by the police chief.

(2) The police chief may issue a taxi certification card upon finding that the applicant:

(a) Has a valid Oregon Class I, II, III and IV license.

(b) Has not been convicted of a crime or offense involving burglary, theft, narcotics, assault, robbery, kidnapping, homicide, harassment, vice, a major traffic crime or a sex related offense:

(i) If a felony, within the preceding five years.

(ii) If a misdemeanor, within the preceding two years.

(3) A taxi certification card shall be valid from the date of issuance to the date of employment termination. [Ord. 574 § 3, 1988].


5.15.040 Taxicab service – Responsibilities of driver.

(1) A driver shall:

(a) Obtain and maintain a valid license from the city.

(b) Not commit any offense described in MCMC 5.15.030.

(c) Report to the city in writing within seven days any convictions for a felony or misdemeanor offense described in MCMC 5.15.030.

(d) Have his/her certification card in his/her possession while on duty.

(e) Not operate a vehicle unless an identification card with the driver’s photograph, name in print form and signature, and the owner’s business name, address and telephone number is displayed in full view of the passenger compartment.

(f) Deduct any charges for the time of delay in the event a vehicle becomes disabled or breaks down while conveying a passenger or baggage.

(g) Take the most direct route possible that will carry the passenger safely and expeditiously to his/her requested destination unless otherwise requested.

(h) Upon request by the passenger present a receipt of services provided.

(i) Comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.

(2) Violations of MCMC 5.15.020, 5.15.030 or this section shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of a certification card. [Ord. 574 § 4, 1988].


5.15.050 Penalty.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00. Each day’s violation constitutes a separate offense. [Ord. 574 § 5, 1988].


Chapter 5.20 TOBACCO VENDING MACHINES

Sections:

5.20.010    Purpose.

5.20.020    Title.

5.20.030    Definitions.

5.20.040    Tobacco vending machines prohibited.

5.20.050    Exceptions.

5.20.060    Affirmative defense.

5.20.070    Penalties.


5.20.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health and welfare of the citizens of the city of Myrtle Creek by limiting the availability of cigarettes and tobacco products to children under the age of 18 years, through the means of restricting the placing of vending machines dispensing cigarettes or tobacco products. [Ord. 604 § 1, 1991].


5.20.020 Title.

This chapter shall be known and cited as the “city of Myrtle Creek tobacco vending machine ordinance.” [Ord. 604 § 2, 1991].


5.20.030 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, certain words, terms and phrases are defined as follows:

“Accessible to persons under the age of 18 years” means, in reference to premises, that no prohibition exists to the entry upon premises, or a discrete portion of premises, by persons who have not attained the age of 18 years.

“Cigarette” has the meaning set out in ORS 323.010(1).

“Tobacco products” has the meaning set out in ORS 323.500(14).

“Tobacco vending machine” means any self-service device offered for public use which, upon insertion of a coin, coins, currency or token, or by other means, dispenses cigarettes or any tobacco product, either in bulk or package, without the necessity of replenishing the device between each vending operation. [Amended during 2012 recodification; Ord. 604 § 3, 1991].


5.20.040 Tobacco vending machines prohibited.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person in possession of any premises located within the city of Myrtle Creek to place or allow to be placed on such premises any tobacco vending machine.

(2) It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or controls a tobacco vending machine to place or allow to be placed such tobacco vending machine on the premises within the city of Myrtle Creek. [Ord. 604 § 4, 1991].


5.20.050 Exceptions.

The prohibition of MCMC 5.20.040 shall not apply to premises or to tobacco vending machines on premises that are:

(1) Licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages and that persons under the age of 18 are prohibited from entering.

(2) Licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission as a retail liquor store.

(3) Maintained for the use of employees and not open to the public.

(4) Not accessible to persons under the age of 18 years.

(5) Configured in a way that will allow a blind person, as that term is defined in ORS 346.110(3), who has training and skills that enable the blind person to determine if a person obtaining cigarettes or any tobacco product from a tobacco vending machine is under 18 years of age, and which blind person is in control of the tobacco vending machine. [Ord. 604 § 5, 1991].


5.20.060 Affirmative defense.

In any prosecution for violation of MCMC 5.20.040 it shall be an affirmative defense that the premises are not accessible to persons who are under 18 years of age. [Ord. 604 § 6, 1991].


5.20.070 Penalties.

Violation of MCMC 5.20.040 is an infraction punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more than $500.00 for a noncontinuing offense and a fine of not more than $1,000 for a continuing offense. [Ord. 604 § 7, 1991].


Chapter 5.25 RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA TAX

Sections:

5.25.005    Purpose.

5.25.010    Definitions.

5.25.020    Tax imposed.

5.25.030    Deductions.

5.25.040    Seller responsible for payment of tax.

5.25.050    Penalties and interest.

5.25.060    Failure to report and remit tax – Determination of tax by director.

5.25.070    Appeals.

5.25.080    Refunds.

5.25.090    Actions to collect.

5.25.100    Violations.

5.25.110    Confidentiality.

5.25.120    Audit of books, records or persons.

5.25.130    Forms and regulations.


5.25.005 Purpose.

For the purposes of this chapter, every person who sells marijuana items in the city of Myrtle Creek is exercising a taxable privilege. The tax shall be imposed upon the sale of marijuana items by a marijuana retailer regulated under Chapter 1, Oregon Laws 2015 (Measure 91), as amended by Section 1, Chapter 614 Oregon Laws 2015 (HB 3400); but shall not be imposed on marijuana sold by medical marijuana dispensaries registered under ORS 475B.450. [Ord. 806 § 1, 2016].


5.25.010 Definitions.

When not clearly otherwise indicated by the context, the following words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

“Director” means the finance director for the city of Myrtle Creek or his/her designee.

“Gross taxable sale(s)” means the total amount received in money, credits, property and/or other consideration from sales of marijuana items.

“Marijuana item(s)” has the meaning assigned to such term under Section 5, Chapter 1, Oregon Law 2015 (Measure 91), as amended by Section 1, Chapter 614, Oregon Laws 2015 (HB 3400).

“Marijuana retailer(s) or seller(s)” means a person who sells marijuana items to a consumer in this state and who holds a license under Section 22, Chapter 1, Oregon Laws 2015 (Measure 91).

“Person” means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or any group or combination acting as a unit, including the United States of America, the state of Oregon and any political subdivision thereof, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

“Purchase or sale” means the acquisition or furnishing of marijuana items for consideration by any person within the city.

“Tax” means either the tax payable by the seller or the aggregate amount of taxes due from a seller during the period for which the seller is required to report collections under this chapter.

“Taxpayer” means any person obligated to account to the finance director for taxes collected or to be collected, or from whom a tax is due, under the terms of this chapter. [Ord. 806 § 1, 2016].


5.25.020 Tax imposed.

To the fullest extent permitted under Section 34a, Chapter 614, Oregon Laws 2015 (HB 3400), there is hereby levied a tax which shall be paid by every marijuana retailer exercising the taxable privilege of selling marijuana items. The amount of tax levied shall be three percent of the gross sales of the marijuana retailer in the area subject to the city’s jurisdiction. The seller shall collect the tax at the point of sale of a marijuana item. Subject to applicable law, the tax rate may be adjusted from time to time by council resolution. [Ord. 806 § 1, 2016].


5.25.030 Deductions.

The following deductions shall be allowed against sales received by the seller providing marijuana:

(1) Refunds of sales actually returned to any purchaser;

(2) Any adjustments in sales which amount to a refund to a purchaser, providing such adjustment pertains to the actual sale of marijuana and does not include any adjustments for other services furnished by a seller. [Ord. 806 § 1, 2016].


5.25.040 Seller responsible for payment of tax.

(1) Every seller shall, on or before the last day of the month following the end of each calendar quarter (in the months of April, July, October and January) make a return to the director, on forms provided by the city, specifying the total sales subject to this chapter and the amount of tax collected under this chapter. The seller may request or the director may establish shorter reporting periods for any seller if the seller or director deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and the director may require further information in the return relevant to payment of the tax. A return shall not be considered filed until it is actually received by the director.

(2) At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the director. Payments received by the director for application against existing liabilities will be credited toward the period designated by the taxpayer under conditions that are not prejudicial to the interest of the city. A condition considered prejudicial is the imminent expiration of the statute of limitations for a period or periods.

(3) Nondesignated payments shall be applied in the order of the oldest liability first, with the payment credited first toward any accrued penalty, then to interest, then to the underlying tax until the payment is exhausted. Crediting of a payment toward a specific reporting period will be first applied against any accrued penalty, then to interest, then to the underlying tax. If the director, in his or her sole discretion, determines that an alternative order of payment application would be in the best interest of the city in a particular tax or factual situation, the director may order such a change. The director may establish shorter reporting periods for any seller if the director deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax. The director also may require additional information in the return relevant to payment of the liability. When a shorter return period is required, penalties and interest shall be computed according to the shorter return period. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by sellers pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment is made to the director. A separate trust bank account is not required in order to comply with this provision.

(4) Every seller required to remit the tax imposed in this chapter shall be entitled to retain five percent of all taxes due to defray the costs of bookkeeping and remittance.

(5) Every seller must keep and preserve in an accounting format established by the director records of all sales made by the dispensary and such other books or accounts as may be required by the director. Every seller must keep and preserve for a period of three years all such books, invoices and other records. The director shall have the right to inspect all such records at all reasonable times. [Ord. 806 § 1, 2016].


5.25.050 Penalties and interest.

(1) Interest shall be added to the overall tax amount due at the same rate established under ORS 305.220 for each month, or fraction of a month, from the time the return to the Oregon Department of Revenue was originally required to be filed by the marijuana retailer to the time of payment.

(2) If a marijuana retailer fails to file a return with the Oregon Department of Revenue or pay the tax as required, a penalty shall be imposed upon the marijuana retailer in the same manner and amount provided under ORS 314.400.

(3) Every penalty imposed, and any interest that accrues, becomes a part of the financial obligation required to be paid by the marijuana retailer and remitted to the Oregon Department of Revenue.

(4) Taxes, interest and penalties transferred to the city of Myrtle Creek by the Oregon Department of Revenue will be distributed to the city’s general fund.

(5) If at any time a marijuana retailer fails to remit any amount owed in taxes, interest or penalties, the Oregon Department of Revenue is authorized to enforce collection on behalf of the city of the owed amount in accordance with ORS 475B.700 to 475B.755, any agreement between the Oregon Department of Revenue and the City of Myrtle Creek under ORS 305.620 and any applicable administrative rules adopted by the Oregon Department of Revenue. [Ord. 813 § 1, 2017; Ord. 806 § 1, 2016].


5.25.060 Failure to report and remit tax – Determination of tax by director.

If any seller should fail to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report of the tax required by this chapter, the director shall proceed in such manner as deemed best to obtain facts and information on which to base the estimate of tax due. As soon as the director shall procure such facts and information as is able to be obtained, upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any seller, the director shall proceed to determine and assess against such seller the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the director shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by having it served personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the seller so assessed at the last known place of address. Such seller may make an appeal of such determination as provided in MCMC 5.25.070. If no appeal is filed, the director’s determination is final and the amount thereby is immediately due and payable. [Ord. 806 § 1, 2016].


5.25.070 Appeals.

Any seller aggrieved by any decision of the director with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the city administrator. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. [Ord. 806 § 1, 2016].


5.25.080 Refunds.

(1) Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once, or has been erroneously collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in the following subsection (2) of this section, provided a claim in writing, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the director within one year of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the director.

(2) The director shall have 20 calendar days from the date of receipt of a claim to review the claim and make a determination in writing as to the validity of the claim. The director shall notify the claimant in writing of the director’s determination. Such notice shall be mailed to the address provided by claimant on the claim form. In the event a claim is determined by the director to be a valid claim, in a manner prescribed by the director a seller may claim a refund, or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted, the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously collected or received. The seller shall notify director of claimant’s choice no later than 15 days following the date director mailed the determination. In the event claimant has not notified the director of claimant’s choice within the 15-day period and the seller is still in business, a credit will be granted against the tax liability for the next reporting period. If the seller is no longer in business, a refund check will be mailed to claimant at the address provided on the claim form.

(3) No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant established the right by written records showing entitlement to such refund and the director acknowledged the validity of the claim. [Ord. 806 § 1, 2016].


5.25.090 Actions to collect.

Any tax required to be paid by any seller under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the seller to the city. Any such tax collected by a seller which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the seller to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. In lieu of filing an action for the recovery, the city, when taxes due are more than 30 days delinquent, can submit any outstanding tax to a collection agency. So long as the city has complied with the provisions set forth in ORS 697.105, in the event the city turns over a delinquent tax account to a collection agency, it may add a reasonable fee to the amount owing, not to exceed the collection fee of the collection agency. [Ord. 806 § 1, 2016].


5.25.100 Violations.

(1) In addition to the penalties provided in MCMC 5.25.050, a violation of this chapter is an offense punishable by fine as well as imprisonment as set forth in this code. It is a violation of this chapter for any seller or other person to:

(a) Fail or refuse to comply as required herein;

(b) Fail or refuse to furnish any return required to be made;

(c) Fail or refuse to permit inspection of records;

(d) Fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the director;

(e) Render a false or fraudulent return or claim; or

(f) Fail, refuse or neglect to remit the tax to the city by the due date.

(2) The remedies provided by this chapter are not exclusive and do not prevent the city from exercising any other remedy available under the law.

(3) The remedies provided by this chapter do not prohibit or restrict the city or other appropriate prosecutor from pursuing criminal charges under state law or city ordinance. [Ord. 806 § 1, 2016].


5.25.110 Confidentiality.

Except as otherwise required by law, it shall be unlawful for the city, any officer, employee or agent to divulge, release or make known in any manner any financial information submitted or disclosed to the city under the terms of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall prohibit:

(1) The disclosure of the names and addresses of any person who is operating a licensed establishment from which marijuana is sold or provided; or

(2) The disclosure of general statistics in a form which would not reveal an individual seller’s financial information; or

(3) Presentation of evidence to a court, or other tribunal having jurisdiction in the prosecution of any criminal or civil claim by the director or an appeal from the director for any amount due the city under this chapter; or

(4) The disclosure of information when such disclosure of conditionally exempt information is ordered under public records law procedures; or

(5) The disclosure of records related to a business’ failure to report and remit the tax when the report or tax is in arrears for over six months or the tax exceeds $5,000. The city council expressly finds and determines that the public interest in disclosure of such records clearly outweighs the interest in confidentiality under ORS 192.501(5). [Ord. 806 § 1, 2016].


5.25.120 Audit of books, records or persons.

The city, for the purpose of determining the correctness of any tax return required, or for the purpose of an estimate of taxes due pursuant to this chapter, may examine or may cause to be examined by an agent or representative designated by the city for that purpose, any books, papers, records, or memoranda, including copies of seller’s state and federal income tax return, bearing upon the matter of the seller’s tax return. All books, invoices, accounts and other records shall be made available within the city limits and be open at any time during regular business hours for examination by the director or an authorized agent of the director. If any taxpayer refuses to voluntarily furnish any of the foregoing information when requested, the director may immediately seek a subpoena from the Myrtle Creek municipal court to require that the taxpayer or a representative of the taxpayer attend a hearing or produce any such books, accounts or records for examination. [Ord. 806 § 1, 2016].


5.25.130 Forms and regulations.

The director is hereby authorized to prescribe forms and promulgate rules and regulations to aid in the making of returns, the ascertainment, assessment and collection of said marijuana tax and in particular and without limiting the general language of this chapter, to provide for:

(1) A form of report on sales and purchases to be supplied to all vendors; and

(2) The records which sellers providing marijuana are to keep concerning the tax imposed by this chapter. [Ord. 806 § 1, 2016].


Title 6 ANIMALS

Chapters:

6.05    Dogs


Chapter 6.05 DOGS

Sections:

6.05.010    Title and purpose.

6.05.020    Definitions.

6.05.030    Dog licenses.

6.05.040    Impoundment procedures and fees.

6.05.050    Quarantine.

6.05.060    Sick, injured and dead dogs.

6.05.070    Running at large.

6.05.080    Public nuisance prohibited.

6.05.090    Vicious dogs.

6.05.100    Enforcement.

6.05.110    Penalties.

    Legislative history: Ords. 506 and 600.


6.05.010 Title and purpose.

(1) Short Title. This chapter shall be referred to as the city of Myrtle Creek dog control ordinance.

(2) Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a humane dog control program which will benefit both the human and animal populations. [Ord. 501 § 1, 1981].


6.05.020 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are defined as follows:

“Abandoned dog” means any dog left without proper food and water for a period of over 24 hours, or any barking dog without supervision for over a period of 24 hours.

Animal. Unless the context of the sentence expressly indicates otherwise, “animal” shall mean dog.

“Animal shelter” means facility designated or recognized by the city of Myrtle Creek for the purpose of impounding and caring for dogs; includes the terms “dog pound” or “city pound.”

“Barking dog” means a dog which persistently barks or howls, thereby creating a nuisance.

“County” means Douglas County, Oregon, and includes the Douglas County department of animal and predator control and other departments as appropriate.

“Court” means the municipal court of the city of Myrtle Creek.

“Dog” includes both male and female.

“Identification tag” means a tag supplied by Douglas County upon issuance of a dog license.

“Kennel” means a parcel of land used for breeding or boarding four or more dogs which are six months old or older.

“Leash” means any humane device constructed of rope, leather strap, chain or other sturdy material not exceeding eight feet in length, being held in the hand of a person capable of controlling the animal to which it is attached.

“Livestock” means cattle, sheep, horses, goats, swine, fowl, poultry, and any fur bearing animal bred and maintained commercially or otherwise within pens, cages and hutches.

“Owner” means any person, firm, association, or corporation who is the licensed owner of a dog, or who has a right of property in a dog, or who harbors a dog or who has it in his care, possession, custody or control or who knowingly permits a dog to remain on any premises occupied by him.

Parks. For the purpose of this chapter, the term “parks,” unless otherwise stated, shall mean Millsite Park, Evergreen Park, the RV park, and all other public parks within the city limits.

Restraint. A dog shall be considered under “restraint” if it is within the real property limits of its owner, or secured by a leash, or under the control of a responsible person.

“Running at large” means a dog, inside the corporate limits of the city of Myrtle Creek, off the premises of the owner and not under complete control by adequate restraint.

Vicious Dog. Any dog which has the propensity to bite or attack any person without provocation and the capacity to inflict serious harm on that person shall be regarded as “vicious.” It shall be presumed that any dog which has bitten a human being on two occasions without provocation is a vicious dog. [Ord. 501 § 2, 1981].


6.05.030 Dog licenses.

(1) License Required. Every person owning or keeping any dog which has a set of permanent canine teeth or is six months old, whichever comes first, shall, not later than March 1st of each year or within 30 days after he becomes owner or keeper of the dog, procure from Douglas County a license for the dog by paying to Douglas County a license fee which shall be determined by the Douglas County governing body. Douglas County may provide for dates other than March 1st for annual payment of fees.

(2) Guide Dogs.

(a) No license fee shall be required to be paid for any dog owned by a blind person who uses it as a guide. A license shall be issued for such dog upon filing with Douglas County an affidavit by the blind person showing such a dog to come within this exemption.

(b) No license fee shall be required to be paid for any dog owned and used as a guide dog by a deaf person.

(3) Identification Tag. The license tag issued by Douglas County shall be fastened by the licensee to a collar and kept on the dog at all times when not in the immediate possession of the licensee.

(4) Exceptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to dogs whose owners are nonresidents. [Ord. 501 § 3, 1981].


6.05.040 Impoundment procedures and fees.

(1) Authorization for Impoundment. When any dog is found running at large in the city of Myrtle Creek, or when a dog is a public nuisance described in MCMC 6.05.080, it shall be the duty of each and every police officer or dog control officer to impound the dog in the city pound or other suitable place or cite the owner or keeper to court or do both.

(2) Impoundment Period.

(a) Except as otherwise stated herein, all dogs taken up and impounded under this section shall be held for at least three days if the dog is without a license or identification tag and for at least five days if the dog has a license or identification tag. A reasonable effort shall be made to notify the owner of a dog before the dog is removed from impoundment.

(b) Any dog impounded for biting a person shall be held in quarantine in accordance with MCMC 6.05.050.

(c) Any dog impounded for violation of MCMC 6.05.080(6) may, in lieu of impoundment in the city pound, be immediately turned over to the Douglas County animal control authority for impoundment, testing and determination in accordance with state law.

(3) Release. If no owner appears to redeem a dog within the allotted time, the dog may be released for adoption or to the Douglas County animal control authority for disposition in accordance with state law.

(4) Redemption and Payment of Fees.

(a) If the owner appears and redeems the dog at the city of Myrtle Creek pound, he shall pay the applicable impoundment fee, in accordance with subsection (5) of this section, and also pay the expense of keeping the dog during the time it was impounded in accordance with subsection (5) of this section. If the dog is unlicensed, the owner shall also purchase a license. The dog control officer may release the dog in order that the license may be procured upon receiving assurance from the owner that a license will be purchased in accordance with MCMC 6.05.030.

(b) Except as provided in subsection (3) of this section, if no owner appears to redeem a dog within the allotted time, the dog control officer may release the dog to a responsible person upon payment of cost of keep during its impoundment in accordance with subsection (5) of this section and (i) upon receiving assurance that the person will properly care for the dog and not allow it to become a nuisance and (ii) upon receiving assurance that the person will purchase a license, if applicable. The person shall thereafter be liable as owner of the dog as provided by this chapter.

(c) Any unlicensed dog which appears to be suffering from an infectious or dangerous disease or which has been impounded for biting a person shall not be released for sale.

(5) Impoundment Fees and Costs of Keep.

(a) The impoundment fee shall not be less than $10.00 for the first impoundment and not less than $30.00 for each subsequent impoundment.

(b) The expense of keeping any dog during the time it is impounded at the city pound shall be charged at a rate of $2.50 per day.

(6) Disposal by Owner. Any dog given to the dog control officer by the owner for disposal may be immediately turned over to the Douglas County animal shelter to be destroyed or, in the alternative, sold to any person. Dogs specifically requested by the owner to be destroyed shall be destroyed and a fee of $3.50 shall be charged by the city of Myrtle Creek for the disposition of such animal. [Ord. 501 § 4, 1981].


6.05.050 Quarantine.

(1) Notice of Quarantine. When either the dog control officer or the departments of public health and sanitation or public safety of Douglas County has grounds to suspect that a dog is infected with the disease of rabies, there shall be delivered to the owner of the dog a written notice thereof. The owner shall thereupon be required to quarantine the dog for 10 days. The biting of any person by the dog shall constitute adequate grounds for suspecting the dog to be infected. The delivery of the notice to a member of the owner’s family 14 years of age or older at the premises where the dog is kept or at the owner’s usual place of abode shall be considered a delivery of the notice to the owner. Any dog required to be quarantined shall be confined as follows:

(a) On the owner’s premises in such a manner as to prevent it from being in contact with any other animal or person; or

(b) At the owner’s expense in a veterinary hospital, the Douglas County humane society, or a kennel approved by either the department of health and sanitation or the dog control officer.

(2) Any dog that has been bitten by a dog or other animal proved to be rabid shall be adequate grounds for suspecting the dog to be rabid and the dog shall be quarantined per subsection (1) of this section.

(3) If a dog exhibits symptoms of rabies while it is under quarantine, the director of public health may order in writing that it be destroyed and that its head be submitted to the Oregon State Health Laboratory. [Ord. 501 § 5, 1981].


6.05.060 Sick, injured and dead dogs.

(1) Sick or Injured Dogs. Any sick or injured dog found by a peace officer or dog control officer off the premises of its owner may, at the officer’s discretion, be delivered to its owner or impounded. Any such dog for which the owner is either unknown or cannot be reached after reasonable attempts to do so may be immediately delivered to the Douglas County animal control authority for impoundment in accordance with state law. The Douglas County animal control authority shall determine whether:

(a) The dog is so severely injured or incurably crippled that the humane thing to do would be to destroy the dog; or

(b) Any police officer or dog control officer may humanely destroy any dog too severely injured to move and not on the property of its owner, when the owner is either unknown or cannot be reached after reasonable attempts to do so.

(2) Removal of Carcass. No person shall knowingly permit a dog carcass owned by him to remain on public property or to be exposed on private property. Such carcass shall be removed and properly disposed of within 24 hours. [Ord. 501 § 6, 1981].


6.05.070 Running at large.

(1) Running at Large Prohibited.

(a) Dogs are hereby prohibited from running at large within the corporate limits of the city of Myrtle Creek.

(b) As used in this section, running at large does not include:

(i) Use to control or protect livestock or use in other related agricultural activities; or

(ii) In obedience or field training exercise under the direct supervision of a handler.

(2) Violation. Any person who is owner or who has control or possession of a dog that is, or has been, running at large is guilty of a violation of this section if he permits or causes the dog to run at large in the city of Myrtle Creek. [Ord. 501 § 7, 1981].


6.05.080 Public nuisance prohibited.

(1) Public Nuisance Defined. A dog is a public nuisance if it:

(a) Bites a person;

(b) Chases vehicles or persons;

(c) Damages or destroys property of persons other than the owner of the dog;

(d) Soils, defiles or defecates on private property other than the owner’s or on public walks and recreation areas unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the owner;

(e) Scatters garbage;

(f) Causes unsanitary, dangerous or offensive conditions;

(g) Trespasses on private property of persons other than the owner of the dog;

(h) Molests, attacks or interferes with persons or other domestic animals on public property;

(i) Disturbs any person by frequent or prolonged noises;

(j) Is a female in heat and running at large; or

(k) Is not under complete control of an adequate leash while in the parks.

(2) Violation. The owner or keeper of a dog in the corporate limits of the city of Myrtle Creek shall not allow his dog to be a public nuisance under subsection (1) of this section.

(3) Complaint. Any person who has cause to believe a dog is being maintained as a public nuisance may complain, either orally or in writing, to the city of Myrtle Creek police department. The complaint shall be considered sufficient cause for the dog control officer or other police officer to investigate the matter and determine if the owner or keeper of the dog is in violation of subsection (1) of this section.

(4) Owner May Forfeit Bail. A citation issued for violation of this section shall give the person cited the option of forfeiture of bail in lieu of appearance in court.

(5) Exception. A dog shall not be considered a public nuisance under this section or destroyed under MCMC 6.05.040 if he bites a person wrongfully assaulting the dog or the dog’s owner or if he bites a person trespassing upon premises occupied by the dog’s owner after being provoked by that person.

Dogs may be allowed in parks on special occasions with the written approval of the city administrator.

(6) Dog that Kills or Injures Livestock. ORS 609.140 through 609.190 are hereby adopted by reference to provide for dogs which are suspected of killing or injuring livestock. [Ord. 501 § 8, 1981].


6.05.090 Vicious dogs.

(1) Keeping of Vicious Dogs Prohibited. No person shall own a vicious dog.

(2) Impoundment. A vicious dog may be impounded by any police officer or dog control officer and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this chapter for the impoundment and disposition of dogs.

(3) Authorization to Destroy. A vicious dog running at large, which, because of its disposition or diseased condition, is too hazardous to apprehend, may be destroyed by a police officer, dog control officer, or by a person acting in defense of himself, his family, or another person.

(4) Appeal. A dog owner whose dog is impounded as a vicious dog under the provisions of this section, believing himself aggrieved by the seizure and impounding of the dog, may apply to the municipal judge for the release of his dog, and the municipal judge shall thereupon set a time and place for hearing the application and notify the impounding officer, and upon a summary hearing the municipal judge shall have full power to determine whether the dog has been wrongfully impounded and whether it shall be returned to its owner, and upon what terms. [Ord. 501 § 9, 1981].


6.05.100 Enforcement.

(1) The chief of police is hereby designated as the animal control authority and is directed to take all steps necessary to enforce this chapter. Upon reasonable complaint by any person, the chief of police is hereby authorized and directed to determine the ownership of any animal found running at large. Where a violation of this chapter is determined to have occurred, based on investigation, the chief of police is authorized and directed to file a complaint in the municipal court of the city of Myrtle Creek against said person found to be in violation of this chapter.

(2) Any dog control officer or any police officer shall have the privilege of entering onto private land in the course of the officer’s duties in enforcing the provisions of this chapter but such officer shall not enter into any building or dwelling without legal authorization or permission of the owner or occupant of the premises.

(3) No person shall interfere with, hinder, or molest any agent of the animal control authority in the performance of any duty as herein provided.

(4) Any person violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $250.00. [Ord. 501 § 11, 1981].


6.05.110 Penalties.

(1) Violation of MCMC 6.05.030, Dog licenses, 6.05.040, Impoundment procedures and fees, 6.05.070, Running at large, or ORS 609.169 is punishable by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $250.00.

(2) Violation of MCMC 6.05.080, Public nuisance prohibited, is punishable by a fine of not more than $25.00 for the first violation, or not more than $50.00 for each additional violation occurring within six months of the first violation. In addition to any fines, if a dog has been repeatedly found to be a public nuisance under MCMC 6.05.080, the court may order such disposition of the dog as the court considers necessary for the safety or health of the public. [Amended during 2012 recodification; Ord. 501 § 12, 1981].

 


Title 7 (Reserved)


Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY

Chapters:

8.05    Public Nuisances

8.10    Impoundment and Disposition of Discarded Vehicles

8.15    Explosives


Chapter 8.05 PUBLIC NUISANCES

Sections:

8.05.010    Definitions.

8.05.020    Nuisances affecting the public health.

8.05.030    Nuisances affecting public safety.

8.05.040    Attractive nuisances.

8.05.050    Noxious vegetation.

8.05.060    Trees.

8.05.070    Solid waste.

8.05.080    Junk.

8.05.090    Fences.

8.05.100    Defective or obstructed sidewalks.

8.05.110    Surface waters, drainage.

8.05.120    Radio and television interference.

8.05.130    Domestic animals – Domestic fowl.

8.05.140    Swine.

8.05.150    Removal of animal carcasses.

8.05.160    Notices and advertisements.

8.05.170    Unenumerated nuisances.

8.05.180    Abatement notice.

8.05.190    Abatement by person responsible.

8.05.200    Abatement by the city.

8.05.210    Assessment of cost.

8.05.220    Summary abatement.

8.05.230    Penalties.

8.05.240    Separate violations.


8.05.010 Definitions.

(1) As used in this chapter except where the context indicates otherwise, the following shall mean:

“Agent in charge of property” means any lessee, contract purchaser, or person, other than the owner, having possession or control of the property.

“City” means the city of Myrtle Creek.

“Council” means the governing body of the city.

“Nuisance” means any act prohibited by this chapter or the omission or failure to perform any act required to be performed by this chapter.

“Person” means every natural person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation.

“Person in charge of property” means an agent, occupant, lessee, contract purchaser or other person having possession or control of property or supervision of a construction project.

Person Responsible. The “person responsible” for abating a nuisance includes:

(a) The owner.

(b) The person in charge of property, as defined in this chapter or another ordinance of the city.

(c) The person who caused a nuisance, as defined in this chapter or another ordinance of the city.

“Public place” means a building, way, place or accommodation, publicly or privately owned, open and available to the general public.

“Receptacles” means cans, carts, bins, containers, drop boxes, or dumpsters used for the containment and disposal of solid waste.

“Solid waste” means discarded putrescible, nonputrescible, and recyclable materials, including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, refuse, ashes, paper, cardboard, sewage sludge, septic tank and cesspool pumpings, or other sludge, useless or discarded commercial, industrial, demolition, and construction materials, discarded or abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances and furnishings, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semi-solid wastes, dead animals, and infectious waste as defined in ORS 459.386.

(2) As used in this chapter the singular includes the plural and masculine includes the feminine. [Ord. 803, 2015; Ord. 646 § 1, 1993].


8.05.020 Nuisances affecting the public health.

No person shall cause or permit a nuisance affecting public health on property owned or controlled by the person. The following are nuisances affecting public health and may be abated as provided in this chapter.

(1) Privies. Any open vault or privy maintained within the city, except those privies used in connection with construction projects and constructed in accordance with State Health Division regulations.

(2) Debris on Private Property. All accumulations of debris, rubbish, manure and other refuse located on private property and which has not been removed within a reasonable time and which affects the health, safety or welfare of the city.

(3) Stagnant Water. Any pool of water which is without a proper inlet or outlet and which, if not controlled, will be a breeding place for mosquitoes and other similar insects.

(4) Water Pollution. The pollution of any body of water or stream or river by sewage, industrial wastes or other substances placed in or near such water in a manner that will cause harmful material to pollute the water.

(5) Food. All decayed or unwholesome food which is offered for human consumption. [Ord. 646 § 2, 1993].


8.05.030 Nuisances affecting public safety.

(1) No person shall place, leave or discard any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or similar container which has an air-tight snap lock in any place accessible to children without first removing such air-tight snap lock or the door or doors from the ice box, refrigerator or similar container.

(2) No owner or person in charge of property shall permit thereon a well, cistern, cesspool, excavation, or other hole more than four feet deep and having a width of more than six inches which is not adequately covered or fenced with a suitable protective construction. [Ord. 646 § 3, 1993].


8.05.040 Attractive nuisances.

(1) No owner or person in charge of property shall permit on the property:

(a) Unguarded machinery, equipment or other devices that are attractive, dangerous and accessible to children.

(b) Lumber, logs, pilings or other material placed or stored in a manner so as to be attractive, dangerous and accessible to children.

(2) This section does not apply to authorized construction projects with reasonable safeguards to prevent injury or death to playing children. [Ord. 646 § 4, 1993].


8.05.050 Noxious vegetation.

(1) No owner, occupant or agent in charge of improved or unimproved real property shall allow noxious vegetation on the property or upon any sidewalk abutting the property. Noxious vegetation is declared a nuisance.

(2) The owner, occupant or agent in charge of real property shall abate noxious vegetation from the property. The owner and the person in charge shall be jointly and severally liable for the cost of abatement as provided in this chapter.

(3) For the purpose of this section, “noxious vegetation” means:

(a) Vegetation that is, or is likely to become:

(i) A health hazard;

(ii) A fire hazard;

(iii) A traffic hazard, because it impairs the view of the public thoroughfare, or otherwise makes use of the thoroughfare hazardous.

(b) Poison oak and poison ivy.

(c) Blackberry bushes that cross a property line or extend into the right-of-way of a public thoroughfare.

(4) The owner or person in charge of property shall cut down or destroy noxious vegetation as often as needed to prevent it from becoming a health or fire hazard, or, in the case of weeds or other noxious vegetation, from maturing or from going to seed.

(5) The city administrator may cause to be published, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, a copy of subsection (4) of this section as a notice to all owners and persons in charge of property of the duty to keep their property free from noxious vegetation.

(6) Except to the extent that vegetation constitutes a traffic hazard because it impairs the view of the public thoroughfare, or otherwise makes use of the thoroughfare hazardous, this section shall not be construed to prohibit bushes, trees, grass and other shrubbery grown or maintained for ornamental purposes, nor shall it prohibit the growth or maintenance of any vegetation designed for food or fuel purposes. [Amended during 2012 recodification; Ord. 646 § 5, 1993].


8.05.060 Trees.

(1) No owner or person in charge of property that abuts on a street or public sidewalk shall permit trees or bushes on the property to interfere with street or sidewalk traffic. An owner or person in charge of property that abuts on a street or public sidewalk shall keep all trees and bushes on the premises, including the adjoining parking strip, trimmed so that any overhanging portions are at least eight feet above the sidewalk and at least 12 feet above the roadway.

(2) No owner or person in charge of property shall allow a dead or decaying tree to stand if it is a hazard to the public or to persons or property on or near the property. [Ord. 646 § 6, 1993].


8.05.070 Solid waste.

All persons in the city are hereby required to dispose of all perishable solid waste before the same shall have become offensive, and to dispose of all nonperishable solid waste promptly and not permit the same to accumulate on or about premises.

(1) Solid Waste Accumulation and Solid Waste Receptacles. It shall be unlawful for any person in possession, charge, or control of any dwelling, multifamily housing, manufactured home park, place of business, school, or manufacturing establishment where solid waste is created or accumulated to fail at all times to keep portable receptacles of standard type and construction, and to deposit said solid waste therein. Said receptacles shall be strong, watertight, rodent proof, insect proof, and shall have tightly fitting lids. Said receptacles with capacities pursuant to applicable franchise agreements shall be kept tightly closed at all times except when being emptied or filled, and shall be kept and maintained out of the rights-of-way when not placed out for collection. Receptacles placed for collection shall be located in a manner to provide safe, above-ground access without hazard or risk to franchisee or as to pose a hazard to pedestrians, bicycles, or motor vehicles. No person shall accumulate or store waste that is unsightly or in violation of city, county, or Oregon Department of Environmental Quality regulations.

(2) Curbside Receptacle Placement. Placement of receptacles must be within three feet of curb but shall not restrict access to bicycle lanes or sidewalks and shall not be blocked by vehicles or other items. Placement of receptacles is limited to a time period of 24 hours prior to scheduled pick-up by a franchised hauler and 24 hours after scheduled pick-up. Receptacles within alleys or unimproved city streets shall be placed to accommodate collection vehicles. [Ord. 803, 2015; Ord. 646 § 7, 1993].


8.05.080 Junk.

(1) No person shall keep junk outdoors on a street, lot or premises or in a building that is not wholly or entirely enclosed except for doors used for ingress and egress.

(2) The term “junk,” as used in this section, includes all old motor vehicles, old motor vehicle parts, abandoned automobiles, old machinery, old machinery parts, old appliances, old appliance parts, scrap iron or other scrap metal, glass, paper, lumber, wood or other waste or discarded material.

(3) This section does not apply to junk kept in an authorized junkyard or automobile wrecking yard operated in compliance with all applicable city ordinances. [Ord. 646 § 8, 1993].


8.05.090 Fences.

(1) No owner or person in charge of property shall construct or maintain any barbed-wire fence or allow barbed wire to remain as part of a fence along a sidewalk or public way or along the adjoining property line of another person, unless such wire is placed not less than six inches above the top of a board, picket or smooth wire fence when such fence is not less than six feet in height. This section shall not allow a fence, including the topmost wire, to exceed the maximum height permitted for fences as may be established in another ordinance.

(2) No owner or person in charge of property shall install, maintain or operate any electric fence along a sidewalk or public way or along the adjoining property line of another person. [Ord. 646 § 9, 1993].


8.05.100 Defective or obstructed sidewalks.

(1) No owner of property, improved or unimproved, abutting on a public sidewalk shall permit the sidewalk to deteriorate to such a condition that, because of cracks, chipping, weeds, raising up, settling, holes, covering by dirt, ice or snow, or other similar occurrences, the sidewalk becomes a hazard to persons using it.

(2) The city shall not be liable to any person for loss or injury to a person or property suffered or sustained by reason of any accident on sidewalks caused by ice, snow, encumbrances, obstruction, cracks, chipping, weeds, raising, settling, holes, covering by dirt or other similar condition. Abutting property owners shall maintain sidewalks free from such conditions and are liable for any and all injuries to persons or property arising as a result of their failure to so maintain the sidewalk. [Ord. 646 § 10, 1993].


8.05.110 Surface waters, drainage.

(1) No owner or person in charge of a building shall permit rainwater to drain from the building onto a public sidewalk or to flow across the sidewalk.

(2) The owner or person in charge of the building shall install, and maintain in a proper state of repair, adequate drainpipes or a drainage system, so that overflow water accumulating on the roof or about the building is not carried across or onto the sidewalk. [Ord. 646 § 11, 1993].


8.05.120 Radio and television interference.

(1) No person shall operate or use an electrical, mechanical or other device, apparatus, instrument or machine that causes reasonably preventable interference with radio or television reception by a radio or television receiver of good engineering design.

(2) This section does not apply to devices licensed, approved and operated under the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. [Ord. 646 § 12, 1993].


8.05.130 Domestic animals – Domestic fowl.

No person shall permit any horses, cattle or other stock animal, or any chickens, turkeys or other domestic fowl, which are owned by such person or in his possession, to run at large in the city. [Ord. 646 § 13, 1993].


8.05.140 Swine.

Except as household pets, no person shall have or keep swine within the city, except that this section shall not apply to swine being transported for commercial purpose. [Ord. 646 § 14, 1993].


8.05.150 Removal of animal carcasses.

No person shall permit any animal carcass owned by him or under his control to remain upon the public streets or on any private property for a period of time longer than is reasonably necessary to remove such carcass. [Ord. 646 § 15, 1993].


8.05.160 Notices and advertisements.

(1) No person shall affix or cause to be distributed any placard, bill, advertisement or poster upon any real or personal property, public or private, without first securing permission from the owner or person in charge of the property. This section shall not be construed as an amendment to, or a repeal of, any regulation now or hereafter adopted by the city regulating the use of, and location of, signs and advertising.

(2) This section shall not be construed to prohibit the distribution of material during any parade or public gathering. [Ord. 646 § 16, 1993].


8.05.170 Unenumerated nuisances.

(1) The acts, conditions or objects specifically enumerated and defined in this chapter are declared public nuisances and may be abated by the procedures set forth in this chapter.

(2) In addition to those nuisances specifically enumerated within this chapter, every other thing, substance or act which is determined by the city council to be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the city is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be abated as provided in this chapter. [Ord. 646 § 17, 1993].


8.05.180 Abatement notice.

(1) Upon determination by the city administrator that a nuisance as defined by this chapter exists, the city administrator shall cause a notice to be posted on the premises or at the site of the nuisance, directing the person responsible to abate the nuisance.

(2) At the time of posting, the city administrator shall cause a copy of the notice to be forwarded by registered or certified mail to the person in charge of the property at the person’s last known address.

(3) The notice to abate shall contain:

(a) A description of the property, by street address or otherwise, on which the nuisance exists.

(b) A description of the nuisance.

(c) A direction to remove the nuisance within five days from the date of the notice.

(d) A statement that, unless the nuisance is removed within the time specified, the city may abate the nuisance and the cost of abatement will be charged to the person responsible.

(e) A statement that failure to abate a nuisance may warrant imposition of a fine.

(f) A statement that the person responsible may protest the order to abate by giving notice to the city administrator within five days of the date of the notice.

(4) If the person responsible is not the owner, an additional notice shall be sent to the owner, stating that the cost of abatement not paid by the person responsible may be assessed to and become a lien on the property.

(5) Upon completion of the posting and mailing, the person posting and mailing the notice shall execute and file with the city recorder a certificate stating the date and place of the mailing and posting.

(6) An error in the name or address of the owner or person responsible shall not make the notice void, and in such a case the posted notice shall be sufficient. [Ord. 646 § 18, 1993].


8.05.190 Abatement by person responsible.

(1) Within five days after the posting and mailing of the notice, as provided in MCMC 8.05.180, the person responsible shall remove and abate the nuisance or file a protest.

(2) A person responsible, protesting that no nuisance exists, shall file with the city administrator a written statement that specifies the basis for the protest.

(3) The statement shall be referred to the city council as a part of the council’s regular agenda at its next succeeding meeting. At the time set for consideration of the abatement, the person protesting may appear and be heard by the council, and the council shall thereupon determine whether a nuisance in fact exists; and such determination shall be entered in the official minutes of the council. The council’s determination shall be required only in those cases where a written statement has been filed as provided herein.

(4) If the council determines that a nuisance in fact exists, the person responsible shall remove or abate the nuisance within five days after the council’s determination. [Ord. 646 § 19, 1993].


8.05.200 Abatement by the city.

(1) If the nuisance has not been abated by the person responsible within the time allowed, the city administrator shall cause the nuisance to be abated.

(2) Upon presentation of proper credentials, the officer charged with abatement of the nuisance may enter upon the property at reasonable times to investigate or cause the removal of a nuisance, or otherwise perform any duty imposed upon him by this chapter; provided, however, in the event that entry is not voluntarily permitted by the owner, occupant or person in charge of the property, the officer must first obtain an order from a court of competent jurisdiction allowing such entry.

(3) The city recorder shall maintain an accurate record of the expense incurred by the city in abating the nuisance, and shall include a charge of 15 percent of the expense for administrative cost. [Ord. 646 § 20, 1993].


8.05.210 Assessment of cost.

(1) The city recorder shall forward to the owner and the person responsible, by registered or certified mail, a notice stating:

(a) The total cost of abatement, including the administrative costs.

(b) That the cost as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien against the property unless paid within 30 days from the date of the notice.

(c) That if the owner or the person responsible objects to the cost of the abatement as indicated, a notice of objection may be filed with the city administrator within 10 days from the date of the notice.

(2) No sooner than 30 days after the date of the notice, the city council, in the regular course of business, shall hear and make a decision on the objections to the cost assessed.

(3) If the costs of the abatement are not paid within 30 days from the date of the notice, an assessment of the costs, as stated or as decided by the council, shall be made by resolution of the council and shall be entered in the docket of city liens. When the entry is made, it shall constitute a lien on the property from which the nuisance was removed or abated.

(4) The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street improvements are enforced, and shall bear interest at the rate of eight percent per annum. The interest shall begin to run from the date of entry of the lien in the lien docket.

(5) An error in the name of the owner or person responsible or a failure to receive the notice of the proposed assessment will not void the assessment, and it shall remain a valid lien against the property. [Ord. 646 § 21, 1993].


8.05.220 Summary abatement.

The procedure provided by this chapter is not exclusive, but is in addition to procedures provided by other ordinances. The chief of police, the fire chief or any other officer of the city may proceed summarily to abate a health or other nuisance which unmistakably exists and which imminently endangers human life or property. [Ord. 646 § 22, 1993].


8.05.230 Penalties.

A violation of a provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. [Ord. 646 § 23, 1993].


8.05.240 Separate violations.

(1) Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.

(2) The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for violation of this chapter, but is an additional remedy. The imposition of a penalty does not relieve a person of the duty to abate the nuisance. However, abatement of a nuisance within five days of notice that a nuisance exists will relieve the person responsible from the imposition of a penalty imposed by this chapter. [Ord. 646 § 24, 1993].


Chapter 8.10 IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION OF DISCARDED VEHICLES

Sections:

8.10.010    Definitions.

8.10.020    Declaration of public nuisance.

8.10.030    Prohibited action.

8.10.040    Removal from public way.

8.10.050    Removal of hazardous vehicle from public way.

8.10.060    Removal from other property.

8.10.070    Lien for towing and storing.

8.10.080    Notice prior to removal – Methods – Contents.

8.10.090    Rights and liabilities of owner.

8.10.100    Hearing to contest validity of removal and custody.

8.10.110    Exemption for vehicles under criminal investigation.

8.10.120    Disposal of vehicle.

8.10.130    Low value vehicle.

8.10.140    Public sale notice.

8.10.150    Public sale.

8.10.160    Nuisance abatement.

8.10.170    Real property owner rights.

8.10.180    Penalty.


8.10.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases are defined as follows:

“Discarded vehicle” means:

(1) A vehicle that does not have an unexpired license plate lawfully affixed to it or is in one or more of the following conditions:

(a) Inoperative.

(b) Wrecked.

(c) Dismantled or partially dismantled to the extent as to not be legally or physically operable on a public road.

(d) Abandoned.

(e) Junked.

(2) Discarded vehicles include major parts of vehicles, including but not limited to bodies, engines, transmissions and rear ends.

“Law enforcement officer” includes any authorized law enforcement officer of the city.

“Public way” means any street, road, alley, right-of-way, pedestrian way or bicycle path.

“Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn on a public highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

“Vehicle owner” means an individual, firm, corporation or unincorporated association with a claim, either individually or jointly, of ownership or an interest, legal or equitable, in a vehicle. [Ord. 656 § 1, 1994].


8.10.020 Declaration of public nuisance.

The open accumulation and storage of a discarded vehicle is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property; to promote blight, deterioration and unsightliness; to invite plundering; to create fire hazards; to constitute an attractive nuisance causing a hazard to the health and safety of minors; to create a harborage for rodents and insects; and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of a discarded vehicle on private or public property is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as provided in this chapter. [Ord. 656 § 2, 1994].


8.10.030 Prohibited action.

No person shall store or permit the storing of a discarded vehicle upon public or private property within the city for more than 72 hours unless the vehicle is completely enclosed within a building or unless it is in connection with a lawfully conducted business enterprise dealing in junked vehicles. [Ord. 656 § 3, 1994].


8.10.040 Removal from public way.

Except as authorized in MCMC 8.10.050, after providing notice as required under MCMC 8.10.080 and, if requested, after a hearing under MCMC 8.10.100, a law enforcement officer may take a discarded vehicle located upon a public way into custody and remove the vehicle. The law enforcement officer shall cause the vehicle to be appraised within a reasonable time by a person authorized to perform such appraisals by the state of Oregon. Vehicles removed and taken into custody under this section are subject to sale under MCMC 8.10.120 through 8.10.150. [Ord. 656 § 4, 1994].


8.10.050 Removal of hazardous vehicle from public way.

(1) A law enforcement officer may immediately take custody of a disabled vehicle that is on the public way and in such a location as to constitute a hazard or obstruction to vehicular or pedestrian traffic using the public way.

(2) After taking a vehicle into custody under this section, the law enforcement officer shall give notice described in MCMC 8.10.080, and, if requested by the vehicle owner, a hearing as provided for in MCMC 8.10.100 shall be given.

(3) The authority granted in this section to remove and take vehicles into custody is in addition to any authority to remove and take a vehicle into custody granted in this chapter or other ordinances of the city.

(4) The law enforcement officer acting under this section shall cause the vehicle to be appraised within a reasonable time by a person authorized to perform such appraisals by the state of Oregon.

(5) Vehicles removed and taken into custody under this section are subject to sale under MCMC 8.10.120 through 8.10.150 if not reclaimed as provided by MCMC 8.10.090. [Ord. 656 § 5, 1994].


8.10.060 Removal from other property.

(1) A law enforcement officer may take custody of and remove a disabled vehicle that is on private property or on public property other than a public way if:

(a) The person in charge of the property requests the removal; and

(b) The vehicle is parked or left standing upon the property without the express consent of the person in charge of the property.

(2) The law enforcement officer taking custody of a vehicle under this section is not required to give notice and the city is not required to provide a hearing for the vehicle owner.

(3) The authority in this section to remove and take vehicles into custody is in addition to the authority to remove and take vehicles into custody under this chapter or any other ordinance of the city.

(4) The law enforcement officer acting under this section shall cause the vehicle to be appraised within a reasonable time by a person authorized to perform such appraisals by the state of Oregon.

(5) Vehicles removed and taken into custody under this section are subject to sale and disposition under MCMC 8.10.120 through 8.10.150 if not reclaimed as provided by MCMC 8.10.090. [Ord. 656 § 6, 1994].


8.10.070 Lien for towing and storing.

(1) Except as otherwise provided by this section, a person shall have a lien on the vehicle and its contents if the person, at the request of a law enforcement officer, tows or stores a vehicle under this chapter.

(2) A lien established under this section shall be on the vehicle and its contents for the just and reasonable charges for the towing service performed, and any storage provided. The lien shall be subject to the provisions for liens under ORS 98.812(4) as now or hereafter enacted or amended. The person holding the lien may retain possession of the vehicle and its contents until the charges on which the lien is based are paid. A lien described under this section shall not attach to the contents of any vehicle taken from the public way until 15 days after the taking of the vehicle into custody. A lien under this section, which includes charges for storage, shall not exceed storage charges for a period in excess of 60 days.

(3) A person who tows any vehicle at the request of a law enforcement officer under this chapter shall provide written notice, approved by the chief of police, containing information on procedures necessary to obtain a hearing under MCMC 8.10.100. The notice shall be provided to each person who seeks to redeem the vehicle. [Amended during 2012 recodification; Ord. 656 § 7, 1994].


8.10.080 Notice prior to removal – Methods – Contents.

(1) Except when expressly authorized to the contrary, the law enforcement officer removing and taking custody of a vehicle under this chapter shall provide notice before the proposed removal and custody and shall provide an explanation of procedures available for obtaining a hearing under MCMC 8.10.100. The notice shall be given by:

(a) Affixing a citation to the vehicle with the required information; and

(b) Mailing notice, at least five days before taking the vehicle into custody, with the required information to the vehicle owner and to any lessors or security interest holders at the address of each as shown by the records of the Oregon Motor Vehicle Division. The five-day period under this section does not include holidays, Saturdays, or Sundays.

(2) The notice required by this section shall state all of the following:

(a) That the vehicle will be subject to being taken into custody and removed if the vehicle is not removed before the time set in the notice.

(b) The statute, ordinance or rule violated by the vehicle under which the vehicle will be removed.

(c) The place where the vehicle will be held in custody, if known, and the telephone number and address of the Myrtle Creek police department.

(d) That the vehicle, if taken into custody and removed, will be subject to towing and storage charges and that a lien will attach to the vehicle and its contents.

(e) That the vehicle will be sold to satisfy the costs of towing, storage, bail required or fines imposed if such are not paid.

(f) That the person receiving notice is entitled to a hearing before the vehicle is impounded to contest the proposed custody and removal if a hearing is timely requested.

(g) That the vehicle owner may also challenge the reasonableness of any towing and storage charges at the hearing.

(h) The time within which a hearing must be requested and the method for requesting the hearing.

(3) If a law enforcement officer takes custody of a vehicle under MCMC 8.10.050, the officer shall provide, by mail within 48 hours of the removal, notice to the vehicle owner and any lessors or security interest holders as shown on the records of the Oregon Motor Vehicle Division. The notice shall state: the vehicle has been taken into custody, the location of the vehicle, a description of procedures for the release of the vehicle and any other information identified in subsections (2)(b) through (h) of this section. The 48-hour period under this subsection does not include holidays, Saturdays, or Sundays. [Ord. 656 § 8, 1994].


8.10.090 Rights and liabilities of owner.

The vehicle owner, a person entitled to possession, or any person with an interest shown on the certificate of title of the vehicle taken into custody under this chapter:

(1) Is liable for all costs and expenses incurred in the removal, preservation and custody of the vehicle and its contents and for the posting of any bail or unpaid fine imposed by the municipal court for the operation of the vehicle except that a security interest holder is not liable under this subsection unless the security interest holder reclaims the vehicle.

(2) May reclaim the vehicle at any time after it is taken into custody and before the vehicle is sold or disposed of under this chapter upon presentation to the chief of police of satisfactory proof of ownership or right to possession and upon payment of the costs and expenses for which the person is liable under this section.

(3) If the vehicle is taken into custody under MCMC 8.10.040 or 8.10.050, has a right to request and have a hearing under MCMC 8.10.100.

(4) If the vehicle is sold or disposed of under this chapter, has no further right, title or claim to or interest in the vehicle or the contents of the vehicle.

(5) If the vehicle is sold under this chapter, has a right to claim the balance of the proceeds from the sale or disposition as provided in this chapter.

(6) Has no right to a hearing if the vehicle is taken into custody under MCMC 8.10.060. [Ord. 656 § 9, 1994].


8.10.100 Hearing to contest validity of removal and custody.

A person provided notice under MCMC 8.10.080 or any other person who reasonably appears to have an interest in the vehicle may request a hearing under this section to contest the validity of the removal and custody under MCMC 8.10.050 or proposed removal and custody of a vehicle under MCMC 8.10.040 by submitting a request for a hearing to the Myrtle Creek municipal court not later than five days from the mailing date of the notice. The five-day period in this section does not include holidays, Saturdays, or Sundays. The hearing under this section shall comply with the following:

(1) Unless the vehicle proposed for removal violates MCMC 8.10.050, upon receiving a request for a hearing the vehicle shall not be removed until directed by the municipal judge.

(2) A request for a hearing shall be in writing and shall state the grounds upon which the person requesting the hearing believes the custody and removal of the vehicle is not justified.

(3) Upon receipt of a request for a hearing under this section, the municipal court shall conduct the hearing within 72 hours of the receipt of the request and shall provide notice of the hearing to the person requesting the hearing and to the vehicle owners and any lessors or security interest holders shown in the records of the Oregon Motor Vehicle Division, if not the same as the person requesting the hearing. The 72-hour period in this subsection does not include holidays, Saturdays, or Sundays.

(4) If the municipal judge finds, after hearing and by substantial evidence on the record, that the custody and removal of the vehicle was:

(a) Invalid, the judge shall order the immediate release of the vehicle to the owner or person with right of possession. If the vehicle is released under this subsection, the person to whom the vehicle is released is not liable for any towing or storage charges. If the person has already paid the towing and storage charges on the vehicle, the city shall see that the person is reimbursed for the charges. New storage charges on the vehicle will not start to accrue, however, until more than 24 hours after the time the vehicle is officially released to the person under this subsection.

(b) Valid, the municipal judge shall order the vehicle to be held in custody until any fines and all towing and storage costs are paid by the party claiming the vehicle. If the vehicle has not been removed, the municipal judge shall order its removal.

(5) A person who fails to appear at a hearing under this section is not entitled to another hearing unless the person provides reasons satisfactory to the municipal judge for the person’s failure to appear.

(6) The municipal court is only required to provide one hearing under this section for each time a vehicle is taken into custody or removed by the city or proposed to do so.

(7) A hearing under this section may be used to determine the reasonableness of the charges for towing and storage of the vehicle. Towing and storage charges set by law, ordinance or rule or that comply with law, ordinance or rule are reasonable for purposes of this subsection.

(8) The municipal court shall provide a written statement of the results of the hearing held under this section to the person requesting the hearing.

(9) Hearings held under this section may be informal in nature, but the presentation of evidence at a hearing shall be consistent with the practices of the municipal court.

(10) The municipal judge shall not have participated in any determination or investigation related to taking into custody and removing the vehicle that is the subject of the hearing.

(11) Determination of the municipal judge is final and is not subject to appeal. [Ord. 656 § 10, 1994].


8.10.110 Exemption for vehicles under criminal investigation.

A vehicle being held as part of any criminal investigation is not subject to the requirements of MCMC 8.10.070 through 8.10.100; however, upon written notice to the vehicle owner that the vehicle is no longer being held as part of a criminal investigation and a failure of the owner to claim the vehicle within five days, not including holidays, Saturdays or Sundays, storage costs on the vehicle shall begin to accrue and shall constitute a lien against the vehicle and its contents until the charges upon which the lien is based are paid. Such a lien may be foreclosed in the manner provided by ORS 87.152 et seq. as now enacted or hereafter amended. [Ord. 656 § 11, 1994].


8.10.120 Disposal of vehicle.

Within two days after a vehicle has been taken into custody under this chapter, the city administrator shall determine if the city will retain custody of the vehicle and sell it as provided in MCMC 8.10.130 and 8.10.140 or if the city will release its interest in the vehicle to the person performing towing and storage services. The release of the vehicle to the person performing towing and storage services may be conditioned upon no vehicle being released to its owner without first obtaining the written permission of the municipal court or the chief of police, and upon any net proceeds from the sale of the vehicle first coming to the city for deposit with the municipal court to satisfy any unpaid bail or fines for municipal offenses involving the vehicle. Any remaining amount thereafter shall be paid to the Douglas County treasurer as provided in ORS 87.206(1). At the time the net proceeds from the sale are deposited with the city the lien claimant shall also deliver to the city the documents required by ORS 87.206(2). [Amended during 2012 recodification; Ord. 656 § 12, 1994].


8.10.130 Low value vehicle.

(1) If the vehicle taken or to be taken into custody is appraised at $750.00 or less, and if the vehicle remains unclaimed or is released by the owner and any other person having a security interest therein, 15 days after the notice is mailed under MCMC 8.10.080, the law enforcement officer shall file an affidavit with the Oregon Motor Vehicle Division describing the vehicle, including the license plates, if any, stating the location and appraised value of the vehicle and stating that the vehicle will be junked or dismantled. The city administrator may dispose of the vehicle and execute a certificate of sale without notice and public auction.

(2) The certificate of sale shall be on a form provided by the city administrator. [Ord. 656 § 13, 1994].


8.10.140 Public sale notice.

(1) If the vehicle taken or to be taken into custody is appraised at over $750.00, and if the vehicle remains unclaimed or is released by the owner and any other person having a security interest therein, 30 days after the notice is mailed under MCMC 8.10.080, the law enforcement officer shall publish a notice of sale in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The notice of sale shall state:

(a) The sale is of a discarded vehicle in the possession of the city.

(b) A description of the vehicle, including the type, make, license number, identification number, and any other information that will aid in accurately identifying the vehicle.

(c) The terms of the sale.

(d) The date, time and place of the sale.

(2) The notice of sale shall be published two times in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The first publication shall be made not less than 15 days before the date of the proposed sale, and the second shall be made not less than seven days before the date of the proposed sale. [Ord. 656 § 14, 1994].


8.10.150 Public sale.

(1) If a vehicle is appraised over $750.00, the city administrator shall hold a sale at the time and place appointed, within view of the vehicle to be sold.

(2) The vehicle shall be sold to the highest and best bidder. However, if no bids are entered, or those bids that are entered are less than the costs incurred by the city, the city administrator may enter a bid in an amount equal to the costs on behalf of the city.

(3) At the time of payment of the purchase price, the city administrator shall execute a certificate of sale in duplicate; the original shall be delivered to the purchaser and a copy filed with the city recorder.

(4) The certificate of sale shall be on a form provided by the city administrator.

(5) The notice for the sale and the sale required by this section may be given and conducted in connection with any other sale or solicitation of bids conducted by the city. [Ord. 656 § 15, 1994].


8.10.160 Nuisance abatement.

In addition to the provisions of this chapter, the nuisance declared by this chapter may be abated as provided in the city’s general nuisance ordinance as now enacted or hereafter amended. [Ord. 656 § 16, 1994].


8.10.170 Real property owner rights.

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit or abridge any right a person in charge of property has to dispose of discarded vehicles on the person’s real property. [Ord. 656 § 17, 1994].


8.10.180 Penalty.

A violation of any provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00. [Ord. 656 § 19, 1994].


Chapter 8.15 EXPLOSIVES

Sections:

8.15.010    Purpose.

8.15.020    Definitions.

8.15.030    Applicability.

8.15.040    Permit required.

8.15.050    Application for permit and renewal.

8.15.060    Consideration of application.

8.15.070    Issuance of permit.

8.15.080    Overnight storage.

8.15.090    Revocation of permit.

8.15.100    Hearing on denial or revocation of permit.

8.15.110    Inspections.

8.15.120    General applicability.

8.15.130    Operation of the vehicle.

8.15.140    Competent person to attend vehicle.

8.15.150    Parking and stopping restricted.

8.15.160    Disabled vehicles.

8.15.170    Penalty.


8.15.010 Purpose.

It is the intention of the council that this chapter shall supplement and shall be uniformly interpreted with the laws and regulations of the United States and the state of Oregon, so far as possible, to avoid an undue burden on commerce. [Ord. 261 § 1, 1959].


8.15.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter the singular includes the plural and the masculine includes the feminine and neuter. Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following words shall mean:

“Explosives” means chemical compounds, mixtures, or devices, the primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion with substantially instantaneous release of gas or heat, including but not limited to class A and class B explosives as classified by the Interstate Commerce Commission, nitro-carbo-nitrates and fireworks as defined by ORS 480.110, but excluding dangerous articles such as flammable liquids, flammable solids, compressed flammable or nonflammable gases, oxidizing materials, corrosive liquids, poisonous liquids or gases, radioactive materials, and small arms ammunition.

“Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, or association or the assignees, vendees, lessees, trustees, or receivers of any of them. [Ord. 261 § 2, 1959].


8.15.030 Applicability.

(1) Except as this chapter may conflict with the regulations, laws, and Constitution of the United States and the state of Oregon, it shall apply to interstate and intrastate commerce.

(2) This chapter shall not apply to:

(a) The armed forces of the United States or the militia of the state.

(b) The transportation of explosives by rail or by water.

(c) The use of explosives. [Ord. 261 § 3, 1959].


8.15.040 Permit required.

No person may store any explosives unless a permit is first obtained from the council. A revocable permit valid for one year may be issued by the council. [Ord. 261 § 4, 1959].


8.15.050 Application for permit and renewal.

Written application for a permit or for renewal of a permit to store explosives shall be made to the recorder on forms provided by the city. The recorder shall refer the application to the council at the next regular council meeting. [Ord. 261 § 5, 1959].


8.15.060 Consideration of application.

The council may either grant or deny the application for a permit, taking into consideration:

(1) The congestion of persons, the type of buildings, the volume of vehicular traffic, and the topography in the vicinity of the storage area.

(2) The condition and construction of the structure or magazine used or to be used for storage of explosives and the applicable fire zone regulations.

(3) The adequacy of water supply in the storage area.

(4) The American Table of Distances for Storage of Explosives, published by the Institute of Makers of Explosives, September 30, 1955.

(5) Any other factors relevant to public safety. [Ord. 261 § 6, 1959].


8.15.070 Issuance of permit.

In granting a permit, the council may limit the quantity of explosives which may be stored by the applicant and may prescribe in the permit the terms and conditions the council considers necessary for the protection of the public from the dangers of explosion. The recorder shall issue the permit as directed by the council. [Ord. 261 § 7, 1959].


8.15.080 Overnight storage.

No permit may be granted to store or keep over 50 pounds of explosives or over 500 blasting caps any place within the city between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. [Ord. 261 § 8, 1959].


8.15.090 Revocation of permit.

The council may revoke a permit:

(1) If conditions considered in granting the permit change at the storage area or in the vicinity and the public is endangered by the storage of explosives as authorized by the permit.

(2) If the permittee is convicted of a violation of this chapter.

(3) If the permittee is convicted for violation of federal or state laws or regulations relating to safety in storing and transporting explosives. [Ord. 261 § 9, 1959].


8.15.100 Hearing on denial or revocation of permit.

Before denying or revoking a permit, the council shall give written notice of its proposed action to the applicant or permittee. If, within 10 days after the date of such notice, a hearing is requested by the applicant or permittee, the council shall fix time within the next 30 days in which it shall hear the objections of the applicant or permittee to the denial or revocation of the permit. Thereafter the decision of the council shall be final. [Ord. 261 § 10, 1959].


8.15.110 Inspections.

It shall be the duty of the fire chief to enforce the provisions of this chapter relating to storage, and he shall regularly inspect buildings where explosives are stored to determine whether storage practices conform to the provisions of this chapter and the limitations imposed by the permit. [Ord. 261 § 11, 1959].


8.15.120 General applicability.

Every motor vehicle transporting explosives shall be operated in compliance with this chapter unless federal or state laws and regulations impose a greater affirmative obligation or a greater restraint, or unless compliance with this chapter would prevent full compliance with federal or state laws or regulations by persons subject thereto. [Ord. 261 § 12, 1959].


8.15.130 Operation of the vehicle.

Persons shall operate motor vehicles transporting explosives with the highest degree of care to decrease the probability of danger to life and property in the following manner.

(1) The vehicle shall not be driven into the following designated areas: in the vicinity of the Myrtle Creek School.

(2) The vehicle shall be driven only upon designated truck routes, except when delivering or receiving explosives off such truck routes, in which event the vehicle shall be driven upon a route prearranged with the chief of police to avoid, whenever possible, congested streets; heavy traffic; bus routes; viaducts; dangerous crossings; and any dwellings, buildings, or places where persons work, congregate, or assemble.

(3) Except when passing, the vehicle shall be kept at least 300 feet behind other motor vehicles transporting explosives moving in the same direction.

(4) The vehicle shall not be driven near fires of any kind burning on or near a street until passage can be made safely. [Ord. 261 § 13, 1959].


8.15.140 Competent person to attend vehicle.

When transporting explosives the vehicle shall be attended by a competent person whose primary duty is to attend the vehicle. Such person shall be within sight of and in close proximity to the vehicle and shall have on his person the appropriate keys for starting the vehicle. Vehicles are deemed unattended when left in care of a person on duty in the regular course of another business such as service station attendants, motel operators, or merchant patrolmen. The police are authorized to move unattended vehicles to a safe place, and to enter premises at any time to remove an unattended vehicle loaded with explosives. [Ord. 261 § 14, 1959].


8.15.150 Parking and stopping restricted.

(1) Except as provided in this section, no person may park a vehicle loaded with explosives in the city for any purpose, and no person may stop such a vehicle for any reason except momentarily to comply with moving traffic laws.

(2) A person may park an attended vehicle for the sole purpose of, and while physically engaged in, loading or unloading explosives from the vehicle, or changing drivers.

(3) No person may refuel a vehicle within the city except in extreme emergency and then only with enough fuel to enable it to proceed to the first refueling point beyond the city. The engine of the vehicle shall be stopped during refueling. [Ord. 261 § 15, 1959].


8.15.160 Disabled vehicles.

(1) If a vehicle transporting explosives is disabled, the driver shall immediately cause notice to be given to the police and fire departments.

(2) The fire chief shall determine whether or not the vehicle may be moved, and where it may be repaired when loaded.

(3) If the disabled vehicle is moved when loaded with explosives, it shall be moved with a police escort to a location where repairs can be made without endangering life or property.

(4) If transfer of the explosives is imperative, persons making the transfer shall employ adequate safety measures under the supervision of the fire and police departments. [Ord. 261 § 16, 1959].


8.15.170 Penalty.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by imprisonment for not to exceed 180 days, or by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or both. [Ord. 261 § 17, 1959].

 


Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE

Chapters:

9.05    Criminal Code

9.10    Burn Barrels

9.15    Abatement of Chronic Disorderly Properties


Chapter 9.05 CRIMINAL CODE

Sections:

9.05.010    Oregon Criminal Code adopted.

9.05.020    Drinking in public places.

9.05.030    Unnecessary noise.

9.05.040    Curfew for minors.

9.05.050    Discharge of weapons.

9.05.060    Storage of discarded vehicle.

9.05.070    Drug paraphernalia.

9.05.080    Fireworks.

9.05.090    Notices and advertisements.

9.05.100    Offenses outside city limits.

9.05.110    Separate violations.

9.05.120    Penalties.

9.05.130    Nuisance abatement.

9.05.140    Application of state statutes.

    Legislative history: Ord. 698.


9.05.010 Oregon Criminal Code adopted.

(1) Chapters 133, 153, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 471 and 475 ORS and ORS 480.110 through 480.165 and 480.990(5), or as amended, except for any offense classified as a felony under state law, are hereby adopted by reference. Violation of an adopted provision of those chapters is an offense against the city.

(2) The provisions of Chapter 161 ORS, or as amended, relating to defense, burden of proof, general principles of criminal liability, parties, and general principles of justification apply to offenses defined and made punishable by this chapter.

(3) Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, definitions appearing in the general definition and other particular sections of chapters adopted by subsection (1) of this section are applicable throughout this chapter. [Ord. 645 § 1, 1993].


9.05.020 Drinking in public places.

No person shall drink or consume alcoholic liquor in or on a street, alley, mall, parking lot or structure, public grounds or other public place, or in a motor vehicle in any such place, unless the place has been licensed for that purpose by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission, except that consumption of alcoholic liquor may be permitted in a park by permit issued by the city council. [Ord. 645 § 2, 1993].


9.05.030 Unnecessary noise.

No person shall create or assist in creating or permit the continuance of unreasonable noise in the city. The following enumeration of violations of this section is not exclusive but is illustrative of some unreasonable noises.

(1) Keeping an animal that, by loud and frequent continued noise, disturbs the comfort and repose of a person in the vicinity.

(2) Using an engine, thing or device that is so loaded, out of repair or operated in such a manner as to create a loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.

(3) Using a mechanical device operated by compressed air, steam or otherwise, unless the noise created by it is effectively muffled.

(4) Construction, excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of a building between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except by special permit granted by the city.

(5) Using or operating a musical instrument, radio, stereo, television, car radio or stereo, loudspeaker or sound-amplifying device, or any other similar device so loudly that it disturbs persons in its vicinity, or in a manner that makes it a public nuisance. However, on application of the city council, permits may be granted to broadcast music, news, speeches or general entertainment. [Ord. 645 § 3, 1993].


9.05.040 Curfew for minors.

(1) No minor under 18 years of age shall be on a street, highway, park, alley or other public place on Sunday through Thursday between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following morning, or on Friday and Saturday between midnight and 5:00 a.m. the following morning, unless:

(a) The minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person 21 years of age or over and authorized by the parent or by law to have custody of the minor;

(b) The minor is engaged in a lawful pursuit or activity which requires the minor’s presence upon the street, highway, park, alley or other public place; or

(c) The minor is emancipated under ORS 419B.550 through 419B.558.

(2) No parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of a minor under the age of 18 years shall permit the minor to be in violation of this section.

(3) Any police officer is authorized to take a minor violating this section into custody as provided by ORS 419C.080.

(4) No parent, guardian, or other person having legal custody of a minor taken into police custody as provided in subsection (3) of this section shall refuse to come immediately and take custody of the minor upon being notified to do so by the police.

(5) Violation of this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00. [Amended during 2012 recodification; Ord. 645 § 4, 1993].


9.05.050 Discharge of weapons.

Except at a firing range approved by the city council, no person other than a peace officer acting in the line of duty shall fire or discharge a gun or weapon, including a spring- or air-actuated pellet gun, BB gun, cross-bow, bow and arrow, slingshot, peashooter, or any weapon that propels a projectile by use of gunpowder or other explosive, jet or rocket propulsion. [Ord. 645 § 5, 1993].


9.05.060 Storage of discarded vehicle.

No person shall store or permit the storing of a discarded vehicle upon private property within the city for more than 72 hours unless the vehicle is completely enclosed within a building or unless it is in connection with a lawfully conducted business enterprise dealing in junked vehicles.

For the purposes of this section, a discarded vehicle is a vehicle that does not have an unexpired license plate lawfully affixed to it or is in one or more of the following conditions:

(1) Inoperative.

(2) Wrecked.

(3) Dismantled or partially dismantled to the extent as to not be legally or physically operable on a public road.

(4) Abandoned.

(5) Junked.

Discarded vehicles include major parts of vehicles, including, but not limited to, bodies, engines, transmissions and rear ends. [Ord. 645 § 6, 1993].


9.05.070 Drug paraphernalia.

(1) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words, terms and phrases shall mean:

Controlled Substance. ORS 475.005(6) is adopted for the purpose of defining the term “controlled substance.”

“Drug paraphernalia” means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this section. It includes, but is not limited to:

(a) Kits used or intended for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;

(b) Kits used or intended for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances;

(c) Isomerization devices used or intended for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;

(d) Testing equipment used or intended for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances;

(e) Scales and balances used or intended for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances;

(f) Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used or intended for use in cutting controlled substances;

(g) Separation gins and sifters used or intended for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana;

(h) Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used or intended for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances;

(i) Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used or intended for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances;

(j) Containers and other objects used or intended for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;

(k) Hypodermic syringes, needles, and other objects used or intended for use in injecting controlled substances into the human body;

(l) Objects used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:

(i) Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish head, or punctured metal bowls;

(ii) Water pipes;

(iii) Carburetion tubes and devices;

(iv) Smoking and carburetion masks;

(v) Roach clips. Meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand;

(vi) Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;

(vii) Chamber pipes;

(viii) Carburetor pipes;

(ix) Electric pipes;

(x) Air-driven pipes;

(xi) Chillums;

(xii) Bongs;

(xiii) Ice pipes or chillers;

(m) In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority may consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following:

(i) Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use;

(ii) The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this section;

(iii) The proximity of the object to controlled substances;

(iv) The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the objects;

(v) Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons who he knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this section; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of this section should not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use as a drug paraphernalia;

(vi) Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use;

(vii) Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use;

(viii) National and local advertising concerning its use;

(ix) The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;

(x) Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;

(xi) Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sale of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;

(xii) The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community;

(xiii) Expert testimony concerning its use.

(2) Possession of Drug Paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia, to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance except upon prescription of a licensed physician, dentist, or other person authorized to prescribe the same under the law of the state of Oregon. Any person who violates this subsection shall be fined not more than $500.00.

(3) Manufacture or Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this section. Any person who violates this subsection shall be fined not more than $750.00.

(4) Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia to a Minor. Any person 18 years of age or over who violates subsection (3) of this section by delivering drug paraphernalia to a person under 18 years of age who is at least three years his junior shall be fined not more than $1,000.

(5) Advertisement of Drug Paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects intended for use as drug paraphernalia. Any person who violates this subsection shall be fined not more than $250.00. [Ord. 645 § 7, 1993].


9.05.080 Fireworks.

The following sections of the Oregon fireworks law are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter: ORS 480.110, 480.120, 480.130, 480.140(1) and 480.150. [Ord. 645 § 8, 1993].


9.05.090 Notices and advertisements.

No person shall attach or cause to be attached a placard, bill, advertisement or poster upon real or personal property, whether public or private, without first securing permission from the owner or person in control of the property. This section shall not be construed as an amendment to, or repeal of, any city regulation of the use and location of signs. [Ord. 645 § 9, 1993].


9.05.100 Offenses outside city limits.

This chapter applies to acts committed on property owned or leased by the city that is outside the corporate limits of the city. [Ord. 645 § 10, 1993].


9.05.110 Separate violations.

When, in any city ordinance, an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or doing an act is required, or the failure to do an act is declared to be unlawful or an offense, each day a violation continues constitutes a separate offense. [Ord. 645 § 11, 1993].


9.05.120 Penalties.

Unless another section of this chapter prescribes penalties for violation of that section, violation of a provision of this chapter is otherwise punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00; except, however, that if a violation of a provision of this chapter is identical to a state statute with a lesser penalty, punishment shall be limited to the lesser penalty prescribed in state law. [Ord. 645 § 12, 1993].


9.05.130 Nuisance abatement.

No provision of this chapter shall preclude abatement of a nuisance as provided in the city’s nuisance ordinance. [Ord. 645 § 13, 1993].


9.05.140 Application of state statutes.

Provisions of the Oregon Criminal Code relating to defenses, burden of proof, general principles of criminal liability, parties, and general principles of justification apply to offenses defined and made punishable by this chapter. [Ord. 645 § 15, 1993].


Chapter 9.10 BURN BARRELS

Sections:

9.10.010    Title.

9.10.020    Purpose.

9.10.030    Definitions.

9.10.040    Prohibitions.

9.10.050    Exemptions.

9.10.060    Prohibited materials.

9.10.070    Inspection and citation.

9.10.080    Permits.

9.10.090    Penalty.

9.10.100    Severability.


9.10.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as the “Myrtle Creek burn barrel ordinance” and may be cited as such and will be referred to herein as “this chapter.” [Ord. 735 § 1, 2004].


9.10.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to promote public health, safety, and general welfare of the public and owners and occupants of open spaces and structures by prohibiting the use of burn barrels, and adopting all current restricted hours and activities for burning as set forth by the DFPA, within the city of Myrtle Creek; except as expressly allowed by this chapter or if exempted from this chapter by Oregon statute. [Ord. 824, 2019; Ord. 735 § 2, 2004].


9.10.030 Definitions.

The following definitions apply to this chapter:

“Burn barrel” means any area, container, device, pit, ring, barrel, incinerator, or structure used for the purpose of disposal by fire of any material prohibited from burning by ordinance, law, rule or regulation.

“Burn period” means that time when an “open outdoor fire” may be allowed by special fire department permit.

“Commercial open burning” means the open burning of “commercial wastes” which are materials actually generated or used by a commercial operation.

“Commercial waste” means any waste produced in any business involving the lease or sale, including wholesale and retail, of goods or services, including but not limited to housing, and means any waste produced by a governmental, educational or charitable institution; however, it does not include any waste produced in a dwelling containing four living units or less.

“Construction open burning” means the open burning of “construction wastes” which are materials actually resulting from or produced by a building or construction project.

“Demolition material” means any waste resulting from the complete or partial destruction of any manmade structure as a house, apartment, commercial building or industrial building.

“Demolition open burning” means the open burning of “demolition wastes” which are materials actually resulting from or produced by the complete or partial destruction or tearing down of any manmade structure or the clearing of any site, or land clearing for site preparation for development.

“Domestic waste” means any nonputrescible waste, consisting of combustible materials, such as paper, cardboard, yard clippings, wood or similar materials, generated in a dwelling, including the real property upon which it is situated, containing four living units or less.

“Field burning” means the burning of any grass field, grain field, pasture, rangeland, or other field by open burning or by use of mobile equipment or flaming equipment on any land or vegetation.

“Garbage” means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of food.

“Industrial open burning” means the open burning of “industrial wastes” which are materials produced as a direct result of any manufacturing or industrial process.

“Industrial waste” means any waste resulting from any process or activity of manufacturing or construction.

“Land clearing debris” means any waste generated by the removal of debris, logs, trees, brush or demolition material from any site in preparation for land improvement or construction projects.

“Open burning” means any burning conducted in such a manner that combustion air is not effectively controlled and that combustion products are not vented through a stack or chimney, including but not limited to burning conducted in open outdoor fires, common burn barrels and backyard incinerators.

“Recreation fire” as defined in Section 219 of the Oregon Uniform Fire Code for the purpose of burning of material other than rubbish where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace, barbecue grill, or barbecue pit (or other enclosure) and with a total fuel area of three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less in height for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking or similar purposes.

“Residential open burning” means the open burning of clean wood, yard trimmings and prunings which are actually generated in or around a dwelling for three or fewer family living units. Once this material is removed from the property of origin it becomes commercial waste. Such materials actually generated in or around a dwelling of more than three family living units are commercial wastes.

“Responsible person” means each person who is in ownership, control, or custody of the property on which the open burning occurs, including any tenant thereof; or who is in ownership, control, or custody of the materials which are burned; or any person who causes or allows open burning to be initiated or maintained. [Ord. 735 § 3, 2004].


9.10.040 Prohibitions.

Except as provided in MCMC 9.10.050:

(1) No person shall kindle, start, maintain or allow to be maintained any burn barrel.

(2) No person shall kindle, start, maintain or allow to be maintained a garbage fire or rubbish fire. A garbage fire or rubbish fire is an open outdoor fire in which the materials burned are ordinarily found in household garbage and trash, including but not limited to food packaging, cardboard and plastic food containers, as well as putrescible and nonputrescible materials.

(3) No person shall kindle, start, maintain or allow to be maintained the burning of:

(a) Commercial waste.

(b) Construction waste.

(c) Demolition waste.

(d) Domestic waste.

(e) Industrial waste.

(f) Fields and land clearing. [Ord. 735 § 4, 2004].


9.10.050 Exemptions.

Within the ordinary definition and understanding of said words, the following activities are specifically exempted from the prohibition in MCMC 9.10.040 and shall include but not be limited to:

(1) The outdoor burning of grass, hay, straw, or similar material, as well as commercially available residential dwelling heating fuel, wood, tree limbs, branches, leaves, trimmings, or any other woods debris.

(2) A cooking fire or other outdoor fire used for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking or similar purposes with the fire contained in a fireplace, barbecue grill, barbecue pit, or other similar enclosure specifically designed for outdoor recreation or cooking.

(3) Training fires set and maintained for fire fighting training or training fire protection personnel, provided all safety precautions required by the fire marshal are met.

(4) Emergency fire when the mayor, fire chief, or police chief declares an emergency and in accordance with conditions and restrictions deemed necessary by the fire marshal to protect public health and safety. [Ord. 735 § 5, 2004].


9.10.060 Prohibited materials.

No person may cause or allow to be initiated or maintained any open burning of any wet garbage, plastic, asbestos, wire insulation, automobile part, asphalt, petroleum product, petroleum treated material, rubber product, animal remains, or animal or vegetable material resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, or service of food or of any other material which normally emits dense smoke or noxious odors; proposed burning will not cause or contribute to significant degradation of air quality. [Ord. 735 § 6, 2004].


9.10.070 Inspection and citation.

(1) The following are listed “enforcement officers” and are hereby specifically authorized by law to make such investigations and inspections as are necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and to issue violation citations to individuals or entities to appear in the Myrtle Creek municipal court:

(a) Any city firefighter, city police officer, city code enforcement officer, city building official, city planning administrator, city administrator, city engineering manager and such other employees of the city of Myrtle Creek as are specifically identified in an order or resolution of the city council.

(2) When it may be necessary to inspect any premises to enforce the provisions of this code, any enforcement officer having reasonable cause to believe that there exists, upon a premises, a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this chapter, the enforcement officer, in accordance with administrative policy, may enter at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this chapter; provided, that if such premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such premises be unoccupied, the enforcement officer shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the enforcement officer shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry, including specifically an administrative search warrant from the municipal court. [Amended during 2012 recodification; Ord. 735 § 7, 2004].


9.10.080 Permits.

The fire chief or state fire marshal may issue, refuse, or postpone open burning permits when necessary to prevent danger to life or property from fire, notwithstanding any determination by court or city council or designated officer. [Ord. 735 § 8, 2004].


9.10.090 Penalty.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted and upon conviction of any such violation of this chapter, such person shall be punishable by a maximum fine prescribed by statute, or by imprisonment, or by both such fine and imprisonment. [Amended during 2012 recodification; Ord. 735 § 9, 2004].


9.10.100 Severability.

Open burning in compliance with the rules in this chapter does not exempt any person from any civil or criminal liability for consequences or damages resulting from such burning, nor does it exempt any person from complying with any other applicable law, ordinance, regulation, rule, permit, order, or decree of this or any other governmental entity having jurisdiction.

The sections and subsections of this chapter are severable. If any section, provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other sections, provisions, clauses or paragraphs of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable.

Nothing in this chapter authorizes or commands or shall be interpreted as authorizing or commanding the performance of any activity which is in violation of any city, county, state or federal law, rule, or regulation. [Ord. 735 § 10, 2004].


Chapter 9.15 ABATEMENT OF CHRONIC DISORDERLY PROPERTIES

Sections: 

9.15.010    Purpose.

9.15.020    Definitions.

9.15.030    Violation.

9.15.040    Procedure.

9.15.050    Burden of proof – Defenses – Mitigation of civil penalty.

9.15.060    Closure during pendency of action – Emergency closures.

9.15.070    Commencement of actions – Remedies.

9.15.080    Enforcement.

9.15.090    Attorney fees.

9.15.100    Enforcement procedures for violations.


9.15.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide a method for the city to hold persons who allow criminal activity to occur on their property responsible for their actions while protecting their property rights. [Ord. 797 § 1, 2015].


9.15.020 Definitions.

When not clearly otherwise indicated by the context, the following words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

“Chronic disorderly property” is defined as follows:

(1) Property in the city limits on which three or more prohibited activities have occurred during any 60-day period.

(2) Property in the city limits on which or within 200 feet of which any person associated with the property has engaged in three or more prohibited activities during any 60-day period.

“Control” means the ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern conduct that occurs on a property.

“Permit” means to suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent, or expressly assent or agree to the doing of an act.

“Person associated with” includes any person who, on the occasion of a prohibited activity, has entered, patronized, or visited, or attempted to enter, patronize or visit a property or person present on a property, including without limitation any officer, director, customer, agent, employee, or any independent contractor of a property, person in charge, or owner thereof.

“Person in charge” of property means an agent, occupant, lessee, contract purchaser or other person having possession or control of property or supervision of a construction project.

“Prohibited activities” are defined as follows:

(1) Harassment as defined in ORS 166.065(1)(a) or the city code.

(2) Intimidation as provided in ORS 166.155 to 166.165.

(3) Disorderly conduct as provided in ORS 166.025 or the city code.

(4) Assault or menacing as provided in ORS 163.160, 163.165, 163.175, 163.185, or 163.190.

(5) Sexual abuse, contributing to the delinquency of a minor, or sexual misconduct as provided in ORS 163.415, 163.425, 163.427, 163.435, or 163.445.

(6) Public indecency as provided in ORS 163.465.

(7) Prostitution or related offenses as provided in ORS 167.007, 167.012, and 167.017.

(8) Alcoholic liquor violations as provided in ORS 471.105 to 471.482.

(9) Offensive littering as provided in ORS 164.805.

(10) Criminal trespass as provided in ORS 164.243, 164.245, 164.255, or 164.265.

(11) Theft as provided in ORS 164.015 to 164.140.

(12) Possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses as provided in ORS 167.203, 475.005 to 475.285, or 475.940 to 475.995.

(13) Illegal gambling as provided in ORS 167.117, 167.122, or 167.127.

(14) Criminal mischief as provided in ORS 164.345 to 164.365.

(15) Property which in addition to or in combination with the prescribed number and duration of prohibited activities, upon request for execution of a search warrant, has been the subject of a determination by a court that probable cause that possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses as defined in ORS 167.203, 475.005 to 475.285 and/or 475.940 to 475.995 have occurred.

(16) Violating MCMC 9.05.030(1): keeping an animal that, by loud and frequent continued noise, disturbs the comfort and repose of a person in the vicinity.

(17) Discharge of firearms in violation of MCMC 9.05.050.

(18) Frequenting a place where controlled substances are used as provided in ORS 167.222.

“Property” means any property, including land and that which is affixed, incidental or appurtenant to land, including but not limited to any residential premises, room, house, parking area, loading area, landscaping, building or structure or any separate part, unit or portion thereof, or any business equipment, whether or not permanent. For property consisting of more than one unit, property is limited to the unit or the portion of the property on which any prohibited activity has occurred or is occurring, but includes areas of the property used in common by all units of property including without limitation other structures erected on the property and areas used for parking, loading and landscaping. [Ord. 797 § 1, 2015].


9.15.030 Violation.

(1) Property within the city that is a chronic disorderly property is in violation of MCMC 9.15.010 to 9.15.090 and subject to their remedies.

(2) Any person in charge of such property who permits the property to be a chronic disorderly property is in violation of MCMC 9.15.010 to 9.15.090 and subject to their remedies. [Ord. 797 § 1, 2015].


9.15.040 Procedure.

(1) When the chief of police or his designee receives two or more reports documenting the occurrence of prohibited activity on or within 200 feet of a property within the city limits, the chief of police or his designee shall independently review the reports to determine whether they describe prohibited activities enumerated in this code under this chapter. Upon such a finding the chief of police or his designee may:

(a) Notify the person in charge and property owner in writing that the property is in danger of becoming chronic disorderly property. The notice shall contain the following information:

(i) The street address or legal description sufficient for identification of the property.

(ii) A statement that the chief of police has information that the property may be chronic disorderly property, with a concise description of the prohibited activities that may exist, or that have occurred. The chief of police shall offer the person in charge an opportunity to propose a course of action that the chief of police agrees will abate the prohibited activities giving rise to the violation.

(iii) Demand that the person in charge respond to the chief of police within 10 days to discuss the prohibited activities.

(2) When the chief of police receives a report documenting the occurrence of a fourth prohibited activity at or within 200 feet of a property in a residential neighborhood within a 60-day period and determines that the property has become chronic disorderly property, the chief of police shall:

(a) Notify the person in charge in writing that the property is a chronic disorderly property. The notice shall contain the following information:

(i) The street address or legal description sufficient for identification of the property.

(ii) A statement that the chief of police has determined the property to be chronic disorderly property with a concise description of the prohibited activities leading to the findings.

(iii) Demand that the person in charge respond within 14 days to the chief of police and propose a course of action that the chief of police agrees will abate the prohibited activities giving rise to the violation.

(iv) Service shall be made either personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the person in charge at the address of the property believed to be a chronic disorderly property, or any other place which is likely to give the person in charge notice of the determination by the chief of police.

(v) A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner at the address shown on the tax rolls of the county in which the property is located, the occupant, at the address of the property, if these persons are different from the person in charge, and shall be made either personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid.

(vi) A copy of the notice shall be posted at the property.

(vii) The failure of any person to receive notice that the property may be a chronic disorderly property shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the proceedings under MCMC 9.15.010 to 9.15.090.

(b) Chronic disorderly property, as defined by MCMC 9.15.020, shall be subject to the notification requirements of subsections (1) and (2) of this section.

(c) If, after the notification, but prior to the commencement of legal proceedings by the city pursuant to MCMC 9.15.010 to 9.15.090, a person in charge stipulates to the chief of police that the person in charge will pursue a course of action the parties agree will abate the prohibited activities giving rise to the violation, the chief of police may agree to postpone legal proceedings for a period of not less than 10 nor more than 30 days. If the agreed course of action does not result in the abatement of the prohibited activity or if no agreement concerning abatement is reached within 30 days, the chief of police may refer the matter to the city administrator for review.

(d) Concurrent with the notification procedures set forth in subsections (1) and (2) of this section, the chief of police shall send copies of the notice, as well as any other documentation which supports legal proceedings against the property, to the city administrator.

(3) When a person in charge makes a response to the chief of police as required by subsection (2)(c) of this section, any conduct or statements made in connection with the furnishing of that response shall not constitute an admission that any prohibited activities have or are occurring. This subsection does not require the exclusion of any evidence that is otherwise admissible or offered for any other purpose. [Ord. 797 § 1, 2015].


9.15.050 Burden of proof – Defenses – Mitigation of civil penalty.

(1) In an action for chronic disorderly property, the city shall have the initial burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the property is chronic disorderly property.

(2) It is a defense to an action for chronic disorderly property that the person in charge at all material times could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had become chronic disorderly property, or could not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct leading to the determination that the property is chronic disorderly property.

(3) In establishing the amount of any civil penalty requested, the court may consider any of the following factors and shall cite those found applicable:

(a) The actions taken by the person in charge to mitigate or correct the prohibited activities at the property;

(b) The length of time that the prohibited activity has been going on and whether the problem at the property was repeated or continuous;

(c) The magnitude or gravity of the problem;

(d) The cost to the city of investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the prohibited activities;

(e) Any other factor deemed by the court to be relevant. [Ord. 797 § 1, 2015].


9.15.060 Closure during pendency of action – Emergency closures.

Any emergency closure proceeding initiated under this provision shall be based on evidence showing that prohibited activities have occurred on the property and that emergency action is necessary to avoid an immediate threat to public welfare and safety. Proceedings to obtain an order of emergency closure shall be governed by the provisions of ORCP 79 for obtaining temporary restraining orders. In such an event the notice procedures set forth in MCMC 9.15.040(2) need not be complied with. [Ord. 797 § 1, 2015].


9.15.070 Commencement of actions – Remedies.

(1) The city administrator may authorize the city attorney to commence legal proceedings to enjoin or abate chronic disorderly property and to seek closure, the imposition of civil penalties against any or all of the persons in charge of the property, and any other relief deemed appropriate.

(2) If, after the commencement but prior to the trial of an action or suit brought by the city pursuant to MCMC 9.15.010 to 9.15.090, a person in charge of chronic disorderly property stipulates to the city that he or she will pursue a course of action the parties agree will abate the prohibited activities giving rise to the violation, the city may agree to stay proceedings for a period of not less than 10 nor more than 60 days. The person in charge or the city may thereafter petition the court for additional like periods of time as may be necessary to complete the action to abate the prohibited activities. However, if the city reasonably believes the person in charge of a property is not diligently pursuing the action necessary to abate the prohibited activities, the city may apply to the court for release from the stay and may seek relief deemed appropriate.

(3) If a court determines property to be chronic disorderly property, the court shall order that the property be closed and secured against all access, use and occupancy for a period of not less than three months, nor more than one year. The court shall retain jurisdiction during any period of closure. The person in charge may petition the court for an order reducing the period of closure if the person in charge and the city stipulate that the nuisance has been and will continue to be abated.

(4) If a property is found to be chronic disorderly property in violation of MCMC 9.15.030, the person in charge of the chronic disorderly property is subject to a civil penalty of up to $100.00 per day for each day prohibited activities occur on the property, following notice pursuant to MCMC 9.15.040(2).

(5) Nothing in these provisions shall require any conviction for criminal activities prior to the commencement of any action provided herein. [Ord. 797 § 1, 2015].


9.15.080 Enforcement.

(1) The court may authorize the city to physically secure the property against all access, use or occupancy if the person in charge fails to do so within the time specified by the court. If the city is authorized to secure the property, all costs reasonably incurred by the city to physically secure the property shall be paid to the city by the person in charge and may be included in the city’s money judgment. As used in this subsection, “costs” means those costs actually incurred by the city for physically securing the property, as well as tenant relocation costs pursuant to subsection (5) of this section.

(2) The city shall prepare a statement of the costs expended for physically securing the property and submit that statement to the court for its review. If no objection to the statement is made within the period prescribed by ORCP 68, the statement of costs shall be included in the city’s money judgment.

(3) Judgments imposed by MCMC 9.15.030 to 9.15.090 shall bear interest at the rate of nine percent per year from the date the judgment is entered.

(4) Any person who is assessed the costs of physically securing the property by the court shall be personally liable for the payment of costs to the city.

(5) The person in charge shall pay reasonable relocation costs of a tenant, as defined by ORS 90.100(16), if, without actual notice, the tenant moved into the property after either:

(a) A person in charge received notice from the chief of police of the determination pursuant to MCMC 9.15.040(2); or

(b) A person in charge received notice of an action brought pursuant to MCMC 9.15.070. [Ord. 797 § 1, 2015].


9.15.090 Attorney fees.

In any action pursuant to MCMC 9.15.010 to 9.15.090, the court may award attorney’s fees to the prevailing party. [Ord. 797 § 1, 2015].


9.15.100 Enforcement procedures for violations.

The city of Myrtle Creek adopts and incorporates by reference herein the Oregon Revised Statutes regarding procedures for processing violations as described in ORS 153.005 to 153.161. Therefore, the Myrtle Creek Municipal Code hereby authorizes city of Myrtle Creek employees to process violations pursuant to state law per the above listed sections. [Ord. 797 § 1, 2015].


Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:

10.05    Traffic

10.10    Fire Department Vehicles – Flashing Lights

10.15    Golf Carts


Chapter 10.05 TRAFFIC

Sections:

10.05.010    Short title.

10.05.020    Applicability of state traffic laws.

10.05.030    Definitions.

10.05.040    Powers of the city council.

10.05.050    Duties and authority of the city administrator.

10.05.060    Public danger.

10.05.070    Standards.

10.05.080    Authority of law enforcement and fire officers.

10.05.090    Crossing private or public property.

10.05.100    Unlawful riding.

10.05.110    Roller skates, skateboards, sleds and other like devices.

10.05.120    Damaging sidewalks and curbs.

10.05.130    Storing motor vehicles on streets.

10.05.140    Method of parking.

10.05.150    Prohibited parking or standing.

10.05.160    Prohibited practices.

10.05.170    Use of loading zone.

10.05.180    Authorized emergency vehicles.

10.05.190    Lights on parked vehicle.

10.05.200    Extension of parking time.

10.05.210    Exemptions.

10.05.220    Citation on illegally parked vehicle.

10.05.230    Failure to comply with citation.

10.05.240    Owner responsibility.

10.05.250    Registered owner presumption.

10.05.260    Impoundment of vehicles.

10.05.270    Application of state statutes.

10.05.280    Penalties.

    Legislative history: Ords. 670 and 697.


10.05.010 Short title.

This chapter may be cited as the Myrtle Creek traffic ordinance. [Ord. 644 § 1, 1993].


10.05.020 Applicability of state traffic laws.

Violation of provisions in Chapters 153, 743 and 801 through 823 ORS, inclusive, as now constituted or as amended, is an offense against the city. [Ord. 644 § 2, 1993].


10.05.030 Definitions.

In addition to definitions in the Oregon Vehicle Code, certain words, terms and phrases are defined as follows:

“Arterial street” means streets designed and designated to handle a concentration of through traffic and high traffic volumes and which are interconnected with the state or county highway systems. Streets identified as arterial streets include: Division Street, Riverside Drive, Main Street, Dole Road, North Myrtle Road and any other street that may be designated in the future as an arterial street by the Myrtle Creek comprehensive plan.

“Bus stop” means a roadway space designated by sign for use by buses to load or unload passengers.

“Central business district” means the area bounded by Division Street, Millsite Park, First Avenue and Fourth Avenue and includes both sides of the boundary street.

“Holiday” means Sundays, New Year’s Day, Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, Presidents Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Veteran’s Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas Day.

“Loading zone” means a roadway space designated by sign for loading or unloading passengers or materials during specified hours of specified days.

“Motor truck” means a motor vehicle, or portion thereof (i.e., trailer), that is 28 feet or more in length, including any load thereon, and is designed for commercial transport of freight, property, or articles.

“Operating” means the act of having one or more feet on the board of a skateboard or roller device or other portion designed for a foot to propel the device.

“Person” means a natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.

“Riding” means the act of propelling a skateboard or roller device by means other than carrying it.

“Skateboard” means skateboards, roller skates, coaster, blades, scooters, miniature vehicles, and any similar devices, but not including bicycles.

“Street” means highway, road or street as defined in ORS 801.110, 801.305, 801.450 and 801.524, including the entire width of the right-of-way.

“Taxicab stand” means a roadway space designated by sign for taxicab use.

“Traffic lane” means that area of the roadway used for a single line of traffic movement. [Amended during 2012 recodification; Ord. 09-003, 2009; Ord. 644 § 3, 1993].


10.05.040 Powers of the city council.

(1) Subject to state laws, the city council shall exercise all local traffic authority for the city except those powers expressly delegated by this chapter or another ordinance.

(2) The powers of the city council include, but are not limited to:

(a) Designation of through streets.

(b) Designation of one-way streets.

(c) Designation of truck routes.

(d) Designation of parking meter zones.

(e) Restriction of the use of certain streets by any class or kind of vehicle to protect the streets from damage or excess traffic.

(f) Authorization, by resolution, of greater maximum weights or lengths than specified by state law for vehicles using city streets.

(g) Initiation of proceedings to change speed zones.

(h) Revision of speed limits in parks.

(i) Temporary closure or blocking of streets. [Ord. 644 § 4, 1993].


10.05.050 Duties and authority of the city administrator.

(1) It shall be the duty of the city administrator to implement ordinances, resolutions and motions of the city council by causing the installation, alteration and maintenance of traffic control devices. Installation shall be based on standards contained in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways and the Oregon Supplements.

(2) The city administrator is hereby granted the authority to temporarily close or block streets, issue oversize or overweight vehicle permits, and establish, remove or alter the following classes of traffic controls:

(a) Crosswalks, safety zones and traffic lanes.

(b) Intersection channelization and areas where vehicle drivers shall not make right, left or U-turns and the time when the prohibition applies.

(c) Parking areas and time limitations, including the form of permissible parking (e.g., parallel or diagonal). [Ord. 644 § 5, 1993].


10.05.060 Public danger.

(1) Under conditions constituting a danger to the public, the city administrator, or his designee, may install temporary traffic control devices.

(2) Nonfunctioning traffic control devices shall be treated as an all-way stop by vehicle operators on all affected streets. [Ord. 644 § 6, 1993].


10.05.070 Standards.

The standards employed by the city administrator or his designee in carrying out the duties prescribed by this chapter shall be based on:

(1) Traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations.

(2) The Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways and the Oregon Supplements and other applicable standards, limitations and rules promulgated by the Oregon Transportation Commission.

(3) Other recognized traffic control standards. [Ord. 644 § 7, 1993].


10.05.080 Authority of law enforcement and fire officers.

If a fire or other public emergency occurs, officers of the police department and fire department may direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding the provision of this chapter. [Ord. 644 § 8, 1993].


10.05.090 Crossing private or public property.

The operator of a vehicle shall not proceed from one street to an intersecting street by leaving the roadway and crossing private or public property. This provision does not apply to the operator of a vehicle who stops on the property to procure or provide goods or services. [Ord. 644 § 9, 1993].


10.05.100 Unlawful riding.

(1) The operator of a vehicle shall not permit a passenger to, and no passenger shall, ride on a vehicle on a street except within a part of the vehicle designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision does not apply to an employee engaged in the discharge of a duty or to a person riding within a truck body in space intended for merchandise.

(2) No person shall board or alight from a vehicle while the vehicle is in motion on a street. [Ord. 644 § 10, 1993].


10.05.110 Roller skates, skateboards, sleds and other like devices.

(1) Where Riding Permitted. Riding or operating a skateboard is permitted in the following areas:

(a) Areas Within City Parks. In city parks, except designated and posted areas prohibiting the use of skateboards and other roller devices.

(b) Private Property Where Consent. Private property where the owner or person in charge has consented.

(c) Sidewalks and Streets. On city sidewalks and streets unless otherwise prohibited by this ordinance.

(2) Where Riding Prohibited. No person upon roller skates, roller blades, a skateboard, skis, sled, toboggan or similar devices shall ride or operate devices in the following areas:

(a) Streets or sidewalks in the central business district area described in this subsection as delineated on the attached map marked Exhibit A of the ordinance codified in this section. The central business district area is described as that area included within and inclusive of the following described boundaries:

(i) The north boundary shall be NW Fourth Avenue including sidewalks on both sides;

(ii) The west boundary shall be N Main Street including sidewalks on both sides;

(iii) The south boundary shall be NW First Avenue including sidewalks on both sides;

(iv) The east boundary shall be NW Pleasant Street including the sidewalks on both sides.

(b) Park Structures. On any public structure or improvement such as park tables and benches, band shell, pavilion, playground equipment, hand rails, and other like structures.

(c) Private Property Unless Consent. Private property without consent of the owner or person in charge.

(d) Other Property Which Is Posted. On any other public or private property where signs on the property indicate that the operation of a skateboard or other similar device use is prohibited.

(3) Regulations. Where such activities are allowed, the following regulations apply to the operation of a skateboard or other similar roller devices on a public street, sidewalk or public property:

(a) Yield Right-of-Way. Any person operating a skateboard shall yield the right-of way to any vehicle, such as a motor vehicle or bicycle, or pedestrian including yielding the right-of-way to any vehicle when approaching or crossing a driveway.

(b) Standing Position. Any person operating a skateboard shall operate the skateboard in a standing position unless operated in conformance with rules established within a city park designated for skateboard use.

(c) Operating on Right-Hand Side. While on a street, a person shall ride a skateboard as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.

(d) Single File. No person shall ride a skateboard on any street alongside another person riding a skateboard, bicycle or motor vehicle unless overtaking and passing such skateboard, bicycle or motor vehicle.

(e) Equipment.

(i) Protective Headgear. Any person operating a skateboard shall wear protective headgear of a type approved under ORS 815.052 for bicycle helmets; provided, however, protective headgear shall be required only when operating a skateboard on public streets and sidewalks. Headgear is recommended on public property and within a city park designated for skateboard use.

(ii) No skateboard shall be operated on any public street or sidewalk between 30 minutes after sunset and 30 minutes before sunrise unless the skateboard or rider is equipped with lighting equipment that meets the following requirements:

(A) The lighting equipment must show a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front of the skateboard.

(B) The lighting equipment must have a red reflector or lighting device or material of such size or characteristic and so mounted as to be visible from all distances up to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlights on a motor vehicle.

(f) Traffic Control Devices. Any person operating a skateboard shall obey the instructions of official traffic control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles.

(g) Traffic Regulations. The operation of a skateboard on a street shall be subject to all of the provisions or laws of the state and the laws of the city, including those applicable to the drivers of vehicles, except, as to the latter, those provisions that by their very nature have no application.

(h) Operation on Sidewalks. No person shall operate a skateboard on a sidewalk:

(i) So as to suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and move into the path of a vehicle that is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard.

(ii) Without giving an audible warning before overtaking and passing a pedestrian.

(iii) At a speed greater than an ordinary walk when approaching or entering a crosswalk, approaching or crossing a driveway or crossing a curb cut or pedestrian ramp and a vehicle is approaching the crosswalk, driveway, curb cut or pedestrian ramp. This subsection does not require reduced speeds for skateboards either:

(A) At places on sidewalks or other pedestrian ways other than places where the path for pedestrians or bicycle traffic approaches or crosses that for motor vehicle traffic; or

(B) When motor vehicles are not present. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, an operator of a skateboard on a sidewalk or in a crosswalk has the same rights and duties as a pedestrian on a sidewalk or in a crosswalk.

(i) Racing. No person shall engage in, or cause others to engage in, a skateboard race upon the streets, sidewalks or any other public property; provided, however, that it shall not be a violation of this subsection if racing occurs in conformance with rules within a city park designated for skateboard use.

(j) Hitching on Vehicles. No person while operating a skateboard shall in any way attach themselves or the skateboard to any moving motor vehicle.

(k) Careless Riding. No person shall ride a skateboard in a careless manner. Riding in a careless manner means the person rides a skateboard in a manner that endangers or would be likely to endanger any person or property.

(4) Penalties.

(a) Impoundment. At the time any person is stopped and a citation issued for a violation of this chapter, any skateboard used in the violation may be immediately seized and impounded as evidence by the officer issuing the citation. Impounded property may be released by any officer to the parent or guardian of the offender, or to any adult offender upon the case being cleared by the court.

(b) Fines. Upon first conviction for a violation of this chapter, a fine shall be imposed, not to exceed $500.00; a mandatory minimum fine of $50.00 shall be imposed. Subsequent convictions shall be subject to enhanced penalties as provided by subsection (4)(c) of this section. Community service may be imposed in lieu of or in conjunction with fines.

(c) Repeat Offenders. Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter on successive occasions shall be subject to enhanced penalties. If a person is convicted of a second offense within one year of his or her first conviction, then the fine imposed shall be an amount not less than twice the amount of the fine imposed upon the first conviction. If a person is convicted of a third offense at any time thereafter, then the fine imposed shall be an amount not less than double the fine imposed for the second conviction, and the person’s skateboard shall be forfeited. [Ord. 09-003, 2009; Ord. 644 § 11, 1993].


10.05.120 Damaging sidewalks and curbs.

(1) The operator of a motor vehicle shall not drive on a sidewalk or roadside planting strip except to cross an authorized permanent or temporary driveway.

(2) No person shall remove a portion of a curb or move a motor vehicle or a device moved by a motor vehicle onto a curb or sidewalk without first obtaining authorization and posting bond, if required by ordinance. A person who causes damage shall be responsible for the cost of repair. [Ord. 644 § 12, 1993].


10.05.130 Storing motor vehicles on streets.

No person shall store, or permit to be stored, in excess of 72 hours without permission of the city administrator or police chief, a motor vehicle or personal property on a street or other public property. Failure to move a motor vehicle or other personal property for 72 hours constitutes prima facie evidence of storage. [Ord. 644 § 13, 1993].


10.05.140 Method of parking.

(1) When parking spaces are designated on a street or public lot, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than the direction of the traffic flow and in such a manner that the front vehicle tire closest to the curb is located within 12 inches of the curb and within a single marked space, unless the size or shape of the vehicle makes compliance impossible.

(2) The operator who first begins maneuvering a motor vehicle into a vacant parking space on a street or public lot has priority to park in that space, and no other vehicle operator shall attempt to interfere.

(3) When the operator of a vehicle discovers the vehicle is parked close to a building to which the fire department has been summoned, the operator shall immediately remove the vehicle from the area unless directed otherwise by police or fire officers. [Ord. 644 § 14, 1993].


10.05.150 Prohibited parking or standing.

No person shall park or stand:

(1) A vehicle in violation of the Oregon Vehicle Code or in violation of a parking limitation device.

(2) A vehicle in an alley, except for a stop of not more than 30 consecutive minutes for loading or unloading persons or material.

(3) A motor truck within the right-of-way of any public street in any area of the city excepting those areas zoned general commercial (C-3) or general manufacturing (G-M) which are not used for residential purposes. [Ord. 644 § 15, 1993].


10.05.160 Prohibited practices.

No operator shall park a vehicle, and no owner shall allow a vehicle to be parked, on a street or other public property for the principal purpose of:

(1) Repairing or servicing the vehicle, except while making repairs necessitated by an emergency.

(2) Displaying temporary advertising from the vehicle.

(3) Selling merchandise from the vehicle, except when authorized. [Ord. 644 § 16, 1993].


10.05.170 Use of loading zone.

No person shall park or stand a vehicle in a place designated as a loading zone when the hours applicable to that loading zone are in effect for any purpose other than loading or unloading persons or material. Such a stop shall not exceed the time limits posted. If no time limits are posted, use of the zone shall not exceed 30 minutes. [Ord. 644 § 17, 1993].


10.05.180 Authorized emergency vehicles.

(1) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to, but not returning from, a fire alarm, may park or stand irrespective of the provisions of this chapter.

(2) This section shall not relieve drivers of authorized emergency vehicles from the duty to park or stand with regard for the safety of all persons. [Ord. 644 § 18, 1993].


10.05.190 Lights on parked vehicle.

No lights need be displayed on a vehicle that is parked in accordance with this chapter on a street where there is sufficient light to reveal the vehicle at a distance of at least 500 feet from the vehicle. [Ord. 644 § 19, 1993].


10.05.200 Extension of parking time.

Where maximum parking time limits are designated, moving a vehicle to another parking space within the same block shall not extend the time limits for parking. [Ord. 644 § 20, 1993].


10.05.210 Exemptions.

The provisions of this chapter that regulate the parking or standing of vehicles do not apply to:

(1) A city, county, state or public utility vehicle being used for public works maintenance, construction or repair work.

(2) A vehicle used by the United States for collection, transportation or delivery of mail.

(3) A vehicle of a disabled person who complies with the provision of ORS 801.387 and 811.602 through 811.637.

(4) Motor trucks for such reasonable period of time as such vehicle is being actively used for loading and/or unloading persons or property. [Amended during 2012 recodification; Ord. 644 § 21, 1993].


10.05.220 Citation on illegally parked vehicle.

When a vehicle is found parked in violation of a restriction imposed by this chapter or state law, the officer finding the vehicle shall note the license number and any other information displayed on the vehicle that may identify the owner or operator and shall attach a parking citation to the vehicle. The citation shall instruct the owner or operator to appear and answer to the charge or pay the penalty imposed on a specified date, during specific hours, and at a specific place. [Ord. 644 § 22, 1993].


10.05.230 Failure to comply with citation.

A person commits the offense of failure to appear on a traffic citation if the person fails to appear in court at the time mentioned in the summons if the citation is for a major traffic offense; or, in other cases, the person fails to either appear in court at the time indicated in the summons, or prior to such time either request a hearing or post bail in the amount set forth in the summons.

A person who commits the offense of failure to appear shall be subject to the penalties imposed for such offense by state law. [Ord. 644 § 23, 1993].


10.05.240 Owner responsibility.

The owner of a vehicle that is in violation of a parking restriction shall be responsible for the offense unless the operator used the vehicle without the owner’s consent. [Ord. 644 § 24, 1993].


10.05.250 Registered owner presumption.

In a proceeding charging violation of a parking restriction against a vehicle owner, proof that the vehicle was registered to the defendant at the time of the violation constitutes a presumption that the defendant was the owner. [Ord. 644 § 25, 1993].


10.05.260 Impoundment of vehicles.

(1) Disposition of a vehicle towed and stored under provision of state law for the removal of hazardous vehicles shall be in accordance with provision of state law or city ordinance on impoundment and disposition of abandoned vehicles.

(2) Impoundment of a vehicle does not preclude issuance of a citation for violation of a provision of this chapter.

(3) Stolen vehicles may be towed from public or private property and stored at the expense of the vehicle owner. [Ord. 644 § 26, 1993].


10.05.270 Application of state statutes.

Provisions of the Oregon Criminal Code relating to defenses, burden of proof, general principles of criminal liability, parties, and general principles of justification apply to offenses defined and made punishable by this chapter. [Ord. 644 § 27, 1993].


10.05.280 Penalties.

Violation of provisions in Chapters 153, 743 and 801 through 823 ORS, inclusive, as now constituted, is punishable by the penalties prescribed therein.

Violation of MCMC 10.05.090 through 10.05.130 is punishable by fine not to exceed $100.00. Violation of MCMC 10.05.140 through 10.05.200 is punishable by fine not to exceed $50.00. However, if a violation of a provision of this chapter is identical to a state statute with a lesser penalty, punishment shall be limited to the lesser penalty prescribed in state law. [Ord. 644 § 28, 1993].


Chapter 10.10 FIRE DEPARTMENT VEHICLES – FLASHING LIGHTS

Sections:

10.10.010    Permitted when.

10.10.020    Concealed.

10.10.030    Property of city.


10.10.010 Permitted when.

The city of Myrtle Creek, under the concurrent provisions of ORS 483.432(6) and this chapter, hereby authorizes the members of the municipal fire department of the city of Myrtle Creek operating either a private or publicly owned vehicle to display a flashing red light while said vehicle is being driven to a fire station and/or fire location. [Ord. 405 § 1, 1974].


10.10.020 Concealed.

Any red light authorized by MCMC 10.10.010 shall be covered or otherwise concealed when not being displayed as provided in MCMC 10.10.010. [Ord. 405 § 2, 1974].


10.10.030 Property of city.

Any red light displayed as authorized in MCMC 10.10.010 shall be and remain the property of the city of Myrtle Creek. [Ord. 405 § 3, 1974].


Chapter 10.15 GOLF CARTS

Sections:

10.15.010    Short title.

10.15.020    Applicability.

10.15.030    Definitions.

10.15.040    Boundary of use.

10.15.050    Unlawful driving.

10.15.060    Unlawful riding.

10.15.070    Damaging sidewalks and curbs.

10.15.080    Storing of golf carts on streets.

10.15.090    Citation of illegally parked golf cart.

10.15.100    Golf cart liability insurance.

10.15.110    Penalties.


10.15.010 Short title.

This chapter may be cited as the Myrtle Creek golf cart ordinance. [Ord. 723 § 1, 2002].


10.15.020 Applicability.

Violation of provisions of ORS 810.070, Use of golf carts on highways, as now constituted or as amended, is an offense against the city. [Ord. 723 § 2, 2002].


10.15.030 Definitions.

In addition to definitions in the Oregon Vehicle Code, certain words, terms and phrases are defined as follows:

“Combined operation” means a roadway space designed and designated for automobile and golf cart.

“Golf carts” means vehicles primarily used to transport a person or persons on and about the Myrtle Creek golf course, for playing the game of golf or maintenance of the course. A golf cart is a transportation device that is not required to conform to the vehicle equipment laws under the vehicle code.

“Real estate development” means that area developed within the incorporated city limits of Myrtle Creek.

“Road authority” means those rights-of-way defined as maintained by the city of Myrtle Creek, in the Douglas County/Myrtle Creek jurisdictional transfer agreement.

“Street” means highway, road, or street as defined in ORS 801.110, 801.305, 801.450 and 801.524, including the entire width of the right-of-way. [Amended during 2012 recodification; Ord. 723 § 3, 2002].


10.15.040 Boundary of use.

(1) Subject to state laws, the city council may exercise the authority to expand or reduce that area approved for golf cart use within the city of Myrtle Creek.

(2) The designated area of use shall be limited to, and not extend beyond, a distance of one-half mile beyond the Myrtle Creek golf course entrance at Fairway Drive.

(a) Fairway Drive.

(b) Myrtle View Drive.

(c) Malibu Drive.

(d) Rosewood Drive.

(e) Stevenson Avenue.

(f) Vine Maple Drive.

(g) Neal Lane between Riverside Drive and the Myrtle Creek city limits. [Ord. 723 § 4, 2002].


10.15.050 Unlawful driving.

The operator of a golf cart shall not proceed from the designated use area to proceed from one street to an intersecting street by leaving the roadway and crossing private or public property. This provision does not apply to crossing Days Creek Cutoff Road while actively using the Myrtle Creek golf course facilities from one side to another. [Ord. 723 § 5, 2002].


10.15.060 Unlawful riding.

(1) The operator of a golf cart shall not permit a passenger to, and no passenger shall, ride on a golf cart on a street except within a part of the golf cart designated or intended for the use of passengers.

(2) No person shall board or alight from a golf cart while the vehicle is in motion on a public street or right-of-way under the authority of the city of Myrtle Creek.

(3) The operator of a golf cart shall obey all ordinary laws governing vehicular traffic on a public street or roadway. [Ord. 723 § 6, 2002].


10.15.070 Damaging sidewalks and curbs.

The operator of a golf cart shall not drive on a sidewalk or roadside planting strip except to cross an authorized permanent driveway. [Ord. 723 § 7, 2002].


10.15.080 Storing of golf carts on streets.

No person shall store, or permit to be stored, a golf cart on a street or other right-of-way inside the boundary of use in excess of one hour. [Ord. 723 § 8, 2002].


10.15.090 Citation of illegally parked golf cart.

When a golf cart is found parked in violation of city ordinance or state law, the officer finding the cart shall note information displayed on the cart that may identify the owner or operator and shall attach a parking citation to the cart. The citation shall instruct the owner or operator to appear and answer to the charge or pay the penalty imposed on a specified date, during specific hours, and at a specific place. [Ord. 723 § 9, 2002].


10.15.100 Golf cart liability insurance.

All golf carts used within the boundary area shall be insured with liability insurance (ORS 806.010). [Ord. 723 § 10, 2002].


10.15.110 Penalties.

Violation of MCMC 10.15.040 through 10.15.100 is punishable by fine not to exceed $100.00. However, if a violation of a provision of this chapter is identical to a state statute with a lesser penalty, punishment shall be limited to the lesser penalty prescribed in state law. [Ord. 723 § 11, 2002].


Title 11 (Reserved)


Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES

Chapters:

12.05    Sidewalk, Parking Strip and Curb Construction, Alteration, Repair and Maintenance

12.10    Street Utility Fee

12.15    Addressing

12.20    Trees

12.25    Parks


Chapter 12.05 SIDEWALK, PARKING STRIP AND CURB CONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION, REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE

Sections:

12.05.010    General rules.

12.05.020    Application – Issuance of permits.

12.05.030    Supervision.

12.05.040    Standards and specifications.

12.05.050    Barricades and lights.

12.05.060    Revocation of driveway permits.

12.05.070    Restoration of driveway areas.

12.05.080    Penalties.

    Legislative history: Ords. 359 and 661.


12.05.010 General rules.

(1) No person may construct, repair or alter a sidewalk or curb without first obtaining a permit from the public works director.

(2) Persons shall construct, repair, or alter a sidewalk or curb to conform to the general standards and specifications currently on file with the public works director. [Ord. 316 § 1, 1966].


12.05.020 Application – Issuance of permits.

(1) Persons shall file their application for a permit to construct, repair or alter a sidewalk or curb with the public works director, together with pertinent plans, data and other information as may be required.

(2) If the proposed improvement conforms to the applicable standards and specifications, the public works director shall issue a permit; except that when local improvement district proceedings have begun on the same sidewalk or curb, no permit for sidewalk or curb construction, alteration or repair shall be issued.

(3) When a sidewalk or curb is constructed, repaired or altered in connection with improvements or alterations such as a curb cut, driveway approach, sidewalk section or street excavation, the public works director may issue one permit for the entire project.

(4) Fees for Permits. Before any permit is issued, the applicant shall pay to the city a permit fee established in the city of Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges. [Ord. 316 § 2, 1966].


12.05.030 Supervision.

The public works director shall inspect the materials and construction to ensure compliance with the applicable standards and specifications. [Ord. 316 § 3, 1966].


12.05.040 Standards and specifications.

(1) The public works director shall formulate standard plans and specifications for the construction of curbs, gutters, driveways and sidewalks. Such standards and specifications, or any subsequent amendments thereto, shall be submitted to the city council for adoption by resolution.

(2) Separate standard plans and specifications may be proposed and adopted for improvements on different classifications of streets, such as arterials, collectors, and neighborhood streets, and different use classifications of properties, such as industrial, commercial, residential, or other uses; however, such standard plans and specifications shall ensure compliance with applicable zoning and development codes.

(3) The city council, by resolution, shall adopt standards and specifications for constructing, repairing or altering a sidewalk or curb, and such standards and specifications shall be filed in the offices of the public works director for the use of the public. [Ord. 316 § 4, 1966].


12.05.050 Barricades and lights.

A person who excavates or alters a sidewalk, curb or parking strip and thereby creates a condition which endangers pedestrian or vehicular traffic shall maintain adequate barricades around the dangerous condition to protect the public. [Ord. 316 § 5, 1966].


12.05.060 Revocation of driveway permits.

Any permissive use for driveway purposes of any area within public street right-of-way, regardless of whether the driveway was established by permit under this chapter or any other ordinance or established without permit, may be revoked by the city council after notice and public hearing, if the council finds:

(1) That no need exists for vehicular access to the private property to which the driveway extends, considering the use being made of the property at the time; or

(2) That the driveway has been abandoned; or

(3) That the private property to which the driveway extends is accessible by vehicles from some other location or in some other manner; or

(4) That the location of the driveway and its use constitute a hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic using any adjacent street or streets; or

(5) That the driveway is not being maintained so as to keep it in a good state of repair and free from hazards.

Notice of intent to revoke a permit shall be given in writing, delivered to the owner of the property personally or mailed to such owner at the address last shown on the tax rolls of Douglas County, Oregon. The notice shall specify the intent, state the time and place at which a hearing on said matter will be held, and advise such owner that he may be heard thereon at said time and place. The notice shall be given at least 10 days before the date of the hearing. Failure to give such notice in any one or more of the manners herein provided shall not invalidate the proceedings; provided, the owner shall have received actual notice in any other manner, or if he appears personally or by agent at the hearing. [Ord. 316 § 6, 1966].


12.05.070 Restoration of driveway areas.

(1) Upon the termination of any driveway, whether by revocation of permit or expiration of term for temporary driveways, or abandonment or otherwise, the authority, rights and privileges granted shall cease; and the owner of the property to which the driveway leads shall, within a period of 30 days thereafter, remove or modify the driveway improvements; and the sidewalk, parkway, curb and other areas where the improvements were located shall be restored or reconstructed, to the end that the portion of the sidewalk space, parkway, and curb areas which were used for the driveway shall be made for public travel and be placed in the same condition as the adjacent sidewalk spaces, parkway and curb areas.

The restoration work shall be done by said property owner at his own expense.

(2) In the event of the failure, neglect or refusal on the part of any property owners to remove driveways and restore the sidewalk spaces, parkways and curb areas to the restoration conditions required by this section, the city of Myrtle Creek may proceed to restore the same and charge the expense thereof to the property or properties to which said driveways have led; and the cost thereof shall become liens upon said properties, and shall be entered as liens upon the same in the lien docket of the city. [Ord. 316 § 7, 1966].


12.05.080 Penalties.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not to exceed $500.00. Every day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and shall be punishable as such. [Ord. 316 § 8, 1966].


Chapter 12.10 STREET UTILITY FEE

Sections:

12.10.010    Definitions.

12.10.020    Street utility fee established.

12.10.030    Exceptions to street utility fee.

12.10.040    Use of funds.

12.10.050    Street utility fee structure.

12.10.060    Billing and collection of fees.

12.10.070    Waiver of fee in case of vacancy.

12.10.080    Appeal.


12.10.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows:

“City street system” or “street system” means all transportation-related components located on city-owned property, city right-of-way or city easements within the city limits that the city is contractually or legally obligated to operate and maintain. The components include streets, alleys, curbs and gutters, bridges, sidewalks and paths, including improvements and installations related to any and all components, which are designated for use by motor vehicles, pedestrians, bicycles or other vehicle use.

“Developed property” or “developed use” means a parcel or lot of real property upon which any improvement exists, and upon which activities occur that generate or receive motor vehicle traffic. Improvement on developed property includes, but is not limited to, buildings, parking lots, landscaping and outside storage.

“Dwelling” or “dwelling unit” means one or more habitable rooms that are occupied or that are intended or designed to be occupied by one family with housekeeping facilities for living, sleeping, sanitary facilities, cooking and eating.

“Multifamily residential” means property with a building consisting of two or more dwelling units, including, but not limited to, apartments, townhouses, condominiums and duplexes.

“Nonresidential” means a use of property that is primarily not for single-family or multifamily dwellings.

“Occupied unit” means any structure or any portion of any structure occupied for residential, commercial, industrial, or other purposes. For example, in a multifamily residential development, each dwelling unit shall be considered a separate occupied unit when occupied, and each retail outlet in a shopping mall shall be considered a separate occupied unit. An occupied unit may include more than one structure if all structures are part of the same dwelling unit or commercial or industrial operation. For example, an industrial site with several structures that form an integrated manufacturing process operated by a single manufacturer constitutes one occupied unit. Property that is undeveloped or, if developed, is not in current use with city utilities turned off is not considered an occupied unit.

“Person responsible” means the utility customer or the person or persons who by usage, occupancy or contractual arrangement are responsible to pay the city utility bill for an improved premises.

“Single-family residential” means property with a building consisting of a single, detached dwelling unit. [Ord. 10-003 § 2, 2010].


12.10.020 Street utility fee established.

A street utility fee is hereby established, in an amount to be determined, and adjusted from time to time, by resolution of the city council. Fees charged to the person responsible shall be based on a per occupied unit. Such fee shall be established in such amounts which will provide sufficient funds to properly maintain local streets throughout the city. [Ord. 10-003 § 3, 2010].


12.10.030 Exceptions to street utility fee.

The following shall not be subject to the street utility fee:

(1) City-owned parking lots, which are not associated with public services other than parking.

(2) Publicly owned parkland, open spaces, and greenways, unless public off-street parking designed to accommodate the use of such areas is provided. [Ord. 10-003 § 4, 2010].


12.10.040 Use of funds.

All funds collected pursuant to this chapter shall be paid into the street utility fund. Such revenues shall be used to pay costs of operation, maintenance, repair, engineering, improvement, renewal, replacement and reconstruction of the city street system. It shall not be necessary that the maintenance and repair expenditures from the street utility fund specifically relate to any particular property from which the fees for said purposes were collected. [Ord. 10-003 § 5, 2010].


12.10.050 Street utility fee structure.

(1) The street utility fee shall be based on a per unit fee on developed property. Each dwelling unit shall be considered a separate occupied unit when occupied, and each retail outlet in a shopping mall shall be considered a separate occupied unit. An occupied unit may include more than one structure if all structures are part of the same dwelling unit or commercial or industrial operation. Property that is undeveloped or, if developed, is not in current use with city utilities turned off is not considered an occupied unit. The following is an example representing a $3.00-per-unit fee:

(a) Single-family residential unit: one unit times $3.00 equals $3.00 per month.

(b) Multifamily residential unit with four units: four times $3.00 equals $12.00 per month.

(c) Commercial/industrial unit with three retail shops: three times $3.00 equals $9.00 per month.

An industrial site with several structures that form an integrated manufacturing process operated by a single manufacturer constitutes one occupied unit.

(2) The city administrator shall determine the unit classification for developed property. [Ord. 10-003 § 6, 2010].


12.10.060 Billing and collection of fees.

(1) The street utility fee shall be billed and collected with and as part of the monthly water and sewer bill for those lots or parcels utilizing city water and/or sewer, and billed and collected separately for those lots or parcels not utilizing city water and/or sewer. In cases where a developed property is subject to water and sewer utility charges, the street utility fee bill shall be directed to the same person as the bill for water and sewer charges. In the case of those lots or parcels which are not occupied by the owner, the fee shall be billed with the monthly water and sewer bill, if any, which is billed to the resident of the property, unless the owner of the property requests that the combined utility bill be sent to another address. If a tenant in possession of any premises pays such fee, such payment shall relieve the owner from such obligation and lien, but the city shall not be required to look to any person other than the owner for the payment of such fees. All such bills shall be rendered monthly and shall become due and payable upon receipt.

(2) All charges for street service during any month shall be paid no later than 30 days after the billing date. Bills which remain unpaid for more than 30 days after the billing date shall be considered delinquent. If a customer’s account remains delinquent for more than 10 days, the water service may be turned off at the premises against which the delinquent street charges are owed. When so turned off, the water shall not be turned on again until a reconnect fee established in the city of Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges, plus the delinquent portion of the customer’s street account balance, has been paid. If the customer’s account remains delinquent for more than 30 days, the amount owed shall be deducted from the customer’s water service account deposit, the customer’s street, sewer and water accounts may be closed and any remaining deposit balance shall be returned to the customer at the customer’s last known mailing address. The customer shall be responsible for keeping the city informed as to the customer’s current mailing address. The customer shall be defined as the person or persons in whose name the utility service account is registered.

(3) If the street utility fee is not paid when due, the city administrator may proceed to collect such charges in any manner provided by law.

(4) Street service charges shall continue to be levied against the customer’s account until a vacancy occurs, or in the case of a delinquent account, until the city turns off the water service. [Ord. 10-003 § 7, 2010].


12.10.070 Waiver of fee in case of vacancy.

(1) When any property within the city becomes vacant, and water service is discontinued, a waiver of the street utility fee may be granted by the city administrator upon written application of the person responsible, including a signed statement, affirming under penalty of perjury that the property is vacant, and upon payment of all outstanding water, sanitary sewer, and street utility charges.

(2) For purposes of this section, “vacant” shall mean that an entire building or utility billing unit has become vacant or continuously unoccupied for at least 30 days. “Vacant” shall not mean that only a portion of a property without a separate water meter has become vacant or unoccupied.

(3) Fees shall be waived in accordance with this section only while the property remains vacant. The person responsible shall notify the city within five days of the premises being occupied, partially occupied or used, regardless of whether water service is restored. [Ord. 10-003 § 8, 2010].


12.10.080 Appeal.

(1) Any property owner who disputes any interpretation given by the city as to the assigned billing category may appeal such interpretation. A property owner or their agent desiring an interpretation or other examination of the property owner’s street utility fee shall submit a written application to the city administrator. The application shall be submitted in sufficient detail to enable the city administrator to render an interpretation.

(2) Within 30 days of the submission of an application for interpretation together with the required information, the city administrator shall cause a final decision to be made on the application. The decision shall be written and shall include findings of fact and conclusions for the particular aspects of the decision, based upon applicable criteria. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the person submitting the request. The city administrator shall maintain a collection of such decisions.

(3) If the decision of the city administrator affects the unit fee of the property owner requesting the interpretation, the city administrator shall assign a new unit fee. If a change in unit fee is assigned, the appropriate change may be made in the applicable fee to charge in the future. Back charges or refunds shall be allowed up to 60 days, two billing cycles.

(4) Decisions of the city administrator may be further appealed to the city council, and shall be heard at a public meeting. An owner who disputes an interpretation made by the city administrator as to the assigned unit fee under this chapter shall submit a written appeal to the city council within 10 days from the date of the city administrator’s decision, together with a filing fee established by resolution in the handbook of fees and charges. The application for appeal shall specify the reasons therefor. Appeals shall be limited to the issue of whether the appropriate unit number has been assigned to the particular property.

(5) The city administrator shall schedule the matter for city council review and notify the appellant not less than 10 days prior to the date of such council review. The council shall conduct a hearing during a public meeting and determine whether there is substantial evidence in the record to support the interpretation given by the city administrator. The council may continue the hearing for purposes of gathering additional information bearing on the issue. The council shall make a tentative oral decision and shall adopt a final written decision together with appropriate findings in support. The decision of the council with respect to the unit or units shall be limited to whether the appellant has been assigned to the appropriate unit number. If the council should determine that a different unit number should be assigned, it shall so order. Only where the council decision results in change in unit number will the filing fee on the appeal be refunded. The council decision shall be final.

(6) Appeals filed within 120 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not be subject to paying a filing fee. The appeal fee is fully refundable should the appellant adequately justify and secure the requested reassignment in billing category. [Ord. 10-003 § 9, 2010].


Chapter 12.15 ADDRESSING

Sections:

12.15.010    Short title.

12.15.020    Purpose.

12.15.030    Adoption and maintenance of “official address map.”

12.15.040    System generally – Matrix established.

12.15.050    Division of city into districts.

12.15.060    Numbering of lots and structures.

12.15.070    Size and placement of numbers.

12.15.080    Street naming.

12.15.090    Coordination with Douglas County.

12.15.100    Renaming streets by council, commission or petition.

12.15.110    Criteria for street name change.

12.15.120    Procedure for street name change.

12.15.130    Existing addresses.

12.15.140    Violation, penalty and abatement.

    Legislative history: Ord. 717.


12.15.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known as the addressing ordinance of the city of Myrtle Creek. [Ord. 544 § 1, 1985].


12.15.020 Purpose.

That there shall be a uniform system of numbering all residences, places of business and other buildings (excepting sheds and accessory buildings) opening upon or having access to a street within the city, the owner or occupant thereof shall place in a conspicuous place upon the main entrance, or at such other place as provided by MCMC 12.15.070, a number assigned thereto by the city. All public and private streets shall be given a name in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and as approved by the city council. [Ord. 544 § 2, 1985].


12.15.030 Adoption and maintenance of “official address map.”

The planning department shall assign all numbers for all structures, existing or hereafter erected within the city, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and shall prepare and maintain a map of the city whereon the numbers assigned to residences, buildings and premises are clearly indicated. This shall be kept up to date with the numbering and street naming that take place and shall be known as the “official address map of the city of Myrtle Creek.”

The official address map for the city of Myrtle Creek, as originally adopted by City Ordinance No. 544, is hereby amended to apply a street renaming of SE Weaver Avenue to SE Pete’s Avenue. [Ord. 544 § 3, 1985].


12.15.040 System generally – Matrix established.

For the purpose of assigning for buildings or premises situated within the corporate limits of the city as such limits now exist or may hereafter be extended, a grid system of numbering is established as shown by the addressing matrix on file in the planning department. Property numbers shall consist of the assigned structure number, the district prefix (or North/South prefix for Main St.), the proper name of the street such lot or structure faces and the appropriate suffix.

Numbers shall be assigned on a frontage basis proportionate to the length of the grid section with each structure or lot receiving the number nearest to the entrance to the structure or center of the lot, whichever appears to be most practical.

The allocation of numbers for all addresses shall commence at each base line, beginning with 100 and progressing to the larger number following the grid pattern indicated on the addressing matrix. Numbering easterly and westerly shall commence at the division line between the northeast and northwest districts and the division line between the southeast and southwest districts. Numbering northerly and southerly shall commence at the intersection of First Avenue and Main Street, all as shown by the addressing matrix on file in the planning department. [Ord. 544 § 4, 1985].


12.15.050 Division of city into districts.

To indicate the general location of any street, all street signs and addresses shall indicate the district in which the street or portion thereof or address indicated is located, which indication of district shall appear as a prefix to the name of the street, avenue or public or private way (abbreviations may be used for this purpose). The following prefixes shall apply:

(1) Except as designated for Main Street in subsection (2) of this section, each street shall bear the prefix of the quadrant in which it wholly or partly appears as follows:

(a) Northeast District (N.E.). That part of the city lying north of Riverside Drive and east of First Avenue and a line paralleling the east boundary of Section 21 (along Orchard Drive, partially).

(b) Southeast District (S.E.). That part of the city lying south of Riverside Drive and east of South Main Street.

(c) Northwest District (N.W.). That part of the city lying north of North Main Street and Dole Road and west of First Avenue and a line paralleling the east boundary of Section 21 (along Orchard Drive, partially).

(d) Southwest District (S.W.). That part of the city lying south of North Main Street and Dole Road and south and west of South Main Street.

(2) That portion of Main Street lying north and west of First Avenue shall bear the prefix “North” and that portion lying east and south of First Avenue shall bear the prefix “South.” [Ord. 544 § 5, 1985].


12.15.060 Numbering of lots and structures.

(1) Grid Matrix. Building numbering shall be determined on a grid pattern, by ranges or rows of blocks; the distance between numbers varying but proportionate, as shown on the addressing matrix. All streets beginning within any range of blocks shall be allocated numbers beginning with the number of that range and progressing according to its direction on the grid pattern. Wherever practicable (i.e., within areas of generally rectangular blocks), each block shall be in the same hundred series of numbers, allowing 100 numbers to the block (50 on each side).

(2) Irregular Streets. Upon determining the general direction of streets applicable in this section, irregular or winding streets shall take the number sequencing range of nearby streets running that determined direction. Looped streets shall be numbered progressively as if they were a section of the street they originated from. A circular street (having one entrance/exit) shall be numbered progressively from its point of origination and according to that original direction on the grid pattern.

(3) Odd/Even Numbers. Odd numbers shall be assigned to the north and east sides of the street and even numbers upon the south and west sides of the street. In the case where a street changes direction, the odd and even sides shall be assigned to reflect the general direction of the street. Odd and even sides shall remain the same for the entire length of the street, regardless of changes in direction.

(4) Multiple Units. Where a building or premises has several entrances for use by different occupants, the city may assign a different number for each principal entrance. In the case of a multiple dwelling with one principal entrance, or a multi-unit development where insufficient numbers are available, only one number may be assigned to the structure with each unit being identified with the suffix “A,” “B,” “C,” etc., used with the assigned number or a suffix such as “Apt No. 1,” “Apt No. 2,” etc., may be assigned. Mobile home parks and similar developments shall be assigned one number to the principal entrance with each unit or space identified with a suffix indicating the space number.

(5) Driveway Frontage. All developments serviced by unnamed private driveways shall be numbered as if the entire development fronted the public street from which the private driveway begins. [Ord. 544 § 6, 1985].


12.15.070 Size and placement of numbers.

(1) Numbers Assigned. Numbers assigned by the city shall be placed on every structure within the city at the expense of the property owner within 15 days of receiving notification of the assignment of such number. For new construction, numbers shall be assigned within two weeks of the date of issuance of an occupancy permit.

(2) Placement of Numbers. Numbers assigned by the city shall be affixed to the door or door frame of the main entrance to the structure, or as near thereto as practical, in a location conspicuous from the street which the structure faces so that the same may be readily seen from the street.

(3) Size of Numbers. The figures in the numbers required by this section shall be not less than three inches high and shall be a contrasting color to the background.

(4) Address Signs. Where a building is located more than 35 feet from the public or private street on which it fronts, or is situated so that the front entrance is not readily visible from the street, a sign with address numbers shall be located at the intersection of the street and the private driveway serving the building or, if there is no driveway access to the street on which the building fronts, the sign shall be placed within 20 feet of the front property line at a point providing pedestrian access to the building. The sign shall be in conformance with zoning district regulations.

(5) Curb Numbering. The owner or occupant of any residence, structure or place of business (in addition to complying with the provisions of this chapter) may voluntarily place, or cause to be placed, upon the street curb in front of said residence, structure or place of business the appropriate assigned building number. All curb numbering shall adhere to standards of design as follows: block style numbers, black or white in color and not less than two nor more than four inches high. [Ord. 544 § 7, 1985].


12.15.080 Street naming.

All public and private streets shall be named. All street naming shall be subject to approval by the city council. The street name shall not be a duplicating of a street name already in use within the city or within a six-mile radius of the city limits, even if the suffix (Avenue, Drive, etc.) is different, unless there is reasonable assurance that those so-named street sections will be connected in the future. A court that comes off a street at a perpendicular may take that street’s name, but with a “Court” suffix. Public and private ways shall be further named as follows:

(1) Generally, north-south streets shall be designated “Avenue.”

(2) Generally, east-west streets shall be designated “Street.”

(3) Streets designated “Avenue” or “Street” shall retain that same suffix for the entire length of the street, regardless of any changes in direction. The suffix shall represent the general direction of the street.

(4) Arterial streets that are meandering or run diagonally to the north/south or east/west axis may be designated “Road.”

(5) Cul-de-sac streets with no cross streets or intersecting streets shall be designated “Court” or “Place.”

(6) Small cul-de-sacs which consist of inlets off a street (“eyebrows”) shall retain the street name and be numbered as a straight portion of that street.

(7) Collector streets may be designated “Drive.” Local streets may be designated “Way” or “Lane.” Local streets traversing hillsides may be designated “Terrace.”

(8) A continuous loop street that has two intersections with the same street shall be designated “Loop.” A street that runs in a circle with only one entrance/exit shall be designated “Circle.” Loop or circle streets may have only one interior cross street, which shall have a different name than the loop or circle. Loop and circle streets shall have no streets intersecting the exterior of the loop or circle.

(9) Private streets (i.e., within a planned development) shall be designated “Place.” [Ord. 544 § 8, 1985].


12.15.090 Coordination with Douglas County.

Addressing any residence, building, or premises at or near the city boundary shall be coordinated with the Douglas County addressing technician and the numbers assigned to provide for a smooth transition from city to county addresses. All naming of streets shall be coordinated with the Douglas County planning department during preliminary and final subdivision review process to avoid duplication of names within the city and a six-mile radius. [Ord. 544 § 9, 1985].


12.15.100 Renaming streets by council, commission or petition.

(1) By Council or Commission. The common council or the planning commission may initiate the changing of the name of any street within the city of Myrtle Creek. Where the council initiates such change it shall be referred to the planning commission for public hearing and recommendation.

(2) By Petition. A property owner may request a change in the name of a street by filing a petition with the city. The petition shall contain the following information:

(a) Street name proposed for change and a description of the location of the street.

(b) Reason for request.

(c) Suggested new street name and alternative choice.

(d) List of the names and mailing addresses of each owner and resident of all property abutting the street proposed for the name change.

(e) Signatures of the owners of record of at least 51 percent of all property abutting the street proposed for the name change, signifying they agree with the proposed name change. [Ord. 544 § 10, 1985].


12.15.110 Criteria for street name change.

The following criteria shall be used in determining whether or not a street name shall be changed:

(1) Duplicating and Similar Names. The street name is a duplicate of an existing street name (including any name used by Douglas County) or the street name sounds like another street name and causes confusion.

(2) Misspelled Names. Street names that have been misspelled or are words that emphasize a pun or other frivolous association with another word or slang term, resulting in confusion.

(3) Suffix Change. Where future development or street extensions change the classification of a street as described in MCMC 12.15.080, the suffix may be changed to an appropriate suffix. [Ord. 544 § 11, 1985].


12.15.120 Procedure for street name change.

(1) Public Hearing. A public hearing shall be held before the planning commission on any proposed street name change. The hearing shall be scheduled not later than 45 days after receipt of the petition or recommendation from the city council. Notice of hearing shall be given: (a) by mail to all property owners abutting the street in question; (b) to all nonowner occupants residing on the street in question when such information is included with the petition or is a matter of record in the water/sewer clerk’s office; (c) to the general public by the publication of notice in a newspaper of general circulation a minimum of 10 days prior to the hearing; and (d) by mail to the Myrtle Creek police department, the Myrtle Creek fire department, the Myrtle Creek postmaster and other public service agencies requesting notice.

(2) Recommendation of Commission. Following the public hearing, the planning commission shall judge whether such renaming is or is not in the best interest of the city, and the commission shall submit a recommendation on the street name change to the common council for consideration. Notice of the commission’s recommendation shall be mailed to all interested parties and those notified in subsection (1) of this section, except that general public notice shall not be required.

(3) Hearing Before Council. The common council shall hold a public hearing on a proposed street name change whenever there has been filed with the city recorder an objection to the recommendation of the planning commission. Any objection shall be filed, in writing, with the city recorder within 10 days of the date of mailing of the commission’s recommendation to interested parties. If no objection is filed, the council shall base their decision on the record in accordance with the recommendation of the planning commission.

(4) Decision and Filing. After opportunity for hearing has been afforded, the common council shall, by ordinance, rename the street or shall, by resolution, reject the proposed name change. A certified copy of each such ordinance shall be filed for record with the Douglas County clerk. A like copy shall be filed with the county assessor, county surveyor, county elections department and the postmaster at Myrtle Creek, Oregon. Notice shall also be mailed to all property owners of record and other interested parties, including public and private emergency service agencies, utility companies and parcel delivery services. [Ord. 544 § 12, 1985].


12.15.130 Existing addresses.

Numbers assigned prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or in place upon any house, building, or premises on that date, which comply with and are in conformity with the numbering system herein provided shall be deemed as having been assigned by the city. As to any existing numbers that do not comply with such system, it shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of the house, building, or premises having a nonconforming number to apply to the city for the assignment and designation of a new number. [Ord. 544 § 13, 1985].


12.15.140 Violation, penalty and abatement.

(1) Violation and Penalty. Any person (including owner or other person having custody and control of a premises) who shall fail, refuse or neglect to comply with the provisions of this chapter or who shall otherwise violate the terms of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $300.00.

(2) Abatement. In addition to the penalty described in subsection (1) of this section, the common council shall, on such refusal or neglect, have the power and authority to cause the numbers of the said building to be placed thereon, the cost thereof to constitute a lien upon the property and to be entered and collected as any other lien. [Ord. 544 § 14, 1985].


Chapter 12.20 TREES

Sections:

12.20.010    Short title.

12.20.020    Enforcing authority.

12.20.030    Planting and removal of trees.

12.20.040    Street tree plan.

12.20.050    Prohibited trees.

12.20.060    Vision clearance at intersections.

12.20.070    Trimming of trees adjacent to sidewalks.

12.20.080    Hazardous trees.

12.20.090    Removal of trees.

12.20.100    Dangerous trees a nuisance – Summary powers to remove same.

12.20.110    Appeals.

12.20.120    Abuse or mutilation of trees.

12.20.130    Violation and penalty.


12.20.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known as the tree ordinance of the city of Myrtle Creek. [Ord. 543 § 1, 1985].


12.20.020 Enforcing authority.

The city administrator or his duly authorized representative shall be charged with the enforcement of this chapter. [Ord. 543 § 2, 1985].


12.20.030 Planting and removal of trees.

No trees or shrubs shall hereafter be planted in or removed from any public parking strip, sidewalk or other public place in the city without permission from the city. [Ord. 543 § 3, 1985].


12.20.040 Street tree plan.

All trees and shrubs hereafter planted in any public strip, sidewalk, or other public place in the city shall conform as to species and location to the street tree plan on file in the public works department of the city and which is hereby made a part of this chapter. [Ord. 543 § 4, 1985].


12.20.050 Prohibited trees.

It shall be unlawful to plant in any public parking strip or sidewalk planter the following trees:

(1) Poplar.

(2) Conifer.

(3) Fruit or nut trees.*

(4) Willow.

(5) Cottonwood.

(6) Ailanthus. [Ord. 543 § 5, 1985].

*    Exceptions may be approved by the public works department for nonlittering species (lack of flower, fruit, etc.).


12.20.060 Vision clearance at intersections.

In order to provide a clear view of intersecting streets to motorists, there shall be a triangular area of clear vision maintained at the intersection of any two streets where no trees or shrubs shall be placed or planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet and 10 feet above the grade of the street centerline. The size of the restricted area for visibility shall be measured as described in the zoning ordinance provisions for “clear area.” [Ord. 543 § 6, 1985].


12.20.070 Trimming of trees adjacent to sidewalks.

No owner or person in charge of property that abuts upon a street or public sidewalk shall permit trees or bushes on his property to interfere with street or sidewalk traffic. It shall be the duty of an owner or person in charge of property that abuts upon a street or public sidewalk to keep all bottom branches of trees and bushes on his premises and the adjoining parking strip trimmed to a height of not less than eight feet above the sidewalk and not less than 12 feet above the roadway. [Amended during 2012 recodification; Ord. 543 § 7, 1985].


12.20.080 Hazardous trees.

No owner or person in charge of property shall allow to stand a dead or decaying tree that is a hazard to the public or to persons or property on or near the property. [Ord. 543 § 8, 1985].


12.20.090 Removal of trees.

The city administrator or his duly authorized representatives may cause to be trimmed, pruned or removed any trees, shrubs, plants or vegetation in any parking strip, sidewalk or other public place, or may require any property owner to trim, prune or remove any trees, shrubs, plants, or vegetation in a parking strip or sidewalk abutting upon said owner’s property. Failure to comply therewith, after 30 days’ notice by the city recorder, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. [Ord. 543 § 9, 1985].


12.20.100 Dangerous trees a nuisance – Summary powers to remove same.

Any tree or shrub growing in a parking strip, sidewalk, or other public place, or on private property, which is endangering or which in any way may endanger the security or usefulness of any public street, sewer or sidewalk, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the city may remove or trim such tree or may require the property owner to remove or trim any such tree on private property or in a parking strip or sidewalk abutting upon said owner’s property. Failure of the property owner to remove or trim such tree after 30 days’ notice by the city recorder shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, and the city administrator may then cause said tree to be removed or trimmed and assess the cost against the property. [Ord. 543 § 10, 1985].


12.20.110 Appeals.

Appeals from orders made hereunder may be made by filing written notice thereof with the city recorder within 10 days after such order is received, stating in substance that appeal is being made from such order to the city council. The city recorder shall thereupon call such appeal to the attention of the city council at the next regular meeting, at which meeting the appellant and the city administrator may present evidence. Action taken by the city council after such hearing shall be conclusive. [Ord. 543 § 11, 1985].


12.20.120 Abuse or mutilation of trees.

It shall be a violation of this chapter to abuse, destroy, or mutilate any tree, shrub, or plant in a public parking strip, sidewalk or other public place or to attach or place any rope or wire (other than one appropriately used to support a young or broken tree), sign, poster, handbill, or other thing to or on any tree growing in a public place or to cause or permit any wire charged with electricity to come in contact with any such tree, or to allow any gaseous, liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in contact with their roots or leaves. [Ord. 543 § 12, 1985].


12.20.130 Violation and penalty.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or failing to comply with them shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 20 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. [Ord. 543 § 13, 1985].


Chapter 12.25 PARKS

Sections:

12.25.010    Permits.

12.25.020    Park use requiring fees.

12.25.030    Park hours.

12.25.040    Park closures.

12.25.050    Prohibited acts in city parks.

12.25.060    Penalties.

    Prior legislation: Ord. 503.

    Legislative history: Ord. 684.


12.25.010 Permits.

Permits may be obtained at the Myrtle Creek City Hall. The city administrator or administrator’s designee shall have authority to issue permits for the following activities:

(1) To secure temporary entry into a designated camping area.

(2) To camp overnight at Millsite R.V. Park up to the following maximum number of days:

(a) May 15th to September 15th of each year there is a five-day camping limit out of every seven days.

(b) September 16th to May 14th of each year there is a 14-day camping limit out of every 18 days.

(3) To conduct any special events or group activities within park facilities, application must be made seven business days in advance. Special requirements may be applied, based on the nature of the event, for approval of permit.

No person shall engage in any activity described in this section without first obtaining a permit. The city administrator or city administrator’s designee may require reasonable terms and conditions for the issuance of permits which are not inconsistent with the terms of this chapter. The duration for the permits shall be set by the city administrator. Fees for all permits shall be as set forth by Resolution 17-07 in the handbook of fees and charges or as otherwise posted. [Ord. 828 § 1, 2019; Ord. 533 § 1, 1984].


12.25.020 Park use requiring fees.

Fees and deposits for permits, camping and rental of park facilities shall be posted in each park and recreational area as set forth by Resolution 17-07 in the handbook of fees and charges or as otherwise posted.

(1) RV camping:

(a) Campsite providing hookups;

(b) Campsite without hookups;

(c) Extra vehicle within campsite.

(2) User fees required as follows:

(a) Non-youth baseball or softball tournaments;

(b) Groups reserving park areas;

(c) Commercial uses;

(d) Other activities as adopted by resolution.

Note: The city of Myrtle Creek requires a clean-up deposit which will be refunded if all litter and debris are picked up after usage and no damage is done to park facilities. (Baseball or softball tournament deposits are per day per field.)

(3) R.V. dump station:

(a) Included in fee for campsite with hookup.

(b) Non-park user. Honor system. Deposit fee in box. [Ord. 828 § 2, 2019; Ord. 533 § 2, 1984].


12.25.030 Park hours.

Parks and recreational areas shall be closed a half hour after sunset until a half hour before sunrise unless otherwise posted. [Ord. 828 § 3, 2019; Ord. 533 § 3, 1984].


12.25.040 Park closures.

The city administrator or the administrator’s designee is hereby authorized to close or restrict public use of any park and recreational area or a portion thereof when it is deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare or for the protection of the park and recreational area facilities. [Ord. 828 § 4, 2019; Ord. 533 § 4, 1984].


12.25.050 Prohibited acts in city parks.

It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts in a city park or recreational area:

(1) To fail to pay any fees, deposits, rentals or costs assessed for use or rental of park facilities.

(2) To fail to secure a permit or to violate the terms of any permit required by MCMC 12.25.010.

(3) To disregard, deface, remove, tamper or damage any sign or notice posted or erected by the city.

(4) To camp in areas not designated for overnight camping.

(5) To operate or park motor vehicles, bicycles or trailers outside designated spaces in a manner that prevents access to park facilities in excess of designated speed limits.

(6) To erect, place, post or maintain any advertising matter, sign or printed matter other than legal notices in a park facility in excess of designated speed limits.

(7) To solicit, sell, offer for sale, peddle or vend any food, liquids, goods, or merchandise or any items without approval of the park commission or the commission’s designee.

(8) To allow any animal:

(a) To run at large within park boundaries.

(b) To be present inside any park buildings except service animals as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act. Service animals are defined as animals that are individually trained to do work or perform tasks for people with disabilities.

(c) No horses allowed in parks unless on vehicle roadways.

(9) To operate or use a public address system or any sound system without the approval of the park commission or the commission’s designee.

(10) To shoot archery or golf within park boundaries without a special permit.

(11) To build an open campfire.

(12) To use a portable stove during fire season.

(13) To leave, deposit, or scatter waste, refuse, or garbage, including but not limited to a person’s residential waste, refuse or garbage.

(14) To allow animal excrements that are not disposed of properly to remain.

(15) To possess or consume alcohol without approval from the city.

(16) Smoking or other use of tobacco products: Smoke free zones are designated as follows:

(a) Millsite Park: from the northwest corner of the bunker south to Myrtle Creek, then west to the western edge of the sidewalk along the west side of the leisure lawn area, then north along the western side of the aforementioned sidewalk to the sidewalk along Volunteer Way, then east along the sidewalk on the south side of Volunteer Way to the starting point.

(b) Evergreen Park: all of the area on the interior of the paved loop inside the park.

(c) Creekside: all area west of a line drawn from the southeast corner of the parking lot by Tommy’s running north to a point where the east side of the Creekside parking lot meets NE Oak Street.

(d) Maggie Steinbaugh Park: in its entirety.

“Smoking” as used herein shall include: electronic smoking devices, tobacco, marijuana, bidis, cigarettes, cigarillos, cigars, clove cigarettes, nicotine vaporizers, nicotine liquids, hookahs, kreteks, pipes, chew, snuff, smokeless tobacco, and any burning or smoldering substance in any form. “Electronic smoking device” as used herein includes an electronic or battery-operated device and delivers vapors for inhalation. “Electronic smoking devices” includes every variation and type of such devices whether they are manufactured, distributed, marketed or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor. [Ord. 828 § 5, 2019; Ord. 533 § 5, 1984].


12.25.060 Penalties.

A violation of any provision of MCMC 12.25.050 is punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more than $500.00. [Ord. 828 § 6, 2019; Ord. 533 § 6, 1984].


Title 13 UTILITIES

Chapters:

Division I. Rules and Regulations

13.05    Water

13.10    Water Shortage Crisis

13.15    Sewer

13.20    Water and Sewer Service Outside City

Division II. Franchises

13.25    PacifiCorp Franchise

13.30    Sprint Franchise

13.35    AT&T Franchise

13.40    C.P. National Corporation Franchise

13.45    MCI Franchise

13.50    South Umpqua Disposal Service Franchise

13.55    Charter Communications Cable Franchise

13.60    Avista Gas Franchise

13.65    Douglas Fast Net Franchise


Chapter 13.05 WATER

Sections:

13.05.010    Administration.

13.05.020    Public distribution system.

13.05.030    Meters.

13.05.040    Use of water.

13.05.050    Cross-connection control.

13.05.060    Billing and deposits.

13.05.070    General provisions.

13.05.080    Penalty.

    Legislative history: Ords. 330, 342, 373, 409, 528, 551, 557, 559, 650, 689 and 751.


13.05.010 Administration.

(1) The public works director shall have charge of the maintenance and operation of the water supply, treatment plant, pumping equipment, distribution system, fire hydrants, meters, and all other appurtenances of the city water system. The public works director shall supervise all extensions and alterations of the city water system. He shall also be responsible for the reading of all water meters, and shall report to the city administrator on all money due the city of all deposits, fees and charges made for water services and connections.

(2) The city administrator shall be responsible for the collection of water bills, deposits and fees. All revenues therefrom shall be accounted for in the same manner approved for other municipal deposits. [Ord. 251 § 1, 1957].


13.05.020 Public distribution system.

(1) The public distribution system consists of all piping, valves and other appurtenances from the treatment works up to, and including, service meters. For the purpose of this section, the public distribution system does not include unmetered private fire protection lines lying outside the public right-of-way or outside a city utility easement within private property. No person or persons other than employees of the public works department shall extend, tap, change, obstruct, interfere with or in any way disturb the public distribution system except as expressly authorized by the public works director. All such work shall be done in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the public works director.

(2) Extensions to water mains shall be constructed in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the public works director.

(3) The public works director shall require such testing as may be necessary on any water main extensions. No water main shall be placed in service until accepted by the public works director. Upon their acceptance, all water main extensions shall become part of the city water distribution system. The provisions of this section shall also apply to any installation of water mains outside the corporate limits of the city where an agreement has first been made with the city to connect such mains to the existing distribution system. [Ord. 251 § 2, 1957].


13.05.030 Meters.

(1) All service connections, except fire protection connections, shall be metered, and payment shall be made for water at rates established in the city of Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges.

(2) Meters will be furnished by the public works department and will remain the property of the city and will at all times be under its control.

(3) No person other than an authorized employee of the department may change the location of, alter or interfere in any way with any meter.

(4) The expense of maintaining meters will be borne by the city; provided, however, that where replacements, repairs, or adjustments of a meter or meter stop are made necessary by the act, negligence or carelessness of the owner or occupant of the premises, the expense to the department caused thereby shall be charged and collected from the owner and/or occupant of the premises.

(5) In case of damage to the meter, or in case of its stoppage or defective operation, the owner or occupant of the premises shall give immediate notice to the city. All water furnished by the city and used on any metered premises must pass through the meter, unless said water is used for the exclusive purpose of fire protection. No bypass or connection around the meter will be permitted. If any meter becomes defective or fails to register, the consumer will be charged at the average monthly consumption rate as shown by the meter over the period of the preceding three months when the meter was accurately registering.

(6) The accuracy of the meter for any premises will be tested by the department upon request of the owner or occupant. If, on such test, the meter is found to be defective, the meter shall be replaced and the water bill may be adjusted in such manner as is fair and proper, but in all cases the adjustment shall be limited to three months prior to the discovery of the error. [Ord. 251 § 3, 1957].


13.05.040 Use of water.

(1) A service connection charge, as established in the city of Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges, shall be paid to the city for each new service connection to the city water system. A separate service connection charge shall be paid for each dwelling unit, including each single-family dwelling and each dwelling unit in a multifamily dwelling, and each commercial unit whether in a single occupancy premises or a joint occupancy premises, and regardless of whether there is a separate meter for each unit or occupancy. A unit is described as each separate store, office, or occupied space or rental on the same premises of every name, nature, and description.

(2) When a new service is installed for any premises, the meter stop shall be closed and locked, and thereafter will be opened only by an authorized employee of the city, and only upon request of the owner or occupant.

(3) No person shall take or use city water from premises other than his own. Each premises shall be served by a separate service connection and meter; except that for multiple-family dwellings and commercial establishments under joint occupancy, one or more common meters may be used if approved by the public works director.

(4) Where the meter stop has been closed and locked by the city for any reason, no person except an authorized employee of the city may unlock and open it again.

(5) Upon presentation of proper credentials, the public works director or his designated representative may enter at reasonable times any building, structure or premises served by the city water system to perform any duty imposed upon him by this chapter; provided, however, in the event that entry is not voluntarily permitted by the owner or person occupying the building, structure or premises, the public works director must first obtain an order from a court of competent jurisdiction allowing such entry.

(6) Fire hydrants and standpipes may be opened and used only by the water and fire departments of the city, or by such persons as may be specifically authorized by the public works director. [Ord. 251 § 4, 1957].


13.05.050 Cross-connection control.

(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is:

(a) To protect the public potable water supply of the city of Myrtle Creek against contaminants which could backflow from the customer’s water system; and

(b) To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the consumer’s potable water system(s) and nonpotable water system(s), plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems.

(2) The public works director shall be responsible for implementing a cross control program in accordance with the Oregon Administrative Rules of the Oregon State Health Department. The public works department shall have a cross control official certified by the Oregon Health Division.

(3) No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the public works department unless the public water supply is protected as required by state laws and regulations and this chapter. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the public works department if a backflow prevention assembly required by this chapter is not installed, tested and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until conditions or defects are corrected.

(4) The customer’s system shall be open for inspection to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of this chapter, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the public works director may deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises until the customer has corrected the condition(s).

(5) An approved backflow prevention assembly shall also be installed on each service line to a customer’s water system at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served, but, in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever required by the administrative rules of the Oregon Health Division, or whenever the following conditions exist:

(a) In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the public works director, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an Oregon Health Division approved backflow prevention assembly appropriate to the degree of hazard.

(b) In the case of premises on which any industrial fluid or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create a hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of processed waters and waters originating from the utility system which have been subject to deterioration in quality.

(c) In the case of premises having an internal cross-connection that cannot be permanently corrected or controlled, or where intricate plumbing and piping arrangements exist, or where entry to all portions of the premises is denied by the person in charge of the premises, or that is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line.

(6) The type of protective assembly required under this chapter shall depend upon the degree of hazard which shall be determined by the city in general conformity to the Oregon Administrative Rules of the Oregon Health Division.

(7) It shall be the duty of the customer-user at any premises where backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made at least once per year. In those instances where the public works director deems the hazard to be great enough, he may require certified inspections at more frequent intervals. The inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the water user and shall be performed by a certified tester approved by the Oregon Health Division. It shall be the duty of the public works director to see that the tests are made in a timely manner. The assemblies shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the customer-user whenever said assemblies are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs and replacements shall be kept and copies furnished to the city. [Ord. 251 § 5, 1957].


13.05.060 Billing and deposits.

(1) Payment Due. All charges for water supplied during any month shall be paid not later than 20 days after the billing date. Bills which remain unpaid for more than 20 days after the billing date shall be considered delinquent. If a customer’s account remains delinquent for more than 10 days, the water service may be turned off at the premises against which the delinquent charges are owing. When so turned off, the water shall not be turned on again until a reconnect fee established in the city of Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges, plus the delinquent portion of the customer’s account balance, has been paid. If the customer’s account remains delinquent for more than 30 days, the amount owed shall be deducted from the customer’s deposit, the customer’s account may be closed and any remaining deposit balance shall be returned to the customer at the customer’s last known mailing address. The customer shall be responsible for keeping the city informed as to the customer’s current mailing address.

(2) Deposits. At the time a new water service account is opened, and before the water is turned on for any premises, the customer shall pay a security deposit established by the city of Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges.

(a) The customer’s security deposit may be credited to their account after one year if no delinquency has occurred during the preceding 12 months.

(b) The customer shall be defined as the person or persons in whose name the water service account is registered.

(3) In case of a temporary vacancy of any premises, water may be turned off at the meter stop by the city, upon written request of the customer. Service will be turned on again by the city when requested by the customer.

(4) Monthly rates shall be established by the city of Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges. [Ord. 751 § 1, 2006; Ord. 251 § 6, 1957].


13.05.070 General provisions.

Should it become necessary to shut off the water from any section of the city because of any accident or for the purpose of making repairs or extensions, the city will endeavor to give timely notice to the consumers affected thereby and will, so far as practical, use its best efforts to prevent inconvenience and damage arising from any such causes; but the failure to give such notice shall not render the city responsible or liable in damages for an inconvenience, injury or loss which may result therefrom. [Ord. 251 § 7, 1957].


13.05.080 Penalty.

A violation of a provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. [Ord. 251 § 8, 1957].


Chapter 13.10 WATER SHORTAGE CRISIS

Sections:

13.10.010    Water shortage crisis.

13.10.020    Prohibited acts during a water shortage crisis.

13.10.030    Emergency powers of council during water shortage crisis.

13.10.040    Termination or suspension of water shortage crisis regulations.


13.10.010 Water shortage crisis.

At any regular or special meeting of the city council, a majority of the council present at such meeting may declare a water shortage crisis to exist if, in the opinion of said majority, the adequacy of the water supply to the city of Myrtle Creek is sufficiently endangered to create a risk of danger to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city of Myrtle Creek.

Any declaration of a water shortage crisis shall be by resolution, in writing, subscribed by the mayor and the city recorder, and shall state the effective date and time of such declaration. [Ord. 438 § 1, 1977].


13.10.020 Prohibited acts during a water shortage crisis.

During a water shortage crisis, the council may declare any one or more of the following acts to be unlawful, if done by any person, corporation, or other entity, with water processed by the city of Myrtle Creek:

(1) To use water to wash any building, house, garage, or other structure or part thereof.

(2) To use water to wash any car, truck, or other vehicle, except at a commercial establishment that regularly washes vehicles.

(3) To use water to moisten any driveway, sidewalk, street, alley, or other uncultivated surface of real property without specific written authorization from the city administrator of the city of Myrtle Creek.

(4) To add water to any swimming pool except a public pool or a pool at a commercial business establishment.

(5) To water any lawns, flowers, or other ornamental plants.

(6) To water any gardens or noncommercial agricultural products.

(7) To water or irrigate any agricultural crops.

Violation of this section shall be a violation of the ordinances of the city of Myrtle Creek and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and imprisonment in the city jail for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day of violation, or any violation after notice thereof, shall constitute a separate offense. [Ord. 438 § 2, 1977].


13.10.030 Emergency powers of council during water shortage crisis.

During a water shortage crisis, the council may:

(1) Impose a rate schedule by resolution for the purchase of water supplied by the city of Myrtle Creek, with higher rates for higher use. Such rate schedule shall be in writing, subscribed by the mayor and city recorder, and shall state the effective time and date of such rate schedule.

(2) Impose such other water saving measures by resolution upon the city of Myrtle Creek as, in the opinion of the council, are reasonable and necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city of Myrtle Creek. Any such measure shall be in writing, subscribed by the mayor and the city recorder, and shall state the effective time and date of such measure. The willful violation of any such measure shall be a violation of the ordinances of the city of Myrtle Creek and subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment in the jail of the city of Myrtle Creek, not to exceed 30 days. Each day a violation occurs, or any violation after notice thereof, shall be a separate offense. [Ord. 438 § 3, 1977].


13.10.040 Termination or suspension of water shortage crisis regulations.

At any general or special meeting of the city council, a majority of the council may declare the termination or suspension of a water shortage crisis. Any declaration of a termination or suspension of a water shortage crisis shall be in writing, subscribed by the mayor and city recorder, and shall state the effective date and time of such declaration. [Ord. 438 § 4, 1977].


Chapter 13.15 SEWER

Sections:

13.15.010    Definitions.

13.15.020    Use of public sewers required.

13.15.030    Private sewage disposal.

13.15.040    Building sewers and connections.

13.15.050    Use of the public sewers.

13.15.060    Protection from damage.

13.15.070    Powers and authority of officials.

13.15.080    Fees, service rates and billing.

13.15.090    Penalties.

    Legislative history: Ords. 650, 651, 689 and 690.


13.15.010 Definitions.

Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:

“Biochemical oxygen demand” shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees C, which shall be expressed in parts per million by weight.

“Building sewer” shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.

“Garbage” shall mean solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.

“Industrial wastes” shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from domestic sanitary sewage.

“pH” shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.

“Properly shredded garbage” shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.

“Public sewer” shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage and which are owned, operated and maintained by the city.

“Sewage” shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be present.

“Storm sewer” or “storm drain” shall mean a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.

“Suspended solids” shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. [Ord. 214 § 1, 1953].


13.15.020 Use of public sewers required.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city of Myrtle Creek, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.

(2) It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city of Myrtle Creek, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

(3) Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.

(4) The owner of any house, building, or structure used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city limits and located on property that is within 200 feet of a public sanitary sewer that is capable of serving the house, building or structure as determined by the public works director, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 214 § 2, 1953].


13.15.030 Private sewage disposal.

(1) Where the public works director has determined that a public sewer is not available under the provisions of MCMC 13.15.020, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter.

(2) Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a permit from the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.

(3) The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all regulations of the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any storm sewer or natural outlet.

(4) At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as determined by the public works director, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material; except that septic tanks used in conjunction with an approved septic tank effluent pumping system may continue to be used.

(5) The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.

(6) No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the city of Myrtle Creek or the state of Oregon. [Ord. 214 § 3, 1953].


13.15.040 Building sewers and connections.

(1) No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the public works director. All building sewers shall be constructed in conformance with current Uniform Plumbing Code requirements.

(2) All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.

(3) A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building unless plans for a common building sewer are approved by the public works director. All persons, firms, or corporations which shall make any sewer connection with any part of the public sewer system or storm drain of the city of Myrtle Creek under the provisions of this chapter hereby agree in consideration of the city of Myrtle Creek granting them a permit to so connect to the public sewer system or storm drain that they will perpetually save the city harmless from any and all backflow, seepage or drainage resulting in damage in any way whatsoever or caused by the public sewer system and/or storm drain to their property; and further covenant and agree that for the above consideration the said city will not in any way be responsible for any damage whatsoever caused by any backflow, seepage, or drainage caused by the public sewer system and/or storm drain to their property.

(4) Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the public works director, to meet all requirements of this chapter.

(5) The person installing the building sewer shall notify the public works director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the public works director or his representative.

(6) All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the public works director. [Ord. 214 § 4, 1953].


13.15.050 Use of the public sewers.

(1) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to the public sewer system.

(2) Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to the storm sewer, or to a natural outlet approved by the public works director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the public works director, to a storm sewer.

(3) Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer:

(a) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit.

(b) Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million, by weight, of fat, oil, or grease.

(c) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.

(d) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.

(e) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the public sewer system.

(f) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or public works personnel.

(g) Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.

(h) Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.

(i) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance.

(4) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the public works director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the public works director, and shall be accessible for cleaning and inspection.

(5) Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, continuously in efficient operation at all times.

(6) The admission into the public sewer of any waters or wastes having: (a) a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per million by weight, or (b) containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids, or (c) containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in this section having an average daily flow greater than one percent of the average daily sewage flow of the city, shall be subject to the review and approval of the public works director. Where necessary in the opinion of the public works director, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such pretreatment as may be necessary to: (a) reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to not more than 300 parts per million and the suspended solids to not more than 350 parts per million by weight, or (b) reduce the objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in this section or control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed pretreatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the public works director and of the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.

(7) Where pretreatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation, by the owner at his expense.

(8) When required by the public works director, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.

(9) All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes shall be determined in accordance with “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage” and shall be determined at the control manhole, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been provided, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.

(10) No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. [Ord. 214 § 5, 1953].


13.15.060 Protection from damage.

No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the public sewer system. Any person violating this section shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. [Ord. 214 § 6, 1953].


13.15.070 Powers and authority of officials.

The public works director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 214 § 7, 1953].


13.15.080 Fees, service rates and billing.

(1) Fees, service rates and other charges for sewer service shall be established by the city of Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges. A separate service connection charge shall be paid for each dwelling unit, including each single-family dwelling and each dwelling unit in a multifamily dwelling, and each commercial unit whether in a single occupancy premises or a joint premises. A unit is described as each separate store, office, or occupied space or rental on the same premises of every name, nature, and description.

(2) All charges for sewer service during any month shall be paid not later than 20 days after the billing date. Bills which remain unpaid for more than 20 days after the billing date shall be considered delinquent. If a customer’s account remains delinquent for more than 10 days, the water service may be turned off at the premises against which the delinquent sewer charges are owing. When so turned off, the water shall not be turned on again until a reconnect fee established in the city of Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges, plus the delinquent portion of the customer’s sewer account balance, has been paid. If the customer’s account remains delinquent for more than 30 days, the amount owed shall be deducted from the customer’s water service account deposit, the customer’s sewer and water accounts may be closed and any remaining deposit balance shall be returned to the customer at the customer’s last known mailing address. The customer shall be responsible for keeping the city informed as to the customer’s current mailing address. The customer shall be defined as the person or persons in whose name the sewer service account is registered.

The property owner of record shall be responsible for the payments of all sewer charges prescribed by the ordinances of the city of Myrtle Creek. If any person other than the owner of the property shall apply for water and sewer service at the property and the account shall be delinquent for a period of 60 days, the city shall submit the bill for unpaid sewer charges to the property owner of record who shall be responsible therefor.

Sewer charges shall be a lien against the premises from and after the date of billing and entry on the ledger or other records of the city pertaining to sewer charges. Such ledger or other records shall remain accessible for inspection by anyone interested in ascertaining the amount of such charges against the property. Whenever a bill for sewer charges remains unpaid for 90 days after the rendering of said bill, the lien thereby created may result in the city’s refusal to service the property or if remaining unpaid, the sewer charges may be certified to the county tax collector in accordance with the previsions of ORS 454.225.

(3) Sewer service charges shall continue to be levied against the customer’s account until the customer requests the city to turn off the water service at the premises, or in the case of a delinquent account, until the city turns off the water service. [Ord. 750 § 1, 2006; Ord. 214 § 8, 1953].


13.15.090 Penalties.

A violation of a provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. [Ord. 214 § 9, 1953].


Chapter 13.20 WATER AND SEWER SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY

Sections:

13.20.010    Water and sewer service outside city.

13.20.020    Outside service agreement.

13.20.030    Service fee.

13.20.040    Limitation.

13.20.050    Authority.

13.20.060    Violation and penalty.

    Legislative history: Ords. 580 and 635.


13.20.010 Water and sewer service outside city.

City water and sanitary sewer service to property outside the corporate limits of the city may be permitted by the city at its sole discretion under the following conditions:

(1) The city has determined that annexation of the property is not possible at the time application for service is made.

(2) The owners of the property shall sign a legally executed irrevocable consent to annex form which they shall cause to be recorded in the office of the Douglas County clerk.

(3) The property shall have direct frontage on that portion of the public road right-of-way within which the city’s water and/or sanitary sewer main is located, or shall be property through which the city’s water and/or sanitary sewer main passes via a utility easement.

(4) The main to which the connection is to be made must be, in the opinion of the city, of such size, of such quality, and in such state of repair as to permit the connection to be made without detriment to existing users and with reasonable assurance that the party seeking such connection shall be able to receive his reasonable requirements for water after said connection is made.

(5) Before water and/or sanitary sewer service is provided, the property owners shall sign a written agreement, as prescribed in MCMC 13.20.020, accepting the conditions of city water and/or sanitary sewer service.

(6) Water service outside the corporate limits is intended for household and sanitary use and is not intended for irrigation or livestock watering. The city reserves the right at any time to prohibit the use of water outside the city limits for purposes other than stated herein.

(7) Service to users outside the city is hereby declared to be subject to the prior and superior rights of the people of the city of Myrtle Creek to said water at all times. All water sold to users outside the corporate limits shall be surplus water only and, as such, the sale of water to outside users is a privilege which may be revoked at any and all times. In no event shall any contract for the sale of water to any outside user be construed as placing any obligation on the city to furnish anything except surplus water, when available. [Ord. 519 § 1, 1983].


13.20.020 Outside service agreement.

Prior to connecting to or receiving service from a city water and/or sanitary sewer main outside the city limits, the legal owners of the property to be served shall sign a legally executed agreement which shall be in a form approved by the city council, and which they shall cause to be recorded in the office of the Douglas County clerk. The agreement shall contain all applicable terms, conditions and limitations specified in this chapter, as well as any other special terms, conditions and limitations which the city council may determine to be reasonable and appropriate, and shall be binding upon the heirs, administrator, executors, assigns, grantees, tenants, and all persons occupying the premises which is the subject of the agreement. [Ord. 519 § 2, 1983].


13.20.030 Service fee.

In addition to any fees or charges required by Myrtle Creek ordinances or any charges required by a water cooperative outside the city limits, a one-time fee established by the city of Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges will be paid to the city of Myrtle Creek in advance of hookup. [Ord. 519 § 3, 1983].


13.20.040 Limitation.

Nothing in this chapter shall limit the authority of the city of Myrtle Creek to extend its water and sanitary sewer lines outside the city limits for the purpose of connecting to, or selling water to, a water district, association, cooperative, corporation, or municipality. Future sale of water to, or extension of water and sanitary sewer mains to, the territory of a water district, association, cooperative, corporation, or municipality shall be determined by the city council. [Ord. 519 § 4, 1983].


13.20.050 Authority.

Notwithstanding the authority reserved to the city council in MCMC 13.20.040, the city administrator is hereby authorized to administer and enforce all the provisions of this chapter. Any person aggrieved by the actions of the city administrator with respect to the administration of this chapter shall have the right to appeal such actions to the city council. [Ord. 519 § 5, 1983].


13.20.060 Violation and penalty.

New water and sanitary sewer mains shall not be extended outside the corporate limits of the city nor will service hookups be allowed to existing water and sanitary sewer mains outside the city limits except as provided by this chapter. Any willful violation of this chapter or the agreement required by MCMC 13.20.020 may result in the immediate discontinuance of water service without notice. [Ord. 519 § 6, 1983].


Chapter 13.25 PACIFICORP FRANCHISE

Ordinance No. 756 

AN ORDINANCE GRANTING AN ELECTRIC UTILITY FRANCHISE AND GENERAL UTILITY EASEMENT TO PACIFICORP AND PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF ORDINANCE NO. 561 

WHEREAS, PacifiCorp, an Oregon Corporation, d.b.a. Pacific Power, is a regulated public utility that provides electric power and energy to the citizens of the City of Myrtle Creek (the “City”) and other surrounding areas;

WHEREAS, providing electrical power and energy requires the installation, operation and maintenance of power poles and other related facilities to be located within the public ways of the City;

WHEREAS, the City desires to set forth the terms and conditions by which PacifiCorp shall use the public ways of the City;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it ordained by the City:

SECTION 1. Grant of Franchise and General Utility Easement. The City hereby grants to PacifiCorp the right, privilege and authority to construct, maintain, operate, upgrade, and relocate its electrical distribution and transmission lines and related appurtenances, including underground conduits and structures, poles, towers, wires, guy anchors, vaults, transformers, transmission lines, and communication lines (collectively referred to herein as “Electric Facilities”) in, under, along, over and across the present and future streets, alleys, and public ways (collectively referred to herein as “Public Ways”) within the City, for the purpose of supplying and transmitting electric power and energy to the inhabitants of the City and persons and corporations beyond the limits thereof.

SECTION 2. Term. The term of this Franchise and General Utility Easement is for ten (10) years commencing on the date of acceptance by the Company as set forth in Section 3 below.

SECTION 3. Acceptance by PacifiCorp. Within sixty (60) days after the passage of this ordinance by the City, PacifiCorp shall file an unqualified written acceptance thereof, with the City Recorder, otherwise the ordinance and the rights granted herein shall be null and void.

SECTION 4. Non-Exclusive Franchise. The right to use and occupy the Public Ways of the City shall be nonexclusive and the City reserves the right to use the Public Ways for itself or any other entity that provides water or sewerage service to City residences; provided, however, that such use shall not unreasonably interfere with PacifiCorp’s Electric Facilities or PacifiCorp’s rights granted herein.

SECTION 5. City Regulatory Authority. In addition to the provision herein contained, the City reserves the right to adopt such additional ordinances and regulations as may be deemed necessary in the exercise of its police power for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of its citizens and their properties or exercise any other rights, powers, or duties required or authorized, under the Constitution of the State of Oregon, the laws of Oregon or City Ordinances.

SECTION 6. Indemnification. The City shall in no way be liable or responsible for any loss or damage to property or any injury to, or death, of any person that may occur in the construction, operation or maintenance by PacifiCorp of its Electric Facilities. PacifiCorp shall indemnify, defend and hold the City harmless from and against claims, demands, liens and all liability or damage of whatsoever kind on account of PacifiCorp’s use of the Public Ways within the City, and shall pay the costs of defense plus reasonable attorneys’ fees for any claim, demand or lien brought thereunder. The City shall: (a) give prompt written notice to PacifiCorp of any claim, demand or lien with respect to which the City seeks indemnification hereunder; and (b) unless in the City’s judgment a conflict of interest exists between the City and PacifiCorp with respect to such claim, demand or lien, permit PacifiCorp to assume the defense of such claim, demand, or lien with counsel satisfactory to City. If such defense is not assumed by PacifiCorp, PacifiCorp shall not be subject to liability for any settlement made without its consent. Notwithstanding any provision hereof to the contrary, PacifiCorp shall not be obligated to indemnify, defend or hold the City harmless to the extent any claim, demand or lien arises out of or in connection with any negligent or willful act or failure to act of the City or any of its officers or employees.

SECTION 7. Annexation.

7.1 Extension of City Limits. Upon the annexation of any territory to the City, the rights granted herein shall extend to the annexed territory to the extent the City has such authority. All Electrical Facilities owned, maintained, or operated by PacifiCorp located within any public ways of the annexed territory shall thereafter be subject to all of the terms hereof.

7.2 Annexation. When any territory is approved for annexation to the City, the City shall, not later than ten (10) working days after passage of an ordinance approving the proposed annexation, provide by certified mail to PacifiCorp: (a) each site address to be annexed as recorded on county assessment and tax rolls; (b) a legal description of the proposed boundary change; and (c) a copy of the City’s ordinance approving the proposed annexation. The notice shall be mailed to:

Pacific Power

Annexations

P.O. Box 400

Portland, Oregon 97207-0400

With a copy to:

PacifiCorp

Attn: Office of the General Counsel

825 N E Multnomah, Suite 2000

Portland, OR 97232

Additional or increased fees or taxes, other than ad valorem taxes, imposed on PacifiCorp as a result of an annexation of territory to the City shall become effective on the effective date of the annexation if notice is given to PacifiCorp by certified mail not later than ten (10) working days after the effective date of the annexation. However, if notification of the effective date of the annexation is provided to PacifiCorp later than the tenth (10th) working day after the effective date of the annexation, the additional or increased fees or taxes will become effective on the date of the notification. This provision shall be subject to any amendment of ORS 222.005.

SECTION 8. Planning, Design, Construction and Installation of Company Facilities.

8.1 All Electric Facilities installed or used under authority of this Franchise shall be used, constructed and maintained in accordance with applicable federal, state and city laws, codes and regulations.

8.2 Except in the case of an emergency, PacifiCorp shall, prior to commencing new construction or major reconstruction work in the public way or street or other public places, apply for a permit from the City which permit shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned, or delayed. PacifiCorp will abide by all applicable ordinances and all reasonable rules, regulations and requirements of the City, and the City may inspect the manner of such work and require remedies as may be necessary to assure compliance. Notwithstanding the foregoing, PacifiCorp shall not be obligated to obtain a permit to perform emergency repairs.

8.3 All Electric Facilities shall be located so as to cause minimum interference with the Public Ways of the City and shall be constructed, installed, maintained, cleared of vegetation, renovated or replaced in accordance with applicable rules, ordinances and regulations of the City.

8.4 If, during the course of work on its Electrical Facilities, PacifiCorp causes damage to or alters the Public Way or public property, PacifiCorp shall (at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the City) replace and restore it to a condition comparable to that which existed before the work commenced.

8.5 In addition to the installation of underground electric distribution lines as provided by applicable state law and regulations, PacifiCorp shall, upon payment of all charges provided in its tariffs or their equivalent, place newly constructed electric distribution lines underground as may be required by City ordinance.

8.6 The City shall have the right without cost to use all poles and suitable overhead structures owned by PacifiCorp within Public Ways for City wires used in connection with its fire alarms, police signal systems, traffic signals, or other communication lines used for governmental purposes; provided, however, any such uses shall be for activities owned, operated or used by the City for a public purpose and shall not include the provision of CATV, internet, or similar services to the public. Provided further, that PacifiCorp shall assume no liability nor shall it incur, directly or indirectly, any additional expense in connection therewith, and the use of said poles and structures by the City shall be in such a manner as to prevent safety hazards or interferences with PacifiCorp’s use of same. Nothing herein shall be construed to require PacifiCorp to increase pole size, or alter the manner in which PacifiCorp attaches its equipment to poles, or alter the manner in which it operates and maintains its Electric Facilities. City attachments shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the reasonable requirements of PacifiCorp and the current edition of the National Electrical Safety Code pertaining to such construction. Further, City attachments shall be attached or installed only after written approval by PacifiCorp.

8.7 PacifiCorp shall have the right to excavate the Public Ways subject to reasonable conditions and requirements of the City. Before installing new underground conduits or replacing existing underground conduits, PacifiCorp shall first notify the City of such work and shall allow the City, at its own expense, to share the trench of PacifiCorp to lay its own conduit therein, provided that such action by the City will not unreasonably interfere with PacifiCorp’s Electric Facilities or delay project completion.

8.8 Before commencing any street improvements or other work within a Public Way that may affect PacifiCorp’s Electric Facilities, the City shall give written notice to PacifiCorp.

8.9 No structures, buildings or signs shall be erected below PacifiCorp’s facilities or in a location that prevents PacifiCorp from accessing or maintaining its facilities.

SECTION 9. Relocation of Electric Facilities.

9.1 The City reserves the right to require PacifiCorp to relocate overhead Electric Facilities within the Public Ways in the interest of public convenience, necessity, health, safety or welfare at no cost to the City. Within a reasonable period of time after written notice, PacifiCorp shall promptly commence the overhead relocation of its Electrical Facilities. Before requiring a relocation of Electric Facilities, the City shall, with the assistance and consent of PacifiCorp, identify a reasonable alignment for the relocated Electric Facilities within the Public Ways of the City. The City shall assign or otherwise transfer to Company all right it may have to recover the cost for the relocation work and shall support the efforts of PacifiCorp to obtain reimbursement. In cases of capital improvement projects undertaken by the City, PacifiCorp shall convert existing overhead distribution facilities to underground, so long as PacifiCorp is allowed to collect the costs associated with conversion from overhead to underground distribution facilities consistent with OAR 860-022-0046, the Oregon Public Utility Commission rule on forced conversions.

9.2 PacifiCorp shall not be obligated to pay the cost of any relocation that is required or made a condition of a private development. If the removal or relocation of facilities is caused directly or otherwise by an identifiable development of property in the area, or is made for the convenience of a customer, PacifiCorp may charge the expense of removal or relocation to the developer or customer. For example, PacifiCorp shall not be required to pay relocation costs in connection with a road widening or realignment where the road project is made a condition or caused by a private development. In such event, the City shall require the developer to pay PacifiCorp for such relocation costs as part of its approval procedures.

SECTION 10. Subdivision Plat Notification. Before the City approves any new subdivision and before recordation of the plat, the City shall mail notification of such approval and a copy of the plat to PacifiCorp:

PacifiCorp

Attn: Property Management/Right-of-Way Department

825 N.E. Multnomah, Suite 1700

Portland, Oregon 97232

SECTION 11. Vegetation Management. PacifiCorp or its contractor may prune all trees and vegetation which overhang the Public Ways, whether such trees or vegetation originate within or outside the Public Ways, to prevent the branches or limbs or other part of such trees or vegetation from interfering with PacifiCorp’s Electrical Facilities. Such pruning shall comply with the American National Standard for Tree Care Operation (ANSI A300) and be conducted under the direction of an arborist certified with the International Society of Arboriculture. A growth inhibitor treatment may be used for trees and vegetation species that are fast-growing and problematic. Nothing contained in this Section shall prevent PacifiCorp, when necessary and with the approval of the owner of the property on which they may be located, from cutting down and removing any trees which overhang streets.

SECTION 12. Compensation.

12.1 In consideration of the rights, privileges, and franchise hereby granted, PacifiCorp shall pay to the City from and after the effective date of the acceptance of this franchise, seven percent (7%) of its gross revenues derived from within the corporate limits of City. The term “gross revenue” as used herein shall be construed to mean any revenue of PacifiCorp derived from the retail sale and use of electric power and energy within the municipal boundaries of the City after adjustment for the net write-off of uncollectible accounts and corrections of bills theretofore rendered. All amounts paid under this Section 12 shall be subject to review by the City; provided that only payments which occurred during a period of 36 months prior to the date the City notifies PacifiCorp of its intent to conduct a review shall be subject to such review. PacifiCorp, at the request of the City, shall provide records in the event the City requests an audit as part of the review. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, at any time during the term of this Franchise, the City may elect to increase the franchise fee amount as may then be allowed by state law. The City shall provide PacifiCorp with prior written notice of such increase following adoption of the change in percentage by the City. The increase shall be effective sixty (60) days after City has provided such written notice to PacifiCorp.

12.2 The franchise fee shall not be in addition to any other license, occupation, franchise or excise taxes or charges which might otherwise be levied or collected by the City from PacifiCorp with respect to PacifiCorp’s electric business or the exercise of this franchise within the corporate limits of the City and the amount due to the City under any such other license, occupation, franchise or excise taxes or other charges for corresponding periods shall be reduced by deducting there from the amount of said franchise fee paid hereunder.

SECTION 13. Renewal. At least 120 days prior to the expiration of this Franchise, PacifiCorp and the City shall agree to either extend the term of this Franchise for a mutually acceptable period of time or the parties shall use best faith efforts to renegotiate a replacement Franchise. PacifiCorp shall have the continued right to use the Public Ways of the City as set forth herein in the event an extension or replacement Franchise is not entered into upon expiration of this Franchise.

SECTION 14. No Waiver. Neither the City nor PacifiCorp shall be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of this Franchise by any failure of the other, or any of its officers, employees, or agents, upon any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms and conditions.

SECTION 15. Transfer of Franchise. PacifiCorp shall not transfer or assign any rights under this Franchise to another entity, except transfers and assignments by operation of law, unless the City shall first give its approval in writing, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld; provided, however, inclusion of this Franchise as property subject to the lien of PacifiCorp’s mortgage(s) shall not constitute a transfer or assignment.

SECTION 16. Amendment. At any time during the term of this Franchise, the City, through its City Council, or PacifiCorp may propose amendments to this Franchise by giving thirty (30) days written notice to the other of the proposed amendment(s) desired, and both parties thereafter, through their designated representatives, will, within a reasonable time, negotiate in good faith in an effort to agree upon mutually satisfactory amendment(s). No amendment or amendments to this Franchise shall be effective until mutually agreed upon by the City and PacifiCorp and formally adopted as an ordinance amendment.

SECTION 17. Non-Contestability – Breach of Contract.

17.1 Neither the City nor PacifiCorp will take any action for the purpose of securing modification of this Franchise before either the Oregon Public Utility Commission or any Court of competent jurisdiction; provided, however, that neither shall be precluded from taking any action it deems necessary to resolve difference in interpretation of the Franchise nor shall PacifiCorp be precluded from seeking relief from the Courts in the event Oregon Public Utility Commission orders, rules or regulations conflict with or make performance under the Franchise illegal.

17.2 In the event PacifiCorp or the City fails to fulfill any of their respective obligations under this Franchise, the City, or PacifiCorp, whichever the case may be, will have a breach of contract claim and remedy against the other in addition to any other remedy provided by law, provided that no remedy which would have the effect of amending the specific provisions of this Franchise shall become effective without such action which would be necessary to formally amend the Franchise.

SECTION 18. Notices. Unless otherwise specified herein, all notices from PacifiCorp to the City pursuant to or concerning this Franchise shall be delivered to the City Recorder’s Office. Unless otherwise specified herein, all notices from the City to PacifiCorp pursuant to or concerning this Franchise shall be delivered to the Customer Services Vice President, PacifiCorp, 201 South Main, Suite 2400, Salt Lake City, Utah 84111, and such other office as PacifiCorp may advise the City of by written notice.

SECTION 19. Severability. If any section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision hereof is for any reason determined to be illegal, invalid, or superseded by other lawful authority including any state or federal regulatory authority having jurisdiction thereof or unconstitutional, illegal or invalid by any court of common jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision hereof, all of which will remain in full force and effect for the term of the Franchise or any renewal or renewals thereof.

PASSED BY THE CITY COUNCIL ON THE FIRST READING this 17th day of April, 2007.

APPROVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL ON THE SECOND READING this 15th day of May, 2007.

APPROVED BY THE MAYOR this 15th day of May, 2007.

Ordinance 810 

AN ORDINANCE EXTENDING THE ELECTRIC UTILITY FRANCHISE AND GENERAL UTILITY EASEMENT TO PACIFICORP IN THE CITY OF MYRTLE CREEK, OREGON 

WHEREAS, the existing electric utility franchise granted pursuant to Ordinance Number 756 is due to expire on May 29, 2017; and

WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 13 of Ordinance Number 756, the City and PacifiCorp desire to extend the term of the existing franchise;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it ordained by the City:

SECTION 1. The term of the franchise and general utility easement shall be extended for ten (10) years commencing on the date of acceptance by PacifiCorp as set forth below.

SECTION 2. Within 60 days after the passage of this Ordinance by the City, PacifiCorp shall file an unqualified written acceptance thereof with the City Recorder, otherwise this Ordinance and the rights granted herein shall be null and void.

SECTION 3. Upon acceptance of the extended franchise, the City and PacifiCorp shall be bound by the terms of the existing Franchise Agreement under Ordinance Number 756 for ten (10) years from the date of acceptance by PacifiCorp. The extension of time, agreed to by both parties, shall not operate to materially modify, revoke or terminate any rights previously granted in the original franchise.

PASSED BY THE CITY COUNCIL UPON ITS FIRST READING this 2nd day of May, 2017.

APPROVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL UPON ITS SECOND READING this 16th day of May, 2017.

APPROVED BY THE MAYOR this 16th day of May, 2017.


Chapter 13.30 SPRINT FRANCHISE

    Legislative history: Ord. 563.

Ordinance No. 808 

AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO SPRINT COMMUNICATIONS COMPANY L.P., A DELAWARE LIMITED PARTNERSHIP, A NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE TO USE THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY TO PROVIDE FOR THE PLACEMENT OF NON-CABLE TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, SUBJECT TO CERTAIN CONDITIONS AND DUTIES AS SPECIFIED 

THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MYRTLE CREEK, DOUGLAS COUNTY, OREGON DO ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS:

SECTION 1. Permission Granted.

A.1    Subject to the provisions contained herein, and to the ordinance and resolution of the City of Myrtle Creek, Oregon State Statutes and the Constitution of the State of Oregon, the City hereby grants to Sprint the nonexclusive revocable Franchise, right and privilege to construct, install, operate, maintain, and upgrade the system then in place, a Fiber Optics Communication System in, under, along, over and across certain streets and public ways, in the City as specifically identified on the map attached as Exhibit A with designated specific streets and public ways as the authorized routes governed by this Franchise. The permission granted is also subject to the applicable provisions of the City of Myrtle Creek resolutions and ordinances and any amendments thereto. The permission granted herein to Sprint shall hereinafter be referred to as “Franchise.” As used herein the term “streets and public ways” means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, sidewalk, right-of-ways, alley, right-of-way easements, or other public way of any type whatsoever. Sprint may construct, install, upgrade and operate additions to its Fiber Optics Communication System in City right-of-way other than that shown on Exhibit A with the written consent of the City Engineer, without further approval of the Myrtle Creek City Council. Any such additions shall be at all times governed by the terms and conditions of this Franchise. In the event Sprint makes additions, an amended Exhibit A shall be produced by Sprint.

A.2    For purposes of this Franchise, “Fiber Optics Communication System” means an interstate network of fiber optic cables and all related property including conduit, carrier pipe, cable fibers, repeaters, power sources and other attachments and appurtenances necessary for transmitting high speed voice, data and (for such applications as teleconferencing) video signals in connection with a long distance telecommunications system or systems. The authority granted by this Franchise to use the streets and public ways does not authorize the use of the Fiber Optics Communication System or fiber optic cable for operating a cable television system, nor authorize Sprint to operate as a cable operator as those terms are defined in the Communications Act of 1934 as amended, state law, or the City Code. The authority granted by this Franchise does not authorize the use of the streets and public ways for an open video system as defined in the Communications Act of 1996 or as defined or authorized by the FCC.

A.3    If it is necessary for Sprint to comply with any law or regulation of the Federal Communications Commission or the Public Utility Commission of Oregon to engage in business activities associated with use of the streets and public ways for a Fiber Optics Communication System, Sprint shall comply with such laws or regulations as a condition precedent to exercising any rights granted by this Franchise.

SECTION 2. General Conditions.

A.1    Sprint has represented to the City it is authorized to provide Telecommunication Service in Oregon by the Public Utility Commission of Oregon (Order No. 08-221).

A.2    There is hereby reserved to the City every right and power which is required to be herein reserved or provided by any ordinance, resolution or statute, and Sprint by its acceptance of this Franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the City in its lawful exercise of such rights or power, heretofore or hereafter enacted or established. Neither the granting of any Franchise nor any provision hereof shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the City; provided however, that the City shall not voluntarily impair the rights of Sprint under this Franchise.

A.3    Insurance

(i)    Sprint shall indemnify and hold harmless the City and its agents and employees from and against all claims, damages, losses, and expenses of any nature, including reasonable attorney’s fees sustained by the City on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever arising out of the performance of work by Sprint and its agents, employees and contractors pursuant to this Franchise or the installation, operation or maintenance of the Fiber Optics Communication System authorized herein, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this Franchise.

(ii)    Throughout the term of this Franchise, and as specified herein Sprint and those acting on its behalf, including but not limited to subcontractors, shall maintain in full force and effect the following insurance, issued on policies written by companies authorized to do business under the laws of the State of Oregon with a financial rating no less than “A-” in the latest edition of “Best’s Key Rating Guide,” published by A.M. Best Guide:

Comprehensive general liability insurance, written on an occurrence basis, with limits not less than:

(1)    $2,000,000 per occurrence combined for bodily injury and property damage, $4,000,000 annual aggregate.

CGL insurance shall provide coverage for any and all costs, including defense costs, and losses and damages resulting from personal injury, bodily injury or death, property damage, products liability, and completed operations. Such insurance shall include broad form and blanket contractual coverage.

Comprehensive automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a limit of $1,000,000 combined single limit per accident.

(iii)    Worker’s compensation with statutory limits and employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence. In the case that Sprint subcontracts with others, Sprint shall require each subcontractor to similarly provide worker’s compensation insurance for all of subcontractor’s employees.

(iv)    The coverage amounts set forth may be met by a combination of underlying and umbrella policies so long as in combination the limits equal or exceed those stated.

(v)    The liability insurance policies required by this Section shall be maintained by Sprint and those acting on its behalf, including but not limited to subcontractors, throughout the term of the Franchise and such other period of time during which Sprint is operating without an authorization or franchise hereunder, or is engaged in the removal of its Facilities. Sprint shall provide an insurance certificate, together with an endorsement naming the City as an additional insured, to the City prior to the commencement of any work or installation of any facilities pursuant to said Franchise and again at each policy renewal or replacement. Payment of deductibles and self-insured retentions shall be the sole responsibility of Sprint. The insurance required by this Section shall contain a clause stating that coverage shall apply separately to each insured against whom claim is made or suit is brought, except with respect to the limits of the insurer’s liability. Sprint’s insurance shall be primary insurance as respects the City. Any insurance maintained by the City, its officers, officials, employees, consultants, agents, and volunteers shall be in excess of Sprint’s insurance and shall not contribute to it.

(vi)    Each policy shall be endorsed to provide the City with notice of cancellation or material change in accordance with policy provisions.

(vii)    If Sprint desires to satisfy the insurance requirements herein through self-insurance, Sprint must provide documentation to the City demonstrating that the coverage provided meets or exceeds that described above.

(viii)    No provisions of this Section A.3 shall bar Sprint from claiming contribution for such injuries, death, damages and defense costs after, and to the extent, City is found liable by a court of competent jurisdiction for such damages, injuries or death by reason of acts or omissions of City or its employees, servants or agents.

SECTION 3. Plans Approval, Permits and Construction.

A.    The Fiber Optics Communication System herein provided for, to be constructed, installed, operated and maintained hereunder, shall be as located or relocated as to interfere as little as possible with traffic or other authorized uses over, under or through said streets and public ways. Those phases of construction relating to traffic control, backfilling, compaction and paving, as well as the location or relocation of said Fiber Optics Communication System herein provided for, shall be subject to reasonable regulation by the Public Works Director.

B.1    If, during the design process for public improvements the City discovers a potential conflict with proposed construction by Sprint’s Fiber Optics System, Sprint shall either (i) locate and, if necessary, expose its facilities in conflict or (ii) use a location service under contract with the City to locate or expose its facilities. Sprint shall reimburse the City for the reasonable cost resulting from number (ii) above. The City shall make every reasonable effort to design and construct projects pursuant to this Section so as to avoid relocation expense to Sprint. Sprint agrees to furnish the location information in a timely manner, but in no case longer than twenty (20) days.

B.2    The City reserves the prior and superior right to lay, construct, erect, install, use, operate, repair, replace, remove, relocate, re-grade, widen, realign, or maintain any street and public ways, aerial, surface, or subsurface improvement, including but not limited to water mains, traffic control conduits, cable and devices, sanitary or storm sewers, subways, tunnels, bridges, viaducts, or any other public construction within the rights-of-way of the City limits.

B.3    When the City reasonably exercises its prior superior right to the streets and public ways for a public use, Sprint shall move its property that is located in the streets and public ways, at its own cost, to such a location as the City directs. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event the public purpose project is paid for totally or in part by non-public funds, then Sprint’s costs of moving its property shall be borne by the source of the non-public funds in the same ratio as the non-public funds bear to the total project costs.

C.    If, during the course of a Project where infrastructure will be dedicated to the City and the City determines Sprint’s facilities are in conflict with the public infrastructure project, the following shall apply:

(i)    Prior to Notice to Proceed to Contractor (Routine):

Sprint shall, within a reasonable time, but in no event exceeding six (6) months, remove or relocate the conflicting facility. This time period shall begin running upon receipt by Sprint of written notice from the City, or its authorized representative. However, if both the City and Sprint agree, the time frame may be extended based on the requirements of the project.

(ii)    Subsequent to City Notice to Proceed to Contractor:

The City, or its authorized representative, and Sprint will immediately begin the coordination necessary to remove and relocate the facilities. Actual construction to remove or relocate such facilities will begin within a commercially reasonable time after the notice period from the City, or its authorized representative, and following Sprint’s obtaining a permit for such construction.

D.    If, in the installation, use or maintenance of its Fiber Optics Communication System, Sprint damages or disturbs the surface or subsurface of any streets or public ways or adjoining public property or the public improvement located thereon, therein, or thereunder, Sprint shall promptly, at its own expense, and in a manner reasonably acceptable to the City restore the surface or subsurface of the streets or public ways or public property, or repair or replace the public improvement thereon, therein, or thereunder, in as good a condition as before such damage or disturbance.

E.    The City shall not bear any cost of relocation of existing facilities where the City facilities or other facilities occupying the streets or public ways under authority of a City permit or Franchise which must be relocated for a public use, are already located in the streets or public ways and the conflict between Sprint’s potential facilities and existing facilities can only be resolved expeditiously as determined by the City by the movement of the existing City or existing permitted facilities.

F.    If the City requires the subsequent relocation of the Fiber Optics Communication System within five (5) years from the date of relocation of such Fiber Optics Communication System pursuant to this Section 3, the City shall bear the entire cost of subsequent relocation.

G.    In the event the City becomes aware of a potential delay involving Sprint’s facilities, the City shall promptly notify Sprint of this potential delay.

H.    The installation, use and maintenance of Sprint’s Fiber Optics Communication System within the streets and public ways authorized herein shall be in such a manner as not to materially interfere with the City’s placement, construction, use and maintenance of its streets and public ways, street lighting, water pipes, drains, sewers, traffic signal systems or other City systems that have been, installed, maintained, used or authorized by the City.

I.    Sprint shall obtain all required permits, including Traffic Control Permits and pay all applicable permit fees to the City for all construction, installation, erection, enlargement, replacement, extension and relocation in the streets and public ways, and the City may issue permits with such conditions as are reasonable and necessary to ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of this Franchise.

J.    All installation of cable shall be installed per construction plans approved by the City, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed. Sprint may install cables on existing utility poles or in existing conduit where permission is granted by owner of the utility pole or conduit, except where those same poles are scheduled to be replaced with buried facilities.

K.    The entire cost of relocation shall be borne by the City if Sprint is required by the City to relocate facilities which are located in private easements or rights-of-ways obtained by Sprint prior to the dedication of the public street or easement from which the facilities must be relocated. These prior rights of Sprint would also be unaffected by any subsequent relocation. “Prior rights” as used in this paragraph means rights obtained by Sprint prior to the dedication of the streets or public ways from which the facilities are requested by the City to be relocated.

L.    Any trimming of trees by Sprint in the streets and public ways shall be subject to such regulation as the Myrtle Creek City Council or other authorized official may establish to protect the public health, safety and convenience.

SECTION 4. Abandonment of the Fiber-Optics Communications Cable or Termination or Revocation of Franchise.

If Sprint permanently abandons use of its cable, ducts, or other facilities under or pursuant to the Franchise, then the facilities are required to be removed from the streets and public ways to the satisfaction of the City at Sprint’s cost. In lieu of removal the City may permit the improvements to be abandoned in place in such a manner as the City may prescribe. Upon permanent abandonment, Sprint shall submit to the City a proposal and instruments for transferring ownership to the City. Upon revocation or termination of the privilege herein granted, Sprint shall promptly remove its Fiber Optics Communication System unless permitted by the City to be left in place. If Sprint decides to remove such Fiber Optics Communication System, or any portion thereof, then Sprint, at its sole expense, shall restore the public rights-of-way where disturbed by such removal in as good condition as is reasonably possible to the condition prior to the removal. Any such facilities which are not removed within one hundred eighty days (180) of either such date of termination or revocation or of the date the City issued a permit authorizing removal, whichever is later, automatically shall become the property of the City.

SECTION 5. Franchise Fees

A.    As consideration for the granting of this Franchise, Sprint shall pay the City on April 1, 2017 and on each anniversary date thereof during the term of this License, the sum of twelve thousand eight hundred dollars ($12,800) annually for a nonexclusive right to place and maintain conduit with appurtenances in the Rights-of-Way occupied by Sprint in the same alignment identified in Exhibit A within the City of Myrtle Creek streets and public ways. The fee shall be adjusted each year starting in 2018 during the term of the Franchise based on the change in the all-urban Consumer Price Index (CPI). The adjustment shall be based on the current year’s February CPI compared to the previous year’s February CPI.

B.    Payment by Sprint to the City shall be made in United States legal tender. Payments shall be considered timely if postmarked on or before the due date.

SECTION 6. Term of Franchise.

The right, privilege and term of Franchise granted herein shall continue and exist for a period of ten (10) years from the date of approval by the Myrtle Creek Mayor and City Council. If Sprint is not in default of any provision hereof, this Franchise shall be extended administratively for two additional terms of ten (10) years each by the City unless Sprint gives written notice of its intent to terminate this Franchise prior to its expiration as provided in Section 9 below.

In the event the parties are actively negotiating in good faith for a new Franchise or an amendment to this Franchise upon the termination date of this Franchise, the parties by written mutual agreement may extend the termination date of this Franchise to allow for further negotiations. Such extension period shall be deemed a continuation of this Franchise and not as a new Franchise or amendment.

SECTION 7. Assignment.

The right, privileges, and Franchise granted hereunder shall not be assigned without the express written consent of the City by an ordinance or resolution passed by the Myrtle Creek City Council, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed, provided, however, that Sprint may assign this Franchise or any of its rights under this Agreement or delegate any of its duties under the this Franchise to (i) any entity that it controls, is under common control with or is controlled by or (ii) any entity that is the survivor of a merger, consolidation or other business combination or that acquires all or substantially all of the assets of Sprint. Any assignment or delegation in violation of this Section is null and void. If the City’s consent is not required for an assignment, the assignee will notify the City of the assignment following the assignment.

SECTION 8. Nonexclusive Franchise.

This grant is not exclusive, and nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the City from granting other like or similar grants or privileges to any other person, firm or corporation, subject, however, to the rights granted to Sprint herein. Nothing agreed to in this Franchise is intended to deny or lessen the powers and privileges granted the City under the Constitution and laws of the State of Oregon.

SECTION 9. Cancellation of Franchise.

A.1    The Franchise granted hereunder may be canceled prior to its date of expiration by Sprint upon express written notice to the City. The City may revoke or cancel this Franchise for failure to comply with the provisions of this Franchise.

A.2    Before revoking or canceling the Franchise, the Myrtle Creek City Council or a designee, shall make a written demand that Sprint comply within sixty (60) days notice to Sprint. If a violation by Sprint continues for a period beyond that set forth in the written demand without written proof that corrective action has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, the City may revoke or cancel this Franchise.

SECTION 10. Notice:

Communications relating to this Franchise will be deemed given when received, when sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the following addresses or as may be later designated by written notice of the other party:

	Sprint:	Sprint Communications Company L.P.

	 	Attn: Manager, Real Estate

	 	MS: KSOPHT0101-Z2040

	 	6391 Sprint Parkway

	 	Overland Park, KS 66251

	copy to:	Sprint Communications Company L.P.

	 	Attn: Real Estate Attorney

	 	MS: KSOPHT0101-Z2020

	 	6391 Sprint Parkway

	 	Overland Park, KS 66251

	City:	City of Myrtle Creek

	 	Attn: City Manager

	 	P.O. Box 940

	 	Myrtle Creek, OR 97547

	copy to:	Dole Coalwell

	 	Attn: City Attorney

	 	P.O. Box 1205

	 	Roseburg, OR 97470

SECTION 11. Governing Law.

This Agreement is governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Oregon without regard to any conflict of laws provision.

SECTION 12. Severability.

Nothing in this Franchise is intended to be inconsistent with the State or Federal Law and further neither the City nor Sprint waives any rights granted under State or Federal Law by agreeing to this Franchise.

In the event that any one or more of the provisions contained herein, is, for any reason, held to be unenforceable in any respect under law or regulation, the remainder of this Franchise will not be affected thereby and will continue in full force and effect, unless removal of that provision(s) results in material change to this Franchise. In such a case, the City and Sprint will negotiate in good faith for replacement language.

SECTION 13. Proprietary Information.

Sprint stipulates that it understands that Oregon law limits the ability of the City to shield from public disclosure information given to the City by Sprint. Accordingly, the parties agree to work together to avoid disclosures of information which would result in economic loss or damage to Sprint because of anticipated mandatory disclosure requirements to third persons. To the extent Sprint has provided documents to the City that constitute business or trade secrets and/or proprietary information, Sprint must provide said information in an envelope marked, “Proprietary Information: Do Not Disclose.” The City will exercise good faith efforts to protect the confidentiality of the information provided. Sprint agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City for any loss or liability for legal penalties relating to non-disclosure, costs or attorney’s fees because of nondisclosures requested by Sprint under Oregon’s open public records law. City promises to provide reasonable notice and opportunity to Sprint to defend and/or seek a protective order preventing disclosure under the open public records law. City agrees not to contest Sprint’s motion to intervene in any case involving disclosure of Sprint’s records, should Sprint decide to become a third party intervenor in such a case.

SECTION 14. Entire Agreement.

This Franchise Agreement constitutes the entire agreement between Sprint and the City with respect to the subject matter contained and may not be amended or modified except by written document, signed by both parties.

	CITY OF MYRTLE CREEK	 	SPRINT COMMUNICATIONS COMPANY L.P.

	BY: ___________________________	 	BY: ___________________________

	Name: _________________________	 	Name: James B. Farris

	TITLE: Ken Brouillard, Mayor	 	TITLE: Manager, Real Estate

	DATE: April 11, 2017	 	DATE: April 7, 2017

	_______________________________	 	 

	Joshua Norton, City Recorder	 	 

	APPROVED AS TO FORM:	 	 

	_______________________________	 	 

	Bruce Coalwell, City Attorney	 	 


Chapter 13.35 AT&T FRANCHISE

    Legislative history: Ord. 571.

Ordinance No. 826 

AN ORDINANCE RENEWING THE FRANCHISE OF AT&T CORP. (FORMERLY AMERICAN TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH COMPANY) THROUGH ITS INTERSTATE DIVISION FOR THE PLACEMENT OF COMMUNICATION FACILITIES WITHIN THE CITY OF MYRTLE CREEK, STATE OF OREGON, AND SUPERCEDING ORDINANCE NO. 571. 

WHEREAS, the CITY OF MYRTLE CREEK has determined it appropriate and in the best interests of the public to allow AT&T CORP. the nonexclusive privilege of using the public way to construct and maintain communication facilities within the corporate limits of the City; now, therefore,

THE CITY OF MYRTLE CREEK ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS:

SECTION 1. Definition of Terms

1.1    Terms. For the purpose of this Franchise, the following terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations shall have the meanings ascribed to them below. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number:

A.    “City” means the City of Myrtle Creek, Oregon, or the lawful successor, transferee, or assignee thereof.

B.    “Communication Facilities” means any and all wires, fibers, cables and associated structures owned by Grantee for use of Grantee in providing telecommunication services.

C.    “FCC” means Federal Communications Commission.

D.    “Grantee” means AT&T Corp., or the lawful successor, transferee, or assignee thereof.

E.    “Person” means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, or governmental entity.

F.    “Public Way” shall mean any public street, highway, bridge, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, lane, public way, drive, circle, or other public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility strips, or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses now or hereafter held by the City.

G.    “Service Area” means the present boundaries of the City, and shall include any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means.

SECTION 2. Grant of Franchise

2.1    Grant. The City hereby grants to the Grantee a nonexclusive Franchise which authorizes the Grantee to use the public way to construct and maintain underground communication facilities within the corporate limits of the City.

2.2    Other Ordinances. The Grantee agrees to comply with the terms of any lawfully adopted generally applicable local ordinance, to the extent that the provisions of the ordinance do not have the effect of limiting the benefits or expanding the obligations of the Grantee that are granted by this Franchise. Neither the City nor the Grantee may unilaterally alter the material rights and obligations set forth in this Franchise.

2.3    Franchise Term. This franchise is granted for a term of ten (10) years beginning on the date on which this franchise ordinance is approved. This franchise shall automatically renew for an additional ten (10) year term so long as Grantee does not provide notice not to renew or Grantee is not in default at its expiration.

SECTION 3. Standards of Service

3.1    Conditions of Use.

A.    The communication facilities installed by the Grantee pursuant to the terms hereof shall be located so as to cause a minimum of interference with the proper use of Public Ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property that adjoins any of such Public Ways. In the event the public is unnecessarily inconvenienced by the Grantee’s communication facilities, the City may require the removal or change of location of any such facilities at Grantee’s expense.

B.    The communication facilities shall be underground, and all work shall comply with the standard specifications of the City and all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.

C.    The City shall have the ability to prescribe which Public Ways will be used and the location within a Public Way.

D.    No work shall be done by the Grantee without first obtaining the permits required by the City, which may include plan approval, and the payment of any required fees.

3.2    Restoration of Public Ways. If during the course of the Grantee’s construction, operation. or maintenance of the communication facilities there occurs a disturbance of any Public Way by the Grantee, Grantee shall replace and restore such Public Way to a condition reasonably comparable to the condition of the Public Way existing immediately prior to such disturbance. In the event Grantee fails to restore the Public Way to a condition reasonably comparable to the condition existing immediately prior to such disturbance, the City may restore or cause to restore such Public Way at the expense of Grantee; provided, that the City provides Grantee with reasonable notice to restore, and Grantee fails to restore such Public Way within the time period given by the City.

3.3    Relocation at Request of the City. Within sixty (60) days following written notice from the City or such shorter time as the City may prescribe because of an emergency, a grantee shall, at no expense to the City, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any telecommunications facilities within the public way whenever the City shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:

A.    The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any City or other public improvements in the public way.

B.    The operations of the City or other governmental entity in the public way.

C.    The public interest.

The Grantee shall in all cases have the right of abandonment of its property.

3.4    Relocation for a Third Party. The Grantee shall, on the request of any Person holding a lawful permit issued by the City, protect, support, raise, lower, relocate in or remove from the Public Way as necessary any property of Grantee, provided:

A.    The expense of the change shall be paid by the Person benefiting from the relocation, including, if required by the Grantee, making such payment in advance.

B.    The Grantee shall be given reasonable advance written notice to prepare for such changes. For purposes of this Section 3.4, “reasonable advance written notice” shall be no less than sixty (60) business days in the event of a temporary relocation, and no less than 120 days for a permanent relocation.

3.5    Trimming of Trees and Shrubbery. The Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees or other natural growth within the Public Ways in order to access and maintain the communication facilities.

3.6    Safety Requirements. Construction, operation, and maintenance of the communication facilities shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All such work shall be performed in substantial accordance with generally applicable federal, state, and local regulations and the National Electric Safety Code. The communication facilities shall not endanger or unreasonably interfere with the safety of Persons or property in the Service Area.

3.7    System Standards. The communication facilities shall meet or exceed all applicable technical and performance standards of the FCC.

SECTION 4. Regulation by the City

4.1    Franchise Fee.

A.    The Grantee shall pay to the City a franchise fee equal to $2.00 per lineal foot of communication facilities, with the fee increasing annually by 5% each October 1st. The franchise fee payment shall be paid annually, by November 1st of each year. If there is less than a full year at the start or conclusion of the franchise agreement, the franchise fee shall be prorated during those periods.

B.    The payment of the franchise fee shall not be credited toward the payment of property taxes or payments in lieu thereof, nor any lax adopted by the City, nor credited toward any permit fees required by the Myrtle Creek Code.

C.    Limitation on Franchise Fee Actions. The period of limitation for recovery of any franchise fee payable hereunder shall be four (4) years from the date on which payment by the Grantee is due.

4.2    Transfer of Franchise. The Grantee’s right, title, or interest in the Franchise shall not be sold, transferred, assigned, or otherwise encumbered, other than to an entity controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the Grantee, without the prior consent of the City, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld. No such consent shall be required, however, for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, or by other hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of the Grantee in the Franchise in order to secure indebtedness. Within thirty (30) days of receiving a request for transfer, the City shall notify the Grantee in writing of any additional information it reasonably requires to determine the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the transferee. If the City has not taken action on the Grantee’s request for transfer within one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving such request, consent by the City shall be deemed given, unless the requesting party and City agree to an extension of time.

SECTION 5. Books and Records

Grantee shall maintain “as built” drawings for the communication facilities at Grantee’s business office, and make them available to the City for inspection during normal business hours upon written request. “As built” drawings shall be updated as changes occur in the communication facilities serving the Service Area. Upon written request of the City, Grantee shall provide the City copies of trench maps showing the location of Grantee’s lines within the Public Ways in the Service Area.

SECTION 6. Insurance and Indemnification

6.1    Insurance Requirements. The Grantee shall maintain in full force and effect, as its own cost and expense, during the term of the Franchise, Commercial General Liability Insurance in the amount of $2,000,000 combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage. The City shall be designated as an additional insured. Such insurance shall be noncancelable except upon thirty (30) days prior written notice to the City. Upon written request, the Grantee shall provide a Certificate of Insurance showing evidence of the coverage required.

6.2    Indemnification. The Grantee agrees to indemnify, save and hold harmless, and defend the City, its officers, boards and employees, from and against any liability for damages and for any liability or claims resulting from property damage or bodily injury (including accidental death), which arise out of Grantee’s construction, operation, or maintenance of its communication facilities, provided that the City shall give Grantee written notice of its obligation to indemnify the City within ten (10) days of receipt of a claim or action pursuant to this Section 6.2 Notwithstanding the foregoing, Grantee shall not indemnify the City for any damages, liability, or claims resulting from the willful misconduct or gross negligence of the City.

6.3.    Limitation of Liability. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, in no event shall a Party be liable for any indirect, incidental, consequential, special, reliance or punitive damages, including without limitation damages for lost profits, advantage, savings or revenues of any king, whether or not the Party has been advised of the possibility of such damage.

6.4    Bonds and Other Surety. No bond or other surety shall be required of Grantee at the inception of the Franchise. In the event Grantee is required by the City to obtain a bond or other surety in the future, the City agrees to give Grantee at least 60 days advance written notice thereof stating the specific reasons for such requirement. Such reasons must demonstrate a change in Grantee’s legal, financial or technical qualifications that would materially prohibit or impair Grantee’s ability to comply with the terms and conditions of this Franchise.

SECTION 7. Enforcement and Termination of Franchise

7.1    Notice of Violation. In the event that the City believes that the Grantee has not complied with the terms of the Franchise, the City shall informally discuss the matter with Grantee. If these discussions do not lead to resolution of the problem. the City shall notify the Grantee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance.

7.2    The Grantee’s Right to Cure or Respond. The Grantee shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice described in Section 7.1:(A) to respond to the City, contesting the assertion of noncompliance, or (B) to cure such default, or (C) in the event that by the nature of default, such default cannot be cured within the thirty (30) day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the City of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be completed.

7.3    Public Hearing. In the event that the Grantee fails to respond to the notice described in Section 7.1 pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 7.2, or in the event that the alleged default is not remedied within thirty (30) days or the date projected pursuant to 7.2(C) above, if it intends to continue its investigation into the fault, then the City shall schedule a public hearing. The City shall provide the Grantee at least ten (10) days prior written notice of such hearings, which specifies the time, place and purpose of such hearing and provide Grantee the opportunity to be heard.

7.4    Enforcement. Subject to applicable federal and state law, in the event the City, after the hearing set forth in Section 7.3, determines that the Grantee is in default on any provision of the Franchise, the City may:

A.    Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages; or

B.    Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other equitable relief; or

C.    In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the Franchise, seek to revoke the Franchise in accordance with Section 7.5.

7.5    Revocation. Should the City seek to revoke the Franchise after following the procedures set forth in Section 7. 1-7.4 above, the City shall give written notice to the Grantee of its intent. The notice shall set forth the exact nature of the noncompliance. The Grantee shall have ninety (90) days from such notice to object in writing and to state its reasons for such objection. In the event the City has not received a satisfactory response from the Grantee, it may then seek termination of the Franchise at a public hearing. The City shall cause to be served upon the Grantee, at least thirty (30) days prior to such public hearing, a written notice specifying the time and place of such hearing and stating its intent to revoke the Franchise.

Following the hearing, the City shall determine whether or not the Franchise shall be revoked. If the City determines that the franchise shall be revoked, Grantee may appeal such determination to an appropriate court, which shall have the power to review the decision of the City de novo. Grantee shall be entitled to such relief as the court finds appropriate. Such appeal to the appropriate court must be taken within sixty (60) days of the issuance of the determination of the City.

The City may, at its sole discretion, take any lawful action which it deems appropriate to enforce the City’s rights under the Franchise in lieu of revocation of the Franchise.

7.6    Force Majeure. The Grantee shall not be held in default under, or in noncompliance with, the provisions of the Franchise, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating to noncompliance or default, where such noncompliance or alleged defaults occurred or were caused by circumstances reasonably beyond the ability of the Grantee to anticipate and control.

SECTION 8. Miscellaneous Provisions

8.1    Actions of Parties. In any action by the City or the Grantee that is mandated or permitted under the terms hereof, such party shall act in a reasonable, expeditious, and timely manner. Furthermore, in any instance where approval or consent is required under the terms hereof, such approval or consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.

8.2    Entire Agreement. This Franchise constitutes the entire agreement between the Grantee and the City. Amendments to this Franchise shall be mutually agreed to in writing by the parties.

8.3    Notice. Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the parties, every notice or response required by this Franchise to be served upon the City or the Grantee shall be in writing, and shall be deemed to have been duly given to the required party when placed in a properly sealed and correctly addressed envelope: a) upon receipt when hand delivered with receipt/acknowledgment, b) upon receipt when sent certified, registered mail, or c) within five (5) business days after having been posted in the regular mail.

The notices or response to the City shall be addressed as follows:

City of Myrtle Creek

207 NW Pleasant Street

P.O. Box 940

Myrtle Creek, 97457

The notices or response to the Grantee shall be addressed as follows:

AT&T Corp

3450 Riverwood Parkway SE

Atlanta, GA 30339

Attention: Right of Way Manager

With a copy to:    AT&T Services, Inc.

One AT&T Way

Room 3Al05

Bedminster, NJ 07921

Attention: Legal Department – Network Services

The City and the Grantee may designate such other address or addresses from time to time by giving notice to the other in the manner provided for in this Section 8.3.

8.4.    Descriptive Headings. The captions to sections contained herein are intended solely to facilitate the reading thereof. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of the text herein.

8.5    Severability. If any section, sentence, paragraph, term, or provision hereof is determined to be illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional, by any court of competent jurisdiction or by any state or the validity of any other section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision hereof, all of which will remain in full force and effect for the term of the Franchise.

8.6    Acceptance of Franchise. Within 30 days from the effective date of this ordinance, Grantee shall file with the City Recorder a written unconditional acceptance of this franchise and all of its terms and conditions, and if they fail to do so, this ordinance shall be void and of no effect.

Adopted by the City Council of the City of Myrtle Creek on this ___ day of ____________, 2019.

	 	CITY OF MYRTLE CREEK, OREGON

	 	 

	 	Matthew Hald, Mayor

	 	 

	 	ATTEST:

	BY:	 

	 	Joanna Bilbrey, City Recorder

Accepted this ____ day of _____________, 2019.

	AT&T CORP.

	Signature:	 

	 	 

	Title:	Professional-Technical Process/Quality

 

	State of Colorado	)

	County of ____________	) ss.

	City of _______________	)

This instrument was acknowledged before me this _____ day of ____________, 2019 by _____________________, Professional-Technical Process/Quality of AT&T Corp., a New York corporation, on behalf of said corporation.

	Before me,

	 

	Notary Public for State of Colorado

	My Commission Expires:


Chapter 13.40 C.P. NATIONAL CORPORATION FRANCHISE

Ordinance No. 592 

AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO THE C. P. NATIONAL CORPORATION THE RIGHT AND PRIVILEGE TO CONDUCT A GENERAL TELEPHONE BUSINESS WITHIN THE CITY OF MYRTLE CREEK, OREGON. 

The City Of Myrtle Creek ordains as follows:

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE

This ordinance shall be known as the C. P. National Telephone Franchise Agreement.

SECTION 2. FRANCHISE GRANTED

There is hereby granted by the City of Myrtle Creek, Oregon, (City) to the C. P. National Corporation (Company) the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the streets, alleys, public ways and public places now laid out or dedicated, all extensions thereof and additions thereto in the City, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other telephone fixtures necessary or proper for the maintenance and operation in the City of a telephone exchange, and lines connected therewith. The right to use and occupy said streets, alleys, public ways and places for the purposes herein set forth shall not be exclusive; and the City reserves the right to grant a similar use of said streets, alleys, public ways and places to any person at any time during the period of this franchise. This privilege shall include all rights herein specified within any and all lawful annexations hereafter made to the City.

SECTION 3. TERM OF FRANCHISE

It is acknowledged that Company is currently operating in City under a franchise ordinance, being Ordinance No. 349 of City, which said ordinance terminated on or about July 17, 1990, and it is intended and mutually agreed by City and Company that this ordinance shall supersede said Ordinance No. 349, and said ordinance shall be deemed to have been terminated and no longer of any force and effect from and after the date that this ordinance shall go into full force and effect. This franchise is granted for a period of 20 years from and after the date it becomes effective; provided, however, that this franchise may be terminated at the end of 10 years from and after the effective date hereof, if either the City or Company gives written notice to the other within the 10th year of the franchise term, but not less than 90 days before the end of the 10th year of said franchise term, that it desires that this franchise be so terminated.

SECTION 4. FRANCHISE FEE

As compensation for the right, privilege and franchise hereby granted, the Company shall pay to the City an annual amount equal to 7 per cent of the Company’s gross access line revenues from the operation of the telephones located within the corporate limits of the City of Myrtle Creek and the following dates: March 31, June 30, September 30 and January 31, it being understood that the payments due March 31, June 30 and September 30 may be estimated on the basis of the gross access line revenues for the same period during the preceding calendar year; provided, however, that the payment due January 31 shall be based upon an actual computation of gross access line revenues for the preceding year and shall include any adjustments necessary so that total payments for the preceding calendar year will equal 7 per cent of the actual gross access line revenues. Such 7 per cent payment made by the Company will be accepted by the City also in payment of any license, privilege or occupation tax or fee for revenue or regulation or for any other purpose now or hereafter to be imposed by the City during the term of this franchise.

SECTION 5. LAWS, ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS

The Company shall, at all times during the life of this franchise, be subject to lawful exercise of the police power by the City and to all laws, ordinances and regulations.

SECTION 6. ACCESS TO RECORDS

The City shall have access at reasonable hours to all of the Company’s plans, contracts and accounts; financial, statistical, customer and service records relating to the property and the operation of the Company in Myrtle Creek; and to all other records required to be kept hereunder. The following records and reports shall be filed with the City Clerk and in the local office of the Company:

1.    Copies of such rules, regulations, terms and conditions adopted by it for the conduct of its business.

2.    An annual summary report showing gross revenues received by the Company from its operations within the City during the preceding year and such other information as the City shall request with respect to properties and expenses related to the Company’s service with the City.

SECTION 7. SALE OR TRANSFER OF RIGHTS

The Company may sell or transfer its plant or system to another and transfer any rights under this franchise to another without prior written City approval. No sale or transfer shall be effective until the vendee, assignee or lessee has filed in the office of the City Clerk an instrument, duly executed, reciting the fact of such sale or assignment, accepting the terms of the franchise and agreeing to perform all the conditions thereof.

SECTION 8. MAP OF FACILITIES

The Company shall file with the City an accurate map showing the location of its existing facilities within the City, and shall maintain said map in a current condition by showing thereon all facilities which may be installed in the future.

SECTION 9. CLAIMS FOR NEGLIGENCE

It is expressly understood and agreed by and between the Company and the City that the Company shall save the City harmless from all loss sustained by the City on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever, resulting from negligence on the part of the Company in the construction, operation or maintenance of its telephone system in the City. The City shall notify the Company’s representative in the City within five days after the presentation of any claim or demand, either by suit or otherwise, made against the City on account of any negligence as aforesaid on the part of the Company.

SECTION 10. MAINTENANCE OF POLES AND WIRES

The City shall have the free right and privilege to string and maintain wires for its municipal police and fire alarm systems upon the poles and other facilities erected and maintained by the Company hereunder. The City shall string, maintain and operate such wires at its own expense, risk and responsibility, and in accordance with all legal requirements and good engineering practices, and in such manner as not to impose any additional expense upon the Company or interfere with the safe and convenient use by the Company of its poles and facilities. Any such wire of the City shall be subject to interference by the Company only when necessary in the maintenance, operation or repair of the Company’s fixtures, wires and appurtenances. The City, in its use and maintenance of such wires and fixtures, shall at all times comply with the rules and regulations of the Company so that there may be a minimum danger of contact or conflict between the wires and fixtures of the Company and the wires and fixtures used by the City. It is further agreed, in order to avoid danger to life and property, that the above privilege is granted on condition that no wires or fixtures of the City shall be placed on poles carrying electric light or power wires without the consent of the Company; nor shall said wires by exposed, without consent of the Company, to the danger of contact with any conductor carrying a voltage greater than the normal telephone voltage.

SECTION 11. LOCATION OF TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION STRUCTURES

All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the Company within the City shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said streets, alleys or other public ways and places. The Company shall not place poles or other fixtures where the same will interfere with any electric light, water hydrant or water main; and all such poles or fixtures, placed in any street, shall be placed at the outer edge of the sidewalk and inside the curb line; and those placed in alleys shall be placed close to the line of the lot abutting on said alley, and then in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on said streets, alleys and public ways.

SECTION 12. RESTORATION OF PROPERTY

Whenever Company shall disturb any street, alley, sidewalk, driveway or other City property for any of its purpose, Company shall restore the same to good order and conditions as soon as practicable and without unnecessary delay.

SECTION 13. STREET AND UTILITY IMPROVEMENTS

Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed in any way to prevent the proper authorities of the City, upon 15 days written notice, without expense to the City, from sewering, grading (including change of grade), planking, rocking, paving, repairing, altering or improving any of the streets, alleys, avenues, thoroughfares and public highways within the City, in or upon which the poles, wires or other conductors of the Company shall be placed; but all such work or improvements shall be done, if possible, so as not to obstruct or prevent the free use of said poles, wires, conductors, conduits, pipes or other apparatus; provided, however, that any expense incurred by the Company arising from the above mentioned changes or improvements shall be borne by the Company. If Company does not make said changes at or before the end of said notice, City may make said changes and Company shall pay all charges therefor.

SECTION 14. BUILDING MOVING PERMITS

The Company shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the City, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of the building. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the Company shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The Company shall be given no less than 48 hours’ advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.

SECTION 15. TRIMMING OF TREES

The Company shall have the right and privilege of trimming all trees which overhang the streets in such a manner and to such an extent as will prevent the branches or limbs or other parts of such trees from touching or interfering with its wires, poles and other fixtures and equipment; providing, no such trees are trimmed or cut back farther than may be necessary to prevent such interference and to allow the proper operation and maintenance of said lines, poles and fixtures.

SECTION 16. CITY INSPECTIONS

The City shall have the right to supervise all construction or installation of work performed subject to the provisions of this ordinance and to make such inspection as it shall find necessary to insure compliance with governing ordinances.

SECTION 17. VIOLATIONS

The violation by the said Company, its successors or assigns, of any of the terms or conditions of this ordinance shall be sufficient cause for the City to annul and set aside all privileges herein set forth, mentioned and described, unless said violation is remedied or corrected by said Company within 30 days after written notice by the City to the Company at 229 West Main Street, Medford, Oregon, specifying the existence and nature of such violation. Upon the revocation of this franchise by action of the City, or at the termination thereof, the City may require the Company to cease and desist from further operations within the City pending a determination as to whether or not the franchise will be extended, renewed or terminated.

Passed by the Council and approved by the Mayor August 21, 1990.


Chapter 13.45 MCI FRANCHISE

Ordinance No. 674 

AN ORDINANCE GRANTING MCI A FRANCHISE FOR THE PURPOSE OF OPERATING AS A CARRIER OF LONG DISTANCE TELECOMMUNICATIONS TRAFFIC AND FOR PLACEMENT OF FIBER OPTIC CABLES WITHIN CITY RIGHT-OF-WAY AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY 

The City of Myrtle Creek ordains as follows:

SECTION 1. DEFINITIONS

1.1    Where used in this ordinance, the following terms shall mean:

1.1.1    “MCI” means MCI Telecommunications Corporation, and its respective successors and assigns.

1.1.2    “CITY” means the City of Myrtle Creek, a municipal corporation of the State of Oregon, and its respective successors and assigns.

1.1.3    “FRANCHISE AREA” means any, every and all of the roads, streets, avenues, alleys, highways, grounds and public places of the City as now laid out, platted, dedicated or improved; and any, every and all roads, streets, avenues, alleys, highways, grounds and public places that may hereafter by laid out, platted, dedicated or improved within the present limits of the City and as such limits may be hereafter extended.

1.1.4    “FACILITIES” means poles (with or without crossarms), wires, lines, conduits, cables, communication and signal lines, braces, guys, anchors, vaults and all necessary or convenient facilities and appurtenances thereto, whether the same be located over or underground.

1.1.5    “ORDINANCE” means Ordinance No 674 which sets forth the terms and conditions of this franchise.

SECTION 2. FACILITIES WITHIN FRANCHISE AREA

2.1    The City does hereby grant to MCI the right, privilege, authority and franchise to:

2.1.1    Set, erect, bury, construct, support, attach, connect and stretch facilities between, maintain, repair, replace, operate and use facilities, in, upon, over, under, along, across and through the franchise area for purposes of all operations as may be required to operate as a carrier of long distance telecommunications traffic.

SECTION 3. NONINTERFERENCE OF FACILITIES

3.1    MCI’s facilities shall be maintained within the franchise area so as not to unreasonably interfere with the free passage of traffic and in accordance with the laws of the State of Oregon. Whenever it shall be necessary for MCI, in the exercise of its rights under this franchise, to make any excavation in the franchise area, MCI shall, upon completion of such excavation, restore the surface of the franchise area, as nearly as practicable, to the same condition it was in prior to such excavation.

SECTION 4. RELOCATION OF FACILITIES

4.1    Whenever any person or entity, other than the City, requires the relocation of MCI’s facilities to accommodate the work of such person or entity within the franchise area; or whenever the City requires the relocation of MCI’s facilities within the franchise area for the benefit of any person or entity other than the City, then MCI shall have the right as a condition of such relocation to require such person or entity to:

4.1.1    Make payment to MCI, at a time and upon terms acceptable to MCI, for any and all costs and expenses incurred by MCI in the relocation of MCI’s facilities; and

4.1.2    Indemnify and save MCI harmless from any and all claims and demands made against it on account of injury or damage to the person or property of another arising out of or in conjunction with the relocation of MCI’s facilities, to the extent such injury or damage is caused by the negligence of the person or entity requesting the relocation of MCI’s facilities or the negligence of the agents, servants or employees of the person or entity requesting the relocation of MCI’s facilities.

4.2    Whenever the City causes the grading or widening of the franchise area (for purposes other than those described in Section 4.1) and such grading or widening requires the relocation of MCI’s then existing facilities within the franchise area, the City shall:

4.2.1    Provide MCI, within a reasonable time prior to the commencement of such grading or widening, written notice requesting such relocation; and

4.2.2    Provide MCI with reasonable plans and specifications for such grading or widening.

After receipt of such notice and such plans and specifications, MCI shall relocate such facilities within the franchise area at no charge to the City. If the City requires the subsequent relocation of any facilities within five (5) years from the date of relocation of such facilities pursuant to this Section 4.2, the City shall bear one-half the cost of subsequent relocation.

4.3    Any condition or requirement imposed by the City upon any person or entity, other than MCI (including, without limitation, any condition or requirement imposed pursuant to any contract or in conjunction with approvals or permits for zoning, land use, construction or development) which requires the relocation of MCI’s facilities shall be a required relocation for purposes of Section 4.1.

4.4    Nothing in this Section 4 “Relocation of Facilities” shall require MCI to bear any cost or expense in connection with the location or relocation of any facilities then existing under benefit of easement or such other prior rights.

SECTION 5. INDEMNIFICATION

5.1    MCI shall indemnify and save the City harmless from any and all claims and demands made against it on account of injury or damage to the person or property of another, to the extent such injury or damage is caused by the negligence of MCI or its agents, servants or employees in exercising the rights granted MCI in this franchise; provided, however, that in the event any such claim or demand be presented to or filed with the City, the City shall promptly notify MCI thereof, and MCI shall have the right, at its election and at its sole cost and expense, to settle and compromise such claim or demand, provided further, that in the event any suit or action is begun against the City based upon any such claim or demand, the City shall likewise promptly notify MCI thereof, and MCI shall have the right, at its election and its sole cost and expense, to settle and compromise such suit or action, or defend the same at its sole cost and expense, by attorneys of its own election.

5.1.1    MCI shall save the City harmless from any losses, expenses or lost revenues incurred by MCI, other than the reasonable cost of repair as a result of negligent injury or damage to MCI’s property by the City.

SECTION 6. INSURANCE AND INDEMNITY

6.1    MCI shall comply with all regulations of the City regarding insurance and indemnification for contracts with the City as they may apply, providing however that MCI may self-insure for any or all matter thereunder upon adequate proof of such self-insurance to the City.

SECTION 7. DEFAULT

7.1    If MCI shall fail to comply with the provisions of this franchise, the City may serve upon MCI a written order to so comply within sixty (60) days from the date such order is received by MCI. If MCI is not in compliance with this franchise after expiration of said sixty (60) day period, the City may, by ordinance, declare an immediate forfeiture of this franchise, provided, however, if any failure to comply with this franchise cannot be corrected with due diligence within said sixty (60) day period (MCI’s obligation to comply and to proceed with due diligence being subject to unavoidable delays and events beyond its control), then the time within which MCI may so comply shall be extended for such time as may be reasonably necessary and so long as MCI commences promptly and diligently to effect such compliance.

SECTION 8. NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE

8.1    This franchise is not and shall not be deemed to be an exclusive franchise. This franchise shall not in any manner prohibit the City from granting other and further franchises over, upon and along the franchise area which do not interfere with MCI’s rights under this franchise. This franchise shall not prohibit or prevent the City from using the franchise area or affect the jurisdiction of the City over the same or any part thereof.

SECTION 9. FRANCHISE TERM

9.1    This franchise is and shall remain in full force and effect for a period of thirty (30) years from and after the effective date of this Ordinance, provided, however, MCI shall have no rights under this franchise nor shall MCI be bound by the terms and conditions of this franchise unless MCI shall, within sixty (60) days after the effective date of the Ordinance, file with the City its written acceptance of the Ordinance

SECTION 10. FRANCHISE FEE

10.1    MCI, as grantee of this franchise, shall during the term thereof, pay to the City of Myrtle Creek, grantor, an annual sum of One Dollar ($1.00) per linear foot of facilities with the franchise area and increase each year an amount equal to the CPI-W.

10.2    Initial payment of the franchise fee described in Section 10.1 shall be made by MCI within thirty (30) days after passage of the Ordinance by the City Council. MCI shall then be given the right to place their facilities within the City right-of-way as described on the attached map (Exhibit A).

10.3    Conditions regarding construction materials, methods, inspection fees and other details are described in the attached Exhibit “B” and are hereby made a part of this ordinance.

SECTION 11. ASSIGNMENT

11.1    MCI shall have the right to assign its rights, benefits and privileges in and under this franchise. Any assignee shall, within thirty (30) days of the date of any assignment, file written notice of the assignment with the City together with its written acceptance of all terms and conditions of this Franchise. Notwithstanding the foregoing, MCI shall have the right, without such notice or such written acceptance, to mortgage its rights, benefits and privileges in and under this franchise to the Trustee for its bondholders.

SECTION 12. MISCELLANEOUS

12.1    If any term, provision, condition or portion of this franchise shall be held to be invalid such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this franchise which shall continue in full force and effect. The headings of sections and paragraphs of this franchise are for convenience of reference only and are not intended to restrict, affect or be or provisions of such sections or paragraphs.

12.2    This franchise may be amended only by written instrument, signed by both parties, which specifically states that it is an amendment to this Franchise and is approved and executed in accordance with the laws of the State of Oregon. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, this franchise (including, without limitation, Section 5.1 above) shall govern and supersede and shall not be changed, modified, deleted, added to, supplemented or otherwise amended by any permit, approval, license, agreement or other document required by or obtained from the City in conjunction with the exercise (or failure to exercise) by MCI of any and all rights, benefits, privileges, obligations or duties in and under this franchise, unless such permit, approval, license, agreement or other document specifically:

12.2.1    References this franchise; and

12.2.2    States that it supersedes this franchise to the extent that it contains terms and conditions which change, modify, delete, add to, supplement or otherwise amend the terms and conditions of this franchise.

12.3    In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of this franchise and the provisions of any such permit, approval, license, agreement or other document, the provisions of this franchise shall control.

SECTION 13. EMERGENCY CLAUSE

Whereas this Ordinance is necessary for the Health, Safety and Well-being of the City of Myrtle Creek, an emergency is hereby declared to exist and this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect immediately upon its passage by the Common Council and approval by the Mayor.

Passed by the City Council and approved by the Mayor July 18, 1995.

EXHIBIT “A” ORDINANCE NO 674 

EXHIBIT “B” ORDINANCE NO 674 

CONDITIONS OF FRANCHISE AGREEMENT:

1.     MCI will pay to the City of Myrtle Creek $120.00 per day for City’s inspection of the work proposed, from date of commencement of work inside City Limits until all work is completed.

2.     MCI contractor’s representative will participate with City’s personnel in pre-construction conference no less than three working days before beginning any work within the City Limits.

3.     MCI’s representative furnish evidence of general liability insurance of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) total personal injury and property damage, which shall be in effect during the time of contract performance. The certifications shall state that the policy shall not be canceled without thirty (30) days written notice sent to the City of Myrtle Creek.

4.     MCI’s representative shall provide evidence of Workmen’s Compensation Insurance as required by the State of Oregon. Everyone working at the project site shall be covered by Workmen’s Compensation Insurance. Coverage shall include principles of the contracting firm.

5.     Evidence of insurance shall be in the form of a certificate, issued by the insurer or his agent, addressed specifically to the City of Myrtle Creek.

6.     MCI or its contractor will sign all work areas according to the Oregon State Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.

7.     No trench or excavation shall be left open for more than 36 hours.

8.     No driveway shall be left inaccessible for more than six (6) hours without written consent of the affected property owners.

9.     Sidewalks will be installed or replaced anywhere that the MCI line is placed behind a curb. Concrete shall be class 3300 - 1. 5" Maximum size and be installed according to City of Myrtle Creek Standards.

10.     MCI will pay to the City the cost to prepare and pave each parking space and the road around the Millsite RV Park. In addition, MCI will pay to the City the cost to install storm drainage with excavation and fill along the southeastern side 4th Street near Millsite Park.

11.     “C” or “D” grade asphalt shall be placed in the top 2" layer of any trench cut in the asphalt no longer than five (5) working days after original asphalt has been removed. Asphalt shall be no less than 290 degrees Fahrenheit temperature at time of placement and shall be compacted to no less than 90% maximum density.

12.     After one (1) year, all asphalt to asphalt trench edges shall be sealed with a hot applied asphalt crack sealer by a person or contractor approved by the City.

13.     MCI’s contractor will backfill all trenches and excavations according to City and/or County standards. All trenches shall be backfilled to a minimum compaction of 90%.


Chapter 13.50 SOUTH UMPQUA DISPOSAL SERVICE FRANCHISE

ORDINANCE NO. 825 

A GENERAL ORDINANCE RELATING TO SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AND RESOURCE RECOVERY, GRANTING EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE TO Wx6 Inc. dba SOUTH UMPQUA DISPOSAL SERVICE TO COLLECT, TRANSPORT, AND CONVEY SOLID WASTE UPON THE STREETS WITHIN THE CITY AND TO DISPOSE OF OR RECOVER MATERIALS OR ENERGY FROM SUCH SOLID WASTE AND TO RECYCLE RECYCLABLE MATERIALS AND REPEALING ORDINANCES NO. 811 and NO. 790. 

The City of Myrtle Creek ordains as follows:

Section 1. Title. This Ordinance shall be known as the “Solid Waste Management Ordinance” and may be referred to herein as “this Ordinance.”

Section 2. Persons, Policy, and Scope. It is declared to be the public policy of the City of Myrtle Creek to regulate Solid Waste Management by:

A.    Insuring safe, economical, and comprehensive solid waste service;

B.    Insuring service rates and charges that are just and reasonable and adequate to provide necessary public service;

C.    Prohibiting rate preferences and other discriminatory practices; and

D.    Providing technologically and economically feasible resource recovery by and through the Franchisee.

Section 3. Definitions. Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the definitions appearing in ORS 459.005, 459A.005 and regulations promulgated thereunder are applicable to this Ordinance. As used in this Ordinance, the following words shall be defined as follows:

A.    City. City of Myrtle Creek. Where the city limits are extended, the City shall include such amended geographic boundaries.

B.    City Council or Council. The City Council of the City of Myrtle Creek.

C.    Compact and compaction. The process of, or to engage in, the shredding of solid waste, or the manual or mechanical compression of solid waste.

D.    Compensation. Compensation includes:

1)    Any type of consideration paid for solid waste management service including, but not limited to, proceeds from resource recovery; rent; or any direct or indirect provision for the payment of money, goods, services or benefits by tenants, lessees, occupants or similarly situated persons;

2)    The exchange of service between persons; and

3)    The flow of consideration from a person owning, possessing or generating solid waste to another person who provides service or from a person providing services to another person owning, possessing, or generating solid waste.

E.    Compost or Composting. The controlled biological decomposition of compostable material or the product resulting from such process.

F.    Compostable Material. Yard debris, food waste and food soiled paper when source separated for composting; but does not include food soiled paper containing plastic or any other material that inhibits controlled biological decomposition.

G.    Food Soiled Paper. Paper products that have been in contact with food or food waste to the degree that they would not be able to be recycled into new paper products. Food soiled paper includes, but is not limited to, used paper table covers, used napkins, pizza boxes, coffee filters, and waxy corrugated cardboard. Food soiled paper does not include unsoiled cardboard, paperboard, or office paper.

H.    Food Waste. All waste from meats, fish, shellfish, grains, fruits and vegetables, which attends or results from the storage, preparation, cooking, handling, selling, or serving of food for human consumption. Food waste includes but is not limited to, excess, spoiled or unusable food or dairy products, meats, fish, shellfish, grains, fruits, vegetables, breads and dough, incidental amounts of edible oils, and organic waste from food processing. Food waste does not include large amounts of oils and meats, which are collected for rendering, fuel production or other reuse applications. Food waste does not include dead animals or animal excrements.

I.    Franchisee. The person to whom a franchise is granted by the City Council pursuant to this ordinance. Such franchise shall grant exclusive rights to provide service and solid waste management service for compensation.

J.    Generator. The person who produces solid waste, compostable material, or recyclable material to be placed, or that is placed, for collection and disposal. As used in this ordinance, “generator” does not include any person who manages an intermediate function resulting in the alteration or compaction of the solid waste, compostable material, or recyclable material after it has been produced by the generator and placed for collection and disposal.

K.    Hazardous Waste. The meaning given in ORS 466.005.

L.    Infectious Waste. The meaning given in ORS 459.386.

M.    Mixed Compostables. The process where two or more types of compostable materials are collected together (i.e. not separated), in a combination allowed by the City.

N.    Mixed Recycling. The process where two or more types of recyclable materials are collected together (i.e. not separated), in a combination allowed by the City.

O.    Person. An individual, partnership, association, corporation, trust, firm, cooperative, estate or other private legal entity.

P.    Placed for Collection. To put solid waste, recyclable material, or compostable material out for collection by the Franchisee, as provided in this ordinance.

Q.    Receptacle. A can, cart, bin, container, drop box or other vessel used for the collection and disposal of solid waste, recyclable material, or compostable material that has been approved by the City and into which solid waste, recyclable material, or compostable material may be placed for collection and disposal.

R.    Recyclable Material. Any material or group of materials that can be collected and sold for recycling at a net cost equal to or less than the cost of collection and disposal of the same material.

S.    Recycling. Any process by which solid waste is transformed into new or different products in such a manner that the original products may lose their original identity.

T.    Resource Recovery. The process of obtaining useful material or energy resources from solid waste, including energy recovery, material recovery, recycling and reuse of solid waste.

U.    Reuse. The return of waste into the economic stream, to the same or similar use or application without change in the waste’s identity.

V.    Service. The collection, storage, transfer, transportation or disposal of or the resource recovery from solid waste, recyclable materials, yard-debris and compostable organic materials by the franchisee.

W.    Service Area. The geographical area in which solid waste management service is provided by Franchisee. The geographical area for this Ordinance is the area within the city limits of the City as now constituted, together with any area hereafter annexed by the City.

X.    Solid Waste. All putrescible and non-putrescible wastes, including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, refuse, ashes, waste paper, cardboard, grass clippings, compost, tires, equipment and furniture; commercial, industrial, demolition and construction wastes; discarded or abandoned vehicles or parts thereof; discarded home or industrial appliances; manure, vegetable or animal solid and semi-solid wastes; dead animals; infectious waste: and other wastes: but the term does not include:

1)    Hazardous waste as defined in ORS 466.005.

2)    Materials used for fertilizer or for other productive purposes or which are salvageable as such materials are used on land in agricultural operations and the growing or harvesting of crops and the raising of fowls or animals.

3)    Beverage containers, subject to reuse or refund provisions, contained in ORS 459A.700 through 459A.740.

Y.    Solid Waste Management. The prevention or reduction of solid waste; management of the collection, storage, transfer, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing and final disposal of solid waste; or resource recovery from solid waste: and facilities necessary or convenient to such activities.

Z.    Yard Debris. All vegetative waste generated from property maintenance and/or landscaping activities, including but not limited to, grass clippings, leaves, hedge trimmings and small tree branches, but excluding tree stumps and other similar bulky woody material.

Section 4. Exclusive Franchise and Exceptions.

A.    Exclusive Franchise. There is hereby granted to John Whitmore dba South Umpqua Disposal Service, hereinafter called “Franchisee,” the exclusive right, privilege and franchise under the terms of this ordinance to provide service and solid waste management service within the City as of the date the franchise is granted. For the purposes of this franchise, the Franchisee shall have the exclusive right to use the public rights-of-way of the City. Except as otherwise provided herein, no other person shall provide, offer to provide, or advertise for the performance of service or solid waste management service for any person or any real property in the City.

B.    Exceptions. The exclusive right, privilege and franchise granted under subsection A. of this Section 4 is subject to the following exceptions:

1)    A person may engage in the collection of source separated materials for recycling or resource recovery, but only for the purpose of raising funds for a charitable, civic, or benevolent activity, provided the activity is not organized for any solid waste management purpose.

2)    A person may transport solid waste which such person produces directly to an authorized disposal site or recycling or resource recovery facility. A property owner may transport solid waste left by a tenant upon such owner’s property after the tenant no longer resides on the property, but may not provide solid waste collection service for a tenant on a regular or continuing basis.

3)    A person may engage in the practice of pumping, transportation, and disposal of septic tank and cesspool pumpings or other sludge, provided such activity is conducted in compliance with applicable state and local laws.

4)    A person may transport and dispose of solid waste accumulated or created as an incidental part of regularly carrying on the business or service of auto wrecking or auto body recovery, to the extent licensed by the State of Oregon.

5)    A person may carry on the business of janitorial services (as used in this subsection, “the business of janitorial services” does not include a business that primarily or solely transports and disposes of solid waste accumulated, created, generated, or produced by a property owner or occupant).

6)    A person may collect, transport, or redeem returnable beverage containers under that portion of ORS Chapter 459A, commonly known as the “Bottle Bill.”

Section 5. Franchise Term.

A.    Unless grounds exist for suspension, modification or revocation of the Agreement, the Agreement shall be considered as a continuing six (6) year term. Beginning on July first (1st) of each year, the Agreement will be considered renewed for an additional six (6) year term, unless at least thirty (30) days prior to July first (1st) on any year the City notifies the Franchisee of intent to terminate the Agreement. Upon the filing of such notice, the Franchisee will have an Agreement which will terminate on July first (1st) which is six (6) years from the date of the last renewal prior to the notice of termination. The City may initiate proceedings for suspension, modification, or revocation of the Agreement at any time based on the terms and conditions of the Agreement.

B.    Franchisee shall, within 10 days after the passage of this ordinance and its approval by the Mayor, file with the City Recorder of the City of Myrtle Creek his written acceptance of all of the terms and conditions of this ordinance, as contained on the last page of this franchise ordinance.

C.    When the franchise term has 24 months or less remaining, franchisee may apply for renewal of the franchise.

Section 6. Franchise Fee.

A.    Franchisee shall pay to the City of Myrtle Creek a franchise fee equal to seven percent (7%) of its gross revenues actually collected for service to customers within the City of Myrtle Creek; however, the fee shall not be assessed on revenue received for drop box disposal.

B.    Franchisee shall report and pay the franchise fee quarterly on or before the 30th day of the succeeding month. The report shall consist of a statement of the gross revenue collected from customers and a calculation of the applicable fee. Each report shall be accompanied by full payment.

C.    City may modify Franchise Fee amount and terms with six (6) months’ notice to Franchisee.

D.    Franchisee shall provide free of charge to City the following services:

1)    1.5 YD 1XW to 710 Bataan Ave. (Swimming Pool) for June, July, August, and September.

2)    2.0 YD 1XW to 131 Cedar Ave. (Evergreen Park) 12 months each year.

3)    Provide one large 20 yard box free during spring cleanup.

Section 7. Franchisee Responsibility.

A.    The Franchisee shall dispose of solid waste at a DEQ approved site, and recover resources from the solid waste in compliance with ORS chapters 459 and 459A, and any rules or regulations adopted pursuant to such statutes, and applicable ordinances adopted by the City.

B.    Franchisee shall provide sufficient collection vehicles, receptacles, facilities, personnel and finances to provide all types of necessary service; but where necessary the franchisee may subcontract with others to provide certain types of specialized service in accordance with Section 9 of this Ordinance.

C.    Except as otherwise provided, all vehicles used in the collection and/or transportation of waste shall be equipped to the greatest extent possible with a leak-proof metal body of the compactor type. If Franchisee uses a specially designed, motorized local collection vehicle for transporting solid waste over short distances from residential or commercial stops to waiting trucks, the container portion of such vehicle shall be equipped with a cover, adequate to prevent scattering of the load. If any pickup truck or open bed truck is used by Franchisee, the load shall be covered with an adequate cover to prevent scattering of the load. All vehicles shall be operated in conformity with all ordinances of the City. All vehicles shall be properly licensed, registered, and equipped in compliance with the motor vehicle laws of the State of Oregon.

D.    Franchisee shall provide the opportunity to recycle by providing curbside recycling collection, and shall comply with the recycling requirements of ORS Chapter 459A. In addition, Franchisee shall comply with any and all rules and regulations adopted by the Department of Environmental Quality and the City.

E.    Except as otherwise provided, the Franchisee shall not give any rate preference to any person, locality, or type of solid waste stored, collected, transported, disposed of, or resource recovered. This paragraph shall not prohibit uniform classes of rates based upon length of haul, time of haul, type or quantity of solid waste handled, or location of customers, so long as such rates are reasonably based upon the cost of the particular service and are approved by the City Council in the same manner as other rates.

F.    Franchisee shall save the City harmless from any and all claims arising out of or in any way connected with said solid waste management service.

G.    Franchisee shall make collection of solid waste within the City of Myrtle Creek at least once each week, and more often if the Council deems it expedient in order to properly dispose of all solid waste within the City. If at any time the Council deems it expedient to make more frequent pickups of solid waste than the Franchisee is making, the Council shall serve written notice upon the Franchisee to make such additional pickups of solid waste. The Franchisee shall have the opportunity to be heard before the Council at a hearing in regard to the matter before the decision of the Council shall be final. The failure thereafter by the Franchisee to comply with the Order of the Council shall be considered a violation of the terms of this franchise. Service shall not be required on Sundays or holidays.

H.    Franchisee shall be responsible for policing cleanliness of curb service by cleaning up any materials dropped or scattered in the course of collection.

I.    Franchisee may terminate service to a customer for non-payment by the customer within 45 days of the mailing of the bill. Franchisee may require advance payment in the future from a previously non-paying customer before resuming service.

J.    Franchisee shall provide and keep in force a public liability insurance policy that provides coverage for bodily injury, including personal injury and property damage insurance, and vehicle coverage. Such insurance shall be primary and provide coverage for not less than the limits of liability for public bodies under ORS 30.270. Franchisee shall provide the City of Myrtle Creek with certificates of insurance evidencing such coverage. Such insurance shall be primary and maintained in full force and effect, and it shall name the City of Myrtle Creek as an additional insured on the policy to the extent of Franchisee’s negligence.

K.    Franchisee shall keep accurate books of account for the purpose of determining amounts due to City under Section 6 of this Ordinance. The City may inspect the books of accounts related to this Ordinance at any time during business hours. The City may require periodic reports from Franchisee relating to operations and revenues within the City.

L.    Franchisee shall inform each new customer, and shall remind each ongoing customer at least once per year of the Customer Responsibilities as described in Sections 14 and 15. As an example, this may be accomplished as a note on the monthly invoice for services refering to the responsibilities that are listed on the Franchisee’s website.

Section 8. Suspension, Modification or Revocation of Ordinance.

A.    The City Council may suspend, modify, or revoke the franchise granted under this ordinance upon finding that the Franchisee has willfully violated this Ordinance, ORS Chapter 459, ORS Chapter 459A, or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder.

B.    When the City Council or the City Administrator receives information indicating a violation of this section, a written notice of such violation shall be provided to Franchisee. Such notice shall provide a description of the alleged violation, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity to correct the violation.

C.    Upon receipt of the written notice, referred to in subsection B of this Section 8, the Franchisee shall have thirty (30) days from the date of mailing of the notice in which to comply or to request a public hearing before the City Council. A request for a public hearing before the City Council shall be made in writing; and in the event a public hearing is held, the Franchisee and other interested persons shall have a reasonable opportunity to present information and testimony in oral or written form.

D.    The City Council shall adopt findings of fact and conclusions which will support or deny the alleged violation. The City Council may, on the basis of such findings, suspend, modify, or revoke the franchise of the Franchisee or condition such action upon continued non-compliance with the alleged violation. The Franchisee shall comply with the time specified in the notice or with the order of the City Council.

Section 9. Subcontracts. Franchisee shall not subcontract with another person on a regular, periodic or long-term basis to provide service under this Ordinance without prior Council approval. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Such subcontract shall not relieve the Franchisee of responsibility for compliance with this Ordinance.

Section 10. Assignment or Transfer. The franchise rights and privileges granted by this ordinance to the Franchisee shall not be assigned or transferred by the Franchisee, except upon due notice in writing given to the City Council and by the approval of the Council. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.

Section 11. City Inspection. The Public Works Director shall cause to be made frequent and regular inspections of all solid waste hauling equipment and the manner of hauling. For any violation of the terms of this ordinance, he shall make formal complaint against Franchisee for violating the provisions of this ordinance (but this shall not be construed as preventing any other person or officer from filing a complaint or complaints) with the City Recorder. If a complaint is filed under this section, the same process for notice, opportunity for compliance, and hearing as set forth in Section 8 of this ordinance shall be followed.

Section 12. Bond. At the time of accepting the rights, privileges, and terms of this agreement, and as a condition to the full performance of the terms thereunder, the Franchisee shall furnish a good and sufficient bond in favor of the City of Myrtle Creek in the sum of $1,000, with the condition that the Franchisee shall promptly, faithfully, and fully perform his duties and all of the terms of this franchise by him to be performed; and that upon his failure to do so, his bond shall indemnify the City against all loss or damage arising by reason of his failure to fulfill his contract. Such bond shall be approved as to form and as to surety by the City Council.

Section 13. Rates.

A.    The rates for service under this Ordinance shall be those rates currently in effect upon the adoption of this Ordinance unless modified by the Council. These rates shall remain in effect until a change in rates is approved by the City Council. The Council shall establish and, as considered necessary from time to time, change rates by resolution.

B.    In determining the appropriate rates to be charged by the Franchisee, the Council may consider any or all of the following, subject to a public hearing:

1)    The cost of performing the service provided by Franchisee.

2)    The anticipated increase in the cost of providing the services hereunder.

3)    The need for equipment replacement and the need for additional equipment to meet service needs.

4)    Compliance with federal, state, local law, ordinances and regulations, or technological change.

5)    The necessity for Franchisee to have a reasonable rate of return, based on a reasonable operating margin.

6)    The rates charged in other cities of similar size in the area for similar service.

7)    The public interest in assuring reasonable rates to enable Franchisee to provide efficient and beneficial service to the residents and other users of the service.

8)    Local wage scales, cost of management, and facilities.

9)    Any profit or cost savings resulting from recycling, and any additional costs resulting from recycling.

10)    Any modifications to this Ordinance or any other services or fees required by the City that result in a financial impact on Franchisee.

11)    Any other information that the City Council deems necessary for rate setting.

Section 14. Customer Responsibility. The requirements and prohibitions set forth in Sections 14 and 15 apply to customers or solid waste generators within the City. The City or, with the permission of the City, the Franchisee, may enforce these requirements through any lawful proceeding.

A.    Preparation of Solid Waste, Recyclable Material and Compostable Material for Collection.

1)    Solid waste, recyclable material and compostable material shall be drained of surplus liquid and placed in a leak-proof receptacle, except that receptacles for compostable material may have vent holes for aeration.

2)    Pet feces, sharp objects such as broken glass and knives, and any other solid waste with potential for causing injury or disease shall be securely wrapped in a manner to prevent exposure or injury to the public or employees of a franchisee. No medical sharps shall be placed in a receptacle.

3)    Ashes shall be allowed to cool and shall be securely wrapped or bagged before being deposited in any solid waste receptacle.

4)    All solid waste, with the exception of large, bulky items, shall be deposited promptly in a receptacle, or be so placed or located for collection by the franchisee so as not to create a safety, nuisance, litter or health hazard. Shredded paper, packing peanuts and other materials that could create a litter problem shall be securely bagged before being placed in a receptacle.

5)    Bulky solid waste may be placed in an appropriately sized receptacle in accordance with this ordinance, so long as the accumulation does not create a nuisance or fire hazard.

6)    All solid waste and recyclable material shall be placed in the appropriate receptacle in a manner that prevents blowing and littering prior to or during collection.

7)    Solid waste, source separated recyclable material or compostable material shall be prepared and placed in conformance with the rules adopted by the City for the purpose of mitigating or addressing public health, public safety or pest concerns.

8)    No liquid waste or semi-solid waste, excluding food waste, shall be placed in a receptacle, unless it is in a sealed, leak-proof vessel.

B.    Solid Waste Receptacles.

1)    Receptacles for the collection of solid waste and recycling by the Franchisee shall be provided to the generator by the Franchisee, unless otherwise authorized by the Franchisee. The loaded weight of a receptacle shall comply with the manufacturer’s specifications.

2)    Except for drop boxes provided to the generator by the Franchisee, receptacles shall be equipped with lids sufficient to keep out precipitation and to prevent disturbance by animals and entrance of pests; shall be kept closed, except when being filled, emptied or cleaned; and shall be kept in a clean, sealed and sanitary condition by the generator of the solid waste, recyclable material or compostable material. Receptacles used for the disposal of compostable materials may contain vent holes for the purpose of aeration.

3)    Solid waste placed in a receptacle that is not designed for emptying by mechanical means shall not exceed a weight of 60 pounds, including the weight of the receptacle and its contents.

4)    Receptacles designed for emptying by mechanical means shall not exceed a weight of 180 pounds for 95 gallon receptacles, 120 pounds for 65 gallon receptacles, 60 pounds for 35 gallon receptacles, and 40 pounds for 20 gallon receptacles, including the weight of the receptacles and their contents.

C.    Placement of Receptacles for Collection by Franchisee.

1)    Receptacles containing solid waste, recyclable materials or compostable materials shall be kept or placed so that there is convenient and safe access for collection service by Franchisee and, except as provided in this section, shall not be kept or placed upon the street, sidewalk or other public place where such placement would be a hazard to pedestrians or the motoring public.

2)    All carts designed for mechanical solid waste, recycling or composting collection shall be placed at the curb or roadside by the generator prior to collection time.

3)    The generator shall provide safe access to the collection point so as not to jeopardize the persons or equipment supplying service or the motoring public.

4)    Receptacles may be placed at or on the curb, whether on the sidewalk or in the street right-of-way, provided that receptacles placed in the street shall be placed so that no part of the receptacle may be more than three feet from the curb. Placement shall be made so that receptacles are within manageable reach if standing in the street or next to the curb line.

5)    Placement of receptacles at curbside or roadside are limited to a time period of 24 hours prior to collection and 24 hours after collection.

6)    Receptacles shall be kept outside of any locked, latched, bolted or hooked enclosure, when placed for collection by Franchisee.

7)    No person shall block service access to a receptacle that has been placed for collection.

Section 15. Prohibitions

A.    No person shall place hazardous waste into any solid waste, recyclable material or compostable material receptacle or drop box supplied by Franchisee, or place any hazardous waste for collection or disposal by Franchisee. Franchisee shall have no obligation to collect hazardous waste, and title to and liability for hazardous waste shall at no time pass to Franchisee and shall remain with the generator of such hazardous waste.

B.    No person shall:

1)    Enter into a receptacle for the purpose of compacting the contents of the receptacle.

	 

	Matthew Hald, Mayor

 

	ATTEST:

	 

	Joanna Bilbrey

	City Recorder

Accepted this _________ day of ___________________, 2019.

	 	 

	 	John Whitmore, President South Umpqua Disposal


Chapter 13.55 CHARTER COMMUNICATIONS CABLE FRANCHISE

    Legislative history: Ord. 362.

ORDINANCE NO. 812 

AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO CHARTER COMMUNICATIONS A NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE FOR THE MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION TO USE THE PUBLIC WAYS OF THE CITY OF MYRTLE CREEK FOR PURPOSES OF PROVIDING CABLE TELEVISION SERVICES IN THE CITY AND REPEALING ORDINANCE NO. 789 

FRANCHISE AGREEMENT 

This Franchise Agreement (“Franchise”) is between the City of Myrtle Creek, Oregon, hereinafter referred to as the “Grantor” and Falcon Community Ventures I, L.P., locally known as CHARTER COMMUNICATIONS, hereinafter referred to as the “Grantee.”

WHEREAS, the Grantor finds that the Grantee has substantially complied with the material terms of the current Franchise under applicable laws, and that the financial, legal and technical ability of the Grantee is sufficient to provide services, facilities and equipment necessary to meet the future cable-related needs of the community; and

WHEREAS, having afforded the public adequate notice and opportunity for comment, Grantor desires to enter into this Franchise with the Grantee for the construction and operation of a cable system on the terms set forth herein; and

WHEREAS, the Grantor and Grantee have complied with all federal and State-mandated procedural and substantive requirements pertinent to this franchise renewal;

NOW, THEREFORE, the Grantor and Grantee agree as follows:

SECTION 1

Definition of Terms

1.1   Terms. For the purpose of this franchise the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning ascribed to them in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended from time to time (the “Cable Act”), unless otherwise defined herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.

A.    “Cable System,” “Cable Service,” and “Basic Cable Service” shall be defined as set forth in the Cable Act.

B.    “Council” shall mean the governing body of the Grantor.

C.    “Cable Act” shall mean the Cable Communication Policy Act of 1984, as amended, 47 U.S.C. §§ 521, et. seq.

D.    “Channel” shall mean a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel.

E.    “Equipment” shall mean any poles, wires, cable, antennae, underground conduits, manholes, and other conductors, fixtures, equipment and other facilities used for the maintenance and operation of the Cable System.

F.    “FCC” shall mean the Federal Communications Commission and any successor governmental entity thereto.

G.    “Franchise” shall mean the non-exclusive rights granted pursuant to this Franchise to construct operate and maintain a Cable System along the public ways within all or a specified area in the Franchise Area.

H.    “Franchise Area” shall mean the geographic boundaries of the Franchise Authority, and shall include any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means.

I.    “Generally Applicable” or “Generally Applied” shall mean that the provision in question is lawful, non-discriminatory, and is consistently and uniformally applied pursuant to applicable state and federal law.

J.    “Gross Revenue” means any revenue, as determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, received by the Grantee from the operation of the Cable System to provide Cable Services in the Franchise Area including but not limited to amounts for Cable Services, premium cable services, advertising, home shopping channels, franchise fees, installation and all leased access payments, provided, however, that such phrase shall not include: (1) any taxes, fees or assessments collected by the Grantee from Subscribers for pass-through to a government agency, including, without limitation, any state or federal regulatory fees, or any sales or utility taxes; (2) unrecovered bad debt; (3) credits, refunds and deposits paid to Subscribers; (4) any exclusions available under applicable State law

K.    “Person” shall mean an individual, partnership, association, organization, corporation, trust or governmental entity.

L.    “Service Area” shall mean the area described in subsection 6.1 hereto.

M.    “Standard Installation” shall mean installations to residences and buildings that are located up to 125 feet from the point of connection to Grantee’s existing distribution system.

N.    “State” shall mean the State of Oregon.

O.    “Street” shall include each of the following located within the Franchise Area: public streets, roadways, highways, bridges, land paths, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, circles, drives, easements, rights of way and similar public ways and extensions and additions thereto, including but not limited to public utility easements, dedicated utility strips, or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses now or hereafter held by the Grantor in the Franchise Area, which is under the jurisdiction and control of Grantor, and only to the extent Grantor has the right, title, interest and/or authority to grant a Franchise to occupy and use such Street, which shall entitle the Grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing, operating, extending, repairing and maintaining the Cable System.

P.    “Subscriber” shall mean any Person lawfully receiving Cable Service from the Grantee.

SECTION 2

Grant of Franchise

2.1   Grant. The Grantor hereby grants to the Grantee a nonexclusive Franchise which authorizes the Grantee to erect, construct, operate and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the Streets, now in existence and as may be created or established during its terms, all Equipment, including the Cable System.

2.2   Term. The Franchise and the rights, privileges and authority hereby granted shall be for an initial term of seven (7) years, commencing on the Effective Date of this Franchise as set forth in Section 14.12.

2.3   Police Powers. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Franchise, Grantee’s rights are subject to the police powers of the Grantor to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary for the safety, health and welfare of the public (“Police Powers”) The Grantee agrees to comply with the terms of any Generally Applicable local ordinance which is lawfully adopted under Grantor’s general Police Power authority.

2.4   Franchise Required. No Cable System shall be allowed to occupy, use, or operate in the Streets or public rights-of-way of the Franchise Area to provide Cable Service without a Franchise.

SECTION 3

Franchise Renewal

3.1   Procedures for Renewal. The Grantor and the Grantee agree that any proceedings undertaken by the Grantor that relate to the renewal of the Grantee’s Franchise shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act, or any such successor statute.

SECTION 4

Indemnification and Insurance

4.1   Indemnification. The Grantee shall, by acceptance of the Franchise granted herein, defend the Grantor, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees for all claims for injury to any Person or property caused by the negligence of Grantee in the construction or operation of the Cable System and in the event of a determination of liability shall indemnify and hold Grantor, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees harmless from any and all liabilities, claims, demands, or judgments growing out of any injury to any Person or property as a result of the negligence of Grantee arising out of the construction, repair, extension, maintenance, operation or removal of its wires, poles or other equipment of any kind or character used in connection with the operation of the Cable System, provided that the Grantor shall give the Grantee written notice of its obligation to indemnify the Grantor within ten (10) days of receipt of a claim or action pursuant to this section. In the event any such claim arises, the Grantor shall tender the defense thereof to the Grantee and the Grantee shall have the right to defend, settle or compromise any claims arising hereunder and the Grantor shall cooperate fully herein. If the Grantor determines in good faith that its interests cannot be represented by the Grantee, the Grantee shall be excused from any obligation to represent the Grantor. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Grantee shall not be obligated to indemnify the Grantor for any damages, liability or claims resulting from the willful misconduct or negligence of the Grantor or for the Grantor’s use of the Cable System.

4.2   Insurance.

A.    The Grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the Franchise insurance in amounts at least as follows:

	Workers’ Compensation	Statutory Limits

	Commercial General Liability	$1,000,000 per occurrence, Combined Single Limit (C.S.L.)

	$2,000,000 General Aggregate

	Auto Liability including coverage on all owned, non-owned hired autos	$1,000,000 per occurrence C.S.L.

	Umbrella Liability	$1,000,000 per occurrence C.S.L.

B.    The Grantor shall be added as an additional insured, arising out of work performed by Charter, to the above Commercial General Liability, Auto Liability and Umbrella Liability insurance coverage.

C.    The Grantee shall furnish the Grantor with current certificates of insurance evidencing primary and noncontributory coverage upon request.

SECTION 5

Service Obligations

5.1   No Discrimination. Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against Subscribers, Channel users, or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age or sex.

5.2   Privacy. The Grantee shall fully comply with the privacy rights of Subscribers as contained in Cable Act Section 631 (47 U.S.C. § 551).

SECTION 6

Service Availability

6.1   Service Area. The Grantee shall make Cable Service distributed over the Cable System available to every residence within the Service Area where there is a minimum density of at least thirty (30) residences per linear strand mile of cable as measured from Grantee’s closest trunk line or distribution cable that is actively delivering Cable Service as of the date of such request for service. If such residence is located within one hundred twenty five (125) feet of Grantee’s feeder cable, the Cable Service will be provided at Grantee’s published rate for standard installations. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Grantee shall have the right, but not the obligation, to extend the Cable System into any portion of the Service Area where another operator is providing Cable Service, into any annexed area which is not contiguous to the present Service Area of the Grantee. Grantee need not make an extension to any area which is financially or technically infeasible, if it provides documentation substantiating such infeasibility to Grantor. Cable Service offered to Subscribers pursuant to this Franchise shall be conditioned upon Grantee having legal access to any such Subscriber’s dwelling unit or other units wherein such Cable Service is provided. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the Grantee’s ability to offer or provide bulk rate discounts or promotions.

6.2   Subscriber Charges for Extensions of the Cable System. No Subscriber shall be refused service arbitrarily. However, if an area does not meet the density requirements of Section 6.1 above, the Grantee shall only be required to extend the Cable System to Subscribers in that area if the Subscribers are willing to share the capital costs of extending the Cable System. The Grantee may require that payment of the capital contribution in aid of construction borne by such potential Subscribers be paid in advance. Subscribers shall also be responsible for any standard/non-standard installation charges to extend the Cable System from the tap to the residence. Grantee may require residents who request service but whose residence is further than 125 feet from an existing feeder cable to equally share the cost of an extension of service greater than the standard cost of a service extension of 125 feet. Standard installation costs may also be required of such subscribers.

6.3   New Development Underground. In cases of new property development where other utilities are to be placed underground, Grantee shall place its facilities underground at Grantee’s sole expense. To the extent that Grantor issues a permit for open trenching to any developer, Grantor agrees to use reasonable efforts to encourage developer to coordinate construction and undergrounding schedules for the open trenching such that all utilities in the Right of Way, including Grantee, shall have at least thirty (30) days prior notice of such construction or undergrounding, and of the particular dates on which open trenching will be available for Grantee’s installation of Grantee facilities, which shall be constructed, placed or provided at Grantee’s sole expense. Costs of trenching and easements required to bring service to the development shall be borne by the developer or property owner; except that if Grantee fails to install its conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals within fifteen (15) working days of the date the trenches are available, as designated in the written notice given by the developer or property owner, then should the trenches be closed after the fifteen (15) day period, the cost of new trenching is to be borne by Grantee.

6.4   Annexation. The Grantor shall promptly provide written notice to the Grantee of its annexation of any territory which is being provided Cable Service by the Grantee or its affiliates. Such annexed area will be subject to the provisions of this Franchise upon sixty (60) days’ written notice from the Grantor, subject to the conditions set forth below and Section 6.1 above. The Grantor shall also notify Grantee in writing of all new street address assignments or changes within the Franchise Area. Grantee shall within ninety (90) days after receipt of the annexation notice, begin calculating the Grantor franchise fees on revenue received from the operation of the Cable System to provide Cable Services in any area annexed by the Grantor if the Grantor has provided a written annexation notice that includes the addresses that will be moved into the Franchise Area in an Excel format or in a format that will allow Grantee to change its billing system. If the annexation notice does not include the addresses that will be moved into the Franchise Area, Grantee shall pay franchise fees in the follow franchise fee payment after it receives the annexed addresses as set forth above. All notices due under this section shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested to the addresses set forth in Section 15.6 with a copy to the Director of Government Affairs. In any audit of franchise fees due under this Franchise, Grantee shall not be liable for franchise fees on annexed areas unless and until Grantee has received notification and information that meets the standards set forth in this section.

SECTION 7

Construction and Technical Standards

7.1   Compliance with Codes. All construction practices and installation of equipment shall be done in accordance with all applicable sections of the National Electric Safety Code and Grantor’s Generally-Applicable ordinances, rules and regulations adopted pursuant to its lawful Police Powers. In the event of conflict between the NESC and Grantor’s ordinances, rules and regulations, the NESC shall prevail.

7.2   Construction Standards and Requirements. All of the Grantee’s Equipment shall be installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and operated in accordance with good engineering practices and performed by experienced maintenance and construction personnel.

7.3   Safety. The Grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall use commonly accepted methods and devices preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage.

7.4   Network Technical Requirements. The Cable System shall be designed, constructed and operated so as to meet those technical standards adopted by the FCC relating to Cable Systems contained in part 76 of the FCC’s rules and regulations as may be amended from time to time, regardless of the transmission technology utilized.

SECTION 8

Conditions on Street Occupancy

8.1   General Conditions. Grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities whenever possible, and shall not construct or install any new, different, or additional poles, conduits, or other facilities on public property provided Grantee is able to access existing poles, conduits, or other facilities on reasonable terms and conditions.

8.2   Underground Construction. The facilities of the Grantee shall be installed underground in those Service Areas where existing telephone and electric services (other than high-voltage electric lines) are both underground at the time of system construction. In areas where either telephone or electric utility facilities are installed aerially at the time of system construction, the Grantee may install its facilities aerially with the understanding that at such time as the existing aerial facilities are required to be placed underground by the Grantor, the Grantee shall likewise place its facilities underground.

8.3   Construction Codes and Permits. Grantee shall obtain all legally required permits and pay all legally required permit fees before commencing any work, including the opening or disturbance of any Street within the Franchise Area. Grantee shall adhere to the terms of all the permits and Grantor codes, ordinances, rules and regulations currently or hereafter applicable to Grantor Streets and/or construction, operation or maintenance of the Cable System within the Service Area, provided that such codes are of General-Applicability and adopted pursuant to Grantor’s Police Powers. The Grantor shall administratively assist the Grantee in securing any permits required.

8.4   System Construction. All transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be so installed and located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners and at all times shall be kept and maintained in a safe, adequate and substantial condition, and in good order and repair. The Grantee shall, at all times, employ ordinary care and use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices shall be used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of all members of the public. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any public way by the Grantee shall be placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on such public way.

8.5   Restoration of Public Ways. Grantee shall, promptly (or as soon as practicable in the event weather or other events beyond Grantee’s control prevent such prompt restoration) and at its own expense, restore any damage or disturbance caused to the public way as a result of its operation, construction, or maintenance of the Cable System to a condition as good as the condition of the Streets immediately prior to such damage or disturbance.

8.6   Tree Trimming. In an emergency that threatens the safety or integrity of Grantee’s facilities, Grantee or its designee shall have the authority to trim trees on public property at its own expense, as may be necessary to protect its wires and facilities. In all other circumstances, Grantee shall provide Grantor with ten (10) days’ written notice prior to such trimming.

8.7   Relocation for the Grantor. The Grantee shall, upon receipt of advance written notice, to be not less than ten (10) business days, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any property of Grantee when lawfully required by Grantor’s Generally-Applicable rules or ordinances and at Grantee’s sole cost. Should Grantee fail to remove or relocate as required by this Section, Grantor may cause such work to be done by a qualified contractor after providing thirty (30) days written notice to Grantee, and the costs thereof, including the reasonable costs incurred due to the delay, shall be paid by Grantee, subject to any applicable reimbursement required in Section 8.9.

8.8   Relocation for a Third Party. The Grantee shall, on the request of any Person holding a lawful permit issued by the Grantor, protect, support, raise, lower, temporarily disconnect, relocate in or remove from the Street as necessary any property of the Grantee. Grantee shall be afforded reasonable advanced written notice from the person holding a lawful permit. Nothing in this section prevents Grantee from requesting reimbursement or compensation from a third party for the cost of such relocation, provided that the expense of such is paid by any such Person benefiting from the relocation and the Grantee is given reasonable advance written notice to prepare for such changes. The Grantee may require such payment in advance. For purposes of this subsection, “reasonable advance written notice” shall be no less than ten (10) business days in the event of a temporary relocation and no less than one hundred twenty (120) days for a permanent relocation.

8.9   Reimbursement of Costs. In the event that Grantor reimbursed any telephone or electric utilities for undergrounding, relocation or removal of facilities required by Grantor, Grantor shall also reimburse Grantee for similar undergrounding, relocation or removal required by Grantor under this Section 8, contingent upon the following conditions: 1) such reimbursement is mandated by State or federal law; or 2) such reimbursement is not limited or prohibited by a fund, loan, or grant used to fund the reimbursement.

8.10   Emergency Use. Grantee shall comply with 47 U.S.C. § 544(g) and all regulations issued pursuant thereto with respect to an Emergency Alert System (“EAS”). If the Grantee provides an EAS, then the Grantor shall permit only appropriately trained and authorized Persons to operate the EAS equipment and shall take reasonable precautions to prevent any use of the Grantee’s Cable System in any manner that results in inappropriate use thereof, or any loss or damage to the Cable System. The Grantor shall hold the Grantee, its employees, officers and assigns harmless from any claims or costs arising out of use of the EAS, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs.

SECTION 9

Service and Rates

9.1   Phone Service. The Grantee shall maintain a toll-free telephone number and a phone service operated to receive complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments at any time.

9.2   Notification of Service Procedures. The Grantee shall furnish each Subscriber at the time service is installed, written instructions that clearly set forth information concerning the procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the Grantee’s name, address and local telephone number. Grantee shall give the Grantor thirty (30) days prior notice of any rate increases, Channel lineup or other substantive service changes.

9.3   Rate Regulation. Grantor shall have the right to exercise rate regulation to the extent authorized by law, or to refrain from exercising such regulation for any period of time, at the sole discretion of the Grantor. If and when exercising rate regulation, the Grantor shall abide by the terms and conditions set forth by the FCC.

9.4   Continuity of Service. It shall be the right of all Subscribers to continue receiving Cable Service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the Grantee are honored, and subject to Grantee’s rights under Section 14.2 of this Franchise.

SECTION 10

Franchise Fee

10.1   Amount of Fee. Grantee shall pay to the Grantor an annual franchise fee in an amount equal to (5%) of the annual Gross Revenue. Such payment shall be in addition to taxes of general applicability owed to the Grantor by the Grantee that are not included as franchise fees under federal law. Franchise fees may be passed through to Subscribers as a line item on Subscriber bills or otherwise as Grantee chooses, consistent with federal law. If Cable Services and non-Cable Services are bundled together and offered to Subscribers for one price, then in accordance with GAAP, Grantee shall account for the revenue from such packages using the retail rate methodology which allocates the bundle discount by the proportion of the total retail rate each billing component represents. Grantee shall not allocate revenue between Cable Services and non-Cable Services for the purposes of evading or reducing its Franchise fee obligations. In the event the Cable Act is amended to modify the current cap on franchise fees to an amount greater than five percent (5%) of Gross Revenues, Grantee agrees and shall pay the new maximum amount consistent with federal law. Such increased fee shall take effect upon sixty (60) days written notice of the adoption of a city Council resolution to increase the franchise fee to the new maximum amount.

10.2   Payment of Fee. Payment of the franchise fee due the Grantor shall be made on a quarterly basis, within forty-five (45) days of the close of each quarter. The payment period and the collection of the franchise fees that are to be paid to the Grantor pursuant to the Franchise shall commence sixty (60) days after the Effective Date of the Franchise as set forth in Section 14.12. In the event of a dispute, the Grantor, if it so requests, shall be furnished a statement of said payment, reflecting the Gross Revenues and the applicable charges.

10.3   Accord and Satisfaction. No acceptance of any payment by the Grantor shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the Grantor may have for additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this Franchise.

10.4   Limitation on Recovery. The period of limitation for recovery of any franchise fee payable hereunder shall be five (5) years from the date on which payment by the Grantee was due. If any Franchise payment or recomputed payment is not made on or before the dates specified herein, interest shall accrue on the unpaid fee at a rate of the Prime Rate plus two percent (2%) commencing with the fifteenth day after the fee shall be due.

10.5   Audit. Grantor may review and/or audit Grantee’s records to ensure the correct calculation of Gross Revenues and payment of Franchise fees. Grantee shall provide such records to Grantor or its designee, upon request by and at no charge to Grantor, subject to Grantor and/or designee signing Grantee’s non-disclosure agreement. If there is a dispute as to whether a particular item of revenue is within the scope of the term “Gross Revenues” and Grantee withholds revenue records on the ground that the revenues are not subject to the Franchise fee, Grantee agrees that it will provide a certified statement describing the nature of the revenues contained in the records withheld. In the event that any Franchise fee is underpaid, Grantee shall pay interest as required in Section 10.2. Subject to applicable law, if the audit discloses an underpayment by an amount in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000), Grantee will reimburse Grantor for all reasonable audit costs. Said audit shall be conducted no more often than annually, and the audit period shall not be any greater than the previous five (5) years. Any undisputed additional amounts due to the Grantor as a result of the audit shall be paid within sixty (60) days following written notice to Grantee by the Grantor, which notice shall include a copy of the audit findings.

SECTION 11

Transfer of Franchise

11.1   Franchise Transfer. The Franchise granted hereunder shall not be assigned, other than by operation of law or to an entity controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the Grantee, without the prior consent of the Grantor, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld or delayed. No such consent shall be required, however, for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of the Grantee in the Franchise or Cable System to secure indebtedness. Within thirty (30) days of receiving a request for transfer, the Grantor shall notify the Grantee in writing of any additional information it reasonably requires to determine the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the transferee. If the Grantor has not taken action on the Grantee’s request for transfer within one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving such request, consent by the Grantor shall be deemed given.

SECTION 12

Records

12.1   Reports Required. The Grantee’s schedule of charges for regular Subscriber service, its policy regarding the processing of Subscriber complaints, delinquent Subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures and any other terms and conditions adopted as the Grantee’s policy in connection with its Subscribers shall be filed with the Grantor upon request.

12.2   Records Required.

The Grantee shall at all times maintain:

A.    A record of all written complaints received regarding interruptions or degradation of Cable Service, which record shall be maintained for one (1) year.

B.    A full and complete set of plans, records and strand maps showing the location of the Cable System.

12.3   Inspection of Records. Grantee shall permit any duly authorized representative of the Grantor, upon receipt of advance written notice, to examine at a mutually-agreeable location during normal business hours and on a non-disruptive basis any and all of Grantee’s records maintained by Grantee as is reasonably necessary to ensure Grantee’s compliance with the Franchise. Such notice shall specifically reference the Section of the Franchise that is under review so that the Grantee may organize the necessary books and records for easy access by the Grantor. The Grantee shall not be required to maintain any books and records for Franchise compliance purposes longer than three (3) years except for (1) books and records showing the calculation of Gross Revenues and payment of Franchise Fees, which shall be kept for five (5) years; and (2) service complaints, which shall be kept for one (1) year as specified above. The Grantee shall not be required to provide Subscriber information in violation of Section 631 of the Cable Act. Subject to Oregon’s public records law, the Grantor agrees to treat as confidential any books, records or maps that constitute proprietary or confidential information to the extent Grantee make the Grantor aware of such confidentiality. If the Grantor believes it must release any such confidential books or records in the course of enforcing this Franchise, or for any other reason, it shall advise Grantee in advance so that Grantee may take appropriate steps to protect its interests. Until otherwise ordered by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, the Grantor agrees that, to the extent permitted by State and federal law, it shall deny access to any of Grantee’s books and records marked confidential, as set forth above, to any Person. Grantee agrees to pay costs incurred by Grantor due to the foregoing denial of books and records, including reasonable attorney fees, in responding to public record requests for Grantee’s books and records and/or defending a denial of such public records requests.

SECTION 13

Public, Educational and Governmental (PEG) Access

13.1   PEG Access. Grantor at any time during the Term or Renewal Term of this Agreement may, request one Channel on the Cable System for use by for non-commercial, video programming for public, education and government (“PEG”) access programming in accordance with the procedures set forth below. The PEG Channel may be placed on any tier of service available to all Subscribers within the Service Area.

13.2   Process for Requesting PEG Access Channel. Grantee will provide one PEG access Channel upon no less than one hundred twenty (120) days’ written notice from the Grantor that the following conditions have been met:

A.    Grantor has passed a resolution, after a public hearing, demonstrating that there is a community need for PEG access programming and that it has made arrangements and agrees to fully fund all operational expenses for such programming; and

B.    Grantor provides a letter to Grantee identifying those entities or persons who will be responsible for providing access programming and agreeing to indemnify Grantee for any negligence or willful misconduct of such entities or persons for such access programming.

13.3   PEG Channel Reclamation. If the PEG channel provided pursuant to this section is unused for or occupied by non-local, substantially duplicated or character generated programming fifty (50%) percent or more of the time during “regular viewing hours” measured over any ten (10) consecutive week period, the Grantee shall have a right to a return of the PEG channel upon one hundred twenty (120) days’ written notice to Grantor of its intent to reclaim the PEG channel. For purposes of this subsection, “regular viewing hours” shall be the hours between 2pm to 10pm Monday through Friday. A program is deemed “duplicated” if it is repeated two (2) times after its first run during regular viewing hours.

13.4   Service to Public Buildings. Subject to applicable law, Grantee shall provide, without charge, one (1) Standard Installation, activated outlet, and equipment for Basic Cable Service to two (2) publicly-owned or publicly-operated buildings identified below, which shall be within one hundred twenty five (125) feet of Grantee’s feeder cable. The Cable Service provided pursuant to this Section shall not be used for commercial purposes and such outlets shall not be located in areas open to the public. The Grantor shall take reasonable precautions to prevent any inappropriate use of or loss or damage to the Grantee’s Cable System.

A.    Myrtle Creek City Hall, 207 NW Pleasant, Myrtle Creek, OR

B.    Myrtle Creek Fire Dept, 601 NE Riverside, Myrtle Creek, OR

SECTION 14

Enforcement or Revocation

14.1   Notice of Violation. If the Grantor believes that the Grantee has not complied with the terms of the Franchise, the Grantor shall first informally discuss the matter with Grantee. If these discussions do not lead to resolution of the problem, the Grantor shall notify the Grantee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance (the “Violation Notice”).

14.2   Grantee’s Right to Cure or Respond. Unless Grantor is pursuing a Revocation pursuant to Section 14.5 below, the Grantee shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of the Violation Notice to (i) respond to the Grantor, contesting the assertion of noncompliance, or (ii) to cure such default, or (iii) if, by the nature of such default, it cannot be cured within the thirty (30) day period, request from Grantor additional time to remedy the default, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default, and notify the Grantor of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be completed, which in no case shall exceed a total of sixty (60) days from Grantor’s notice without prior approval from Grantor.

14.3   Public Hearing. If the Grantee fails to respond to the Violation Notice received from the Grantor, or if the default is not remedied within the cure period set forth above, the Council shall schedule a public hearing if it intends to continue its investigation into the default. Unless Grantor is pursuing a Revocation pursuant to Section 15.7 below, Grantor shall provide the Grantee at least twenty (20) days prior written notice of such hearing, which specifies the time, place and purpose of such hearing, notice of which shall be publicized and noticed in the same manner as all public meetings are publicized and noticed and in compliance with Section 15.7 Public Notice. At the hearing, the Council shall give the Grantee an opportunity to state its position on the matter, after which it shall determine if a breach or violation has occurred and/or whether or not the Franchise shall be revoked. The public hearing shall be on the record and, at the Grantee’s request and sole expense, the City shall provide the adopted minutes or a digital recording of the meeting to the Grantee within ten (10) business days. Nothing herein shall prohibit Grantee from arranging for a written transcript of the hearing at Grantee’s expense. The decision of the Council shall be made in writing and shall be delivered to the Grantee. The Grantee may appeal such determination to an appropriate court, which shall have the power to review the decision of the Council using a standard of review consistent with federal and Oregon law. The Grantee may continue to operate the Cable System until all legal appeals procedures have been exhausted.

14.4   Enforcement. Subject to applicable federal, State and Generally Applicable local law, in the event the Grantor, after the hearing set forth in subsections 14.3 or 14.5 determines that the Grantee is in default of any provision of the Franchise, the Grantor may:

A.    Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages; or

B.    Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other equitable relief; or

C.    In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the Franchise, revoke the Franchise itself in accordance with subsection 14.5 below.

14.5   Revocation Hearings: Standards, Notice, and Opportunity to Cure. Prior to revocation of the Franchise, the Grantor shall give written a Revocation Notice to the Grantee, which shall state its intent to revoke the Franchise on the basis of a pattern of noncompliance by the Grantee, including one or more instances of substantial noncompliance with a material provision of the Franchise. The notice shall set forth the exact nature of the material and substantial noncompliance. The Grantee shall have sixty (60) days from such notice to either object in writing and to state its reasons for such objection and provide any explanation or to cure the alleged noncompliance. If the Grantor has not received a satisfactory response from Grantee within sixty days, it may then revoke the Franchise. If the Grantee responds within sixty days and such response is not satisfactory to Grantor, Grantor shall schedule a public City Council hearing no earlier than 30 days from the date of Grantee’s response. The Grantee shall be given at least thirty (30) days prior written notice of such public hearing, specifying the time and place of such hearing and its intent to revoke the Franchise. The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with requirements of Section 14.1.

A.    Notwithstanding the above provisions, the Grantee and Grantor reserve all of their rights under federal or state and City law or applicable regulation.

B.    Upon revocation of the Franchise, Grantee may remove the Cable System from the Right of Way of the Grantor; or may abandon the Cable System in place with written permission from Grantor.

SECTION 15

Miscellaneous Provisions

15.1   Reservation of Rights and Compliance with Laws. Grantor and Grantee reserve all applicable rights under state or federal law and shall conform to all state and federal laws regarding right of way occupancy, Cable Service, and cable television as they become effective. Grantee shall also conform with all Generally Applicable Grantor ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations heretofore or hereafter adopted or established during the entire term of the Franchise.

By entering into this Agreement neither party takes any position with respect to the Grantor’s right, or lack of right, to impose other non-discriminatory taxes or fees as may be allowed by law, including a license fee appicable to the provision of telecommunications services by Grantee for using the Streets. Grantee expressly reserves any and all rights it has to challenge the legality of such taxes or fees, including the telecommunications license fee, and Grantor expressly reserves any and all rights it may have to impose and enforce such taxes and fees.

15.2   Force Majeure. The Grantor or Grantee shall not be held in default under, or in noncompliance with the provisions of the Franchise, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating to noncompliance or default, where such noncompliance or alleged defaults occurred or were caused by circumstances reasonably beyond the ability of the Grantor or Grantee to anticipate and control. This provision includes, but is not limited to, severe or unusual weather conditions, fire, flood, or other acts of God, strikes, work delays caused by failure of utility providers to service, maintain or monitor their utility poles to which Grantee’s Cable System is attached, as well as unavailability of materials and/or qualified labor to perform the work necessary.

15.3   Minor Violations. Furthermore, the parties hereby agree that it is not either Parties’ intention to subject either Party to forfeitures or revocation of the Franchise for violations of the Franchise where the violation was a good faith error that resulted in no or minimal negative impact on the Subscribers within the Franchise Area, or where strict performance would result in practical difficulties or hardship to the offending Party which outweighs the benefit to be derived by the either Party and/or Subscribers.

15.4   Action of Parties. In any action by the Grantor or the Grantee that is mandated or permitted under the terms hereof, such party shall act in a reasonable, expeditious and timely manner. Furthermore, in any instance where approval or consent is required under the terms hereof, such approval or consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.

15.5   Competitive Equity. The Grantee acknowledges and agrees that Grantor reserves the right to grant one or more additional franchises to provide Cable Service or other services within the Franchise Area. If any such additional or competitive Cable Services franchise is granted by Grantor which contains more favorable or less burdensome material terms or conditions than this Franchise, Grantor agrees that it shall modify and renegotiate this Franchise to include substantially similar material terms more favorable or less burdensome to Grantee. In determining whether the material terms of this Agreement are more burdensome or less favorable than the material obligations of a competing wireline Cable Service provider’s Agreement, the Parties and a court of competent jurisdiction shall consider the comparative material obligations in their totality.

A.    In the event an application for a new Cable franchise is filed with the Franchising Authority proposing to serve the Franchising Area, in whole or in part, the Grantor shall use its best efforts to provide a copy of such application upon any existing Grantee or incumbent cable operator by registered or certified mail or via nationally recognized overnight courier service. In no event shall the Franchising Authority hold a public hearing to consider another Cable franchise without providing public notice as required by law.

B.    In the event that a Non-Franchised Video Service provider is permitted to offer service to the residents of Grantor on more favorable or less burdensome terms than this Franchise, the Grantee may request Franchise amendments. In requesting amendments, the Grantee shall file a petition seeking to amend the Franchise. Such petitions shall: (1) indicate the presence of a non-franchised competitor; (2) identify the basis for Grantee’s belief that Grantee is at a competitive disadvantage; and (3) identify the regulatory burdens requested to be amended or repealed. Grantor shall not unreasonably withhold consent to the Grantee’s petition.

C.    For the purposes of this subsection 15.5(B), “Video Service” shall mean the provision of multichannel video programming through facilities located in, or, or over Grantor’s Streets and generally considered comparable to video programming delivered by a television broadcast station, cable service, or other digital video service, whether provided as part of a tier, on demand, or on a per-channel basis, without regard to the technology used to deliver the video service, including without limitation, Internet Protocol technology or any successor technology.

15.6   Notices. Unless otherwise provided by federal, State or local law, all notices pursuant to this Franchise shall be in writing and shall be deemed to be sufficiently given upon delivery to a Person at the address set forth below, or by U.S. certified mail, return receipt requested, nationally or internationally recognized courier service such as Federal Express or electronic mail communication to the designated electronic mail address provided below. Grantee shall provide thirty (30) days’ written notice of any changes in rates, programming services or Channel positions using any reasonable written means. As set forth above, notice served upon the Grantor shall be delivered or sent to:

	Grantor:	City of Myrtle Creek

	 	City Administrator

	 	PO Box 940

	 	Myrtle Creek, OR 97457

	Email:	sn

	 	 

	Grantee:	Attn: Director, Government Relations

	 	Charter Communications

	 	222 NE Park Plaza Dr., #231

	 	Vancouver, WA 98684

	Email:	marian.jackson@charter.com

	 	 

	Copy to:	Charter Communications

	 	Attn: Vice President, Government Affairs

	 	12405 Powerscourt Drive

	 	St. Louis, MO 63131

	 	 

	 	Additionally, Grantee shall provide updated Director of Government Relations telephone number to Grantor upon request.

15.7   Public Notice. Any public meeting held relating to this Franchise or additional, similar franchises shall comply with the public meetings requirements of Oregon law. Grantee will be considered an interested party and will be notified of Grantor’s public meetings.

15.8   Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this Franchise is, for any reason, held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Franchise.

15.9   Entire Agreement. This Franchise and any Exhibits hereto constitute the entire agreement between Grantee and the Grantor and they supersede all prior or contemporaneous agreements, representations or understandings (whether written or oral) of the parties regarding the subject matter hereof.

15.10   Administration of Franchise. Except as otherwise provided herein, this Franchise is a contract and neither party may take any unilateral action that materially changes the express mutual promises and covenants contained herein. Any changes, modifications or amendments to this Franchise must be made in writing, signed by the Grantor and the Grantee. Any determination by the Grantor regarding the interpretation of this Franchise shall be subject to judicial review using a review standard as determined by a court of competent jurisdiction.

15.11   Effective Date. The Franchise granted herein will take effect and be in full force from such date of acceptance by Grantee recorded on the signature page of this Franchise. If any fee or grant that is passed through to Subscribers is required by this Franchise, such fee or grant shall go into effect sixty (60) days after the Effective Date of this Franchise.

15.12   No Third Party Beneficiaries. Nothing in this Franchise is intended to confer third-party beneficiary status on any person other than the parties to this Franchise to enforce the terms of this Franchise.

Considered and approved this ___ day of _______, 2017.

	City of Myrtle Creek, Oregon

	Signature: ______________________________

	Name/Title_____________________________

Accepted this 19th day of December, 2017, subject to applicable federal, State and local law.

	Falcon Community Ventures I, L.P.

	By: Charter Communications, LLC, its General Manager

	By: Charter Communications Inc., its Manager

	 

	Signature: ______________________________

	Paul Abbott, Vice President Local Government Affairs & Franchising




Chapter 13.60 AVISTA GAS FRANCHISE

    Legislative history: Ord. 730.

Ordinance 793 

AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A NON-EXCLUSIVE GAS UTILITY FRANCHISE TO AVISTA CORPORATION, DBA AVISTA UTILITIES; AND FIXING TERMS, CONDITIONS AND COMPENSATION OF SUCH FRANCHISE 

WHEREAS, Avista Corporation, a corporation organized under the laws of the State of Washington (hereinafter referred to as “Grantee”), has respectfully requested that the City of Myrtle Creek (hereinafter referred to as “Grantor”) in the State of Oregon, renew its Franchise to locate, construct, operate and maintain such plants and works and all necessary or desirable appurtenances thereto for the purchase, transmission and distribution of Gas under, along and across all of Grantor’s rights of way and public property in the City of Myrtle Creek, State of Oregon (hereinafter referred to as “Franchised Area”); and

WHEREAS, Grantee is engaged in the business of providing utility services to customers consistent with applicable laws and regulations, and Grantor has determined it is in the interest of persons and businesses in this jurisdiction to have access to Grantee’s services;

NOW, THEREFORE, THE MYRTLE CREEK CITY COUNCIL HEREBY ORDAINS, that Avista Corporation, its successors and assigns, is granted a non-exclusive franchise in the City of Myrtle Creek, State of Oregon, on the terms and conditions set forth below:

Definitions

Days: means business days.

Effective Date: means the date of acceptance by Grantee of this Ordinance, upon which the rights, duties and obligations of this Franchise shall come into effect, and the date from which the time requirement for any notice, extension and/or renewal shall be measured. 

Facilities: means, collectively, any and all Gas transmission, and distribution systems and appurtenances owned by Avista, now and in the future in the Franchise Area, including but not limited to, Gas plants, Gas pipes, pipelines, mains, laterals, conduits, regulators, valves, meters, meter-reading devices, communication and control systems and other equipment, appliances, fixtures, attachments, appurtenances and other items necessary, convenient, or in any way appertaining to any and all of the foregoing for the purposes of transmission, distribution and sale of Gas.

Franchise: means the grant by the City of rights, privileges and authority embodied in this Ordinance.

Franchise Area: means the surface and space above and below all rights-of-way for: public roads, streets, avenues, alleys, bridges, tunnels, City-owned easements, and highways of the City, as laid out, platted, dedicated, acquired or improved within the present corporate limits of the City;

•    public roads, streets, avenues, alleys, bridges, tunnels, City-owned easements, and highways that may hereafter be laid out, platted, dedicated, acquired or improved within the present corporate limits of the City and as such limits may be extended by annexation or otherwise during the term of this Franchise;

•    all City-owned utility easements dedicated for the placement and location of various utilities, provided such easements would permit Avista to fully exercise the rights granted under this Franchise within the area covered by the easement.

Gas: means natural, manufactured, and/or mixed gases.

Grantee: means Avista Corporation, dba Avista Utilities, a Washington corporation, and its respective successors and assigns, agents and contractors.

Grantor: means the City of Myrtle Creek, a municipal corporation of the State of Oregon, and its respective successors and assigns.

Maintenance, maintaining, or maintain: means, without limit, repairing, replacing, upgrading, examining, testing, inspecting, and removing Avista Facilities, vegetation management, digging and excavating, and restoration of affected Right-of-way surfaces.

Party: means either City or Avista individually.

Right-of-way: means the surface of and the space along, above, and below any street, road, highway, freeway, bridge, tunnel, lane, sidewalk, alley, City-owned utility easement and/or right-of-way now or hereafter held or administered by the City within its corporate limits.

Tariff: means the rate schedules, rules, and regulations relating to utility service, filed with and approved by the Commission.

SECTION 1. GRANT OF FRANCHISE. Grantor hereby grants to Grantee, its successors and assigns, the right, power, privilege and authority to construct, or otherwise acquire, and to own, maintain, equip, and operate plants and works, and all necessary or desirable appurtenances thereto, for the purchase, transmission and distribution of Gas, including the right to construct, lay, maintain, operate, extend, renew, remove, replace, repair, use and operate a Gas distribution system, in, under, upon, over, across, and along the present and future streets, rights of way, bridges and other structures, for the purpose of transporting, distributing and selling Gas (with the right and privilege to make such connections with said pipes as will enable the Grantee to supply Gas) for heating, lighting, power and any and all domestic, commercial, and industrial purposes, and other reasons and purposes within and through the Grantor’s corporate limits and to the Grantor and its inhabitants, and to other persons, firms, entities or municipal corporations. Grantee shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations.

SECTION 2. TERM. The rights, privileges and franchise hereby granted to, and conferred upon the Grantee, as the Grantee has made a long-term investment in constructing, maintaining and operating the natural Gas utility system in and upon the streets, alleys, and public places of the Grantor, to provide natural Gas service to the citizens of the Grantor, shall, unless this Franchise be sooner terminated, as herein provided, extend for a term of 10 years from the date of written acceptance hereof by the Grantee. If no provisions of the Franchise are in default, Grantee shall have the option of requesting one (1) successive ten (10) year renewal of this Franchise. No fewer than sixty (60) days prior to expiration of this Franchise, the Grantee shall notify the Grantor in writing of Grantee’s desire to continue to operate under this existing Franchise. The renewal date shall commence the day immediately following the expiration date of the current term, and all terms and conditions of the Franchise shall remain the same, unless Grantor notifies Grantee in writing prior to the expiration of the Franchise of its desire to draft a new franchise.

SECTION 3. EXPIRATION. At the end of the Franchise term, if the Grantor and Grantee are negotiating another franchise and have not concluded their negotiations, Grantee’s rights and responsibilities shall be controlled by this Franchise until the Grantor grants a new franchise and Grantee accepts it. If Grantee does not accept the new franchise within 30 (thirty) days of its adoption, this Franchise shall expire.

SECTION 4. NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE. This Franchise is not, and shall not be deemed to be, an exclusive Franchise. This Franchise shall not in any manner prohibit the Grantor from granting other and further franchises over, under, upon, and along the Franchised Area that do not interfere with Grantee’s rights under this Franchise. This Franchise shall not prohibit or prevent the Grantor from using the Franchised Area or affect the jurisdiction of the Grantor over the same or any part thereof. The Grantor shall not, however, award a Gas franchise to any other provider under more favorable or less onerous terms than those of this Franchise without this Franchise being amended to reflect such more favorable or less onerous terms.

SECTION 5. FRANCHISE AS CONTRACT. This Franchise shall have the effect of and shall be a contract between Grantor and Grantee and shall be the measure of the rights and liabilities of the Grantor as well as of Grantee. Both Grantor and Grantee have had input and discussion prior to the final passage of this Franchise.

SECTION 6. EFFECT OF INVALIDITY. This Franchise is granted pursuant to the laws of the state of Grantor relating to the granting of such rights and privileges by Grantor. If any article, section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Franchise is for any reason held illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of this Franchise or any of the remaining portions. The invalidity of any portion of this Franchise shall not abate, reduce, or otherwise affect any obligation required of Grantee.

SECTION 7. PRIOR FRANCHISES SUPERSEDED. This Franchise shall update and supersede all prior gas franchises for the above stated purpose heretofore granted to Grantee or its predecessors, by Grantor, or its predecessors, and shall affirm, authorize and ratify all prior installations authorized by permits or other action not previously covered by this Franchise.

SECTION 8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This ordinance will be effective as of the date of approval, passage and publication as required by law, provided Grantee has signed and returned the acceptance form as required and included as part of this ordinance.

SECTION 9. FRANCHISE FEE. As compensation for the Franchise granted by this ordinance, Grantee shall pay to the Grantor an amount equal to six (6) percent of the gross revenue collected by the Grantee from its customers for Gas consumed within the Franchise Area. Except as may be required by the Oregon Public Utilities Commission, no part of the fee required by this Section shall appear on any customer bill sent by Grantee or its agents.

SECTION 10. PAYMENTS. The compensation required by this Franchise shall be due for each calendar quarter or fraction thereof for which the Grantee operates. Said payments shall be made on or before the 30th day following the end of each quarterly period. In the event of the termination of this Franchise at any time prior to the expiration of the declaration of term mentioned in Section 2, the Grantee shall pay the compensation provided for herein to the Grantor within thirty (30) days following such termination, with such payment to cover the period of time for which compensation therefore has not been paid to the Grantor.

SECTION 11. REPORTING. The Grantee shall furnish to the Grantor with each payment of compensation required by this Franchise a written statement executed by an officer of Grantee, showing the amount of gross revenue of the Grantee within the Franchise Area for the period covered by the payment computed on the basis set out in this Franchise. The compensation for the period covered by the statement shall be computed on the basis of the gross revenue so reported. If the Grantee fails to pay the entire amount of compensation due the Grantor through error or otherwise, the difference due the Grantor shall be paid by the Grantee within thirty (30) days from discovery of the error or determination of the correct amount. Any overpayment to the Grantor through error or otherwise shall be offset against the next payment due from the Grantee.

SECTION 12. ACCEPTANCE OF PAYMENT. Acceptance by the Grantor of any payment due under this Franchise shall not be deemed to be a waiver by the Grantor of any breach of this Franchise occurring prior thereto, nor shall the acceptance by the Grantor of any such payments preclude the Grantor from later establishing that a larger amount was actually due, or from collecting any balance due the Grantor.

SECTION 13. AUDITS. Upon written request by the Grantor, Grantee agrees to open its records to the Grantor for a complete audit of franchise fees (as well as the basis for determination thereof) paid or owing from the date of the last audit by the Grantor. The audit is to be conducted by an audit firm licensed to practice in the State of Oregon. Grantee further agrees to make said records available in an electronic Excel spreadsheet and to fully cooperate with the audit firm chosen by the Grantor. If the audit discloses the Grantee has underpaid the Grantor, Grantee shall pay the Grantor within thirty (30) days from discovery of the error or determination of the correct amount.

SECTION 14. CONDUCT OF GRANTEE’S BUSINESS. 

A. The Grantor shall have the right to make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations pertaining to the conduct of the Grantee’s business. Prior to the adoption of any new rule, procedure or policy which would have a direct impact on this Franchise, Grantee will be provided a written draft document for comment with a response period of not less than 30 (thirty) business days. Service shall be supplied to the Grantor and its inhabitants in accordance with the Grantee’s rules and regulations and Tariffs filed or hereafter filed with the appropriate regulatory body of this State having jurisdiction over the Grantee. This Franchise shall be interpreted, construed and enforced in all respects in accordance with the laws of the State of Oregon. In addition, this Franchise is subject to the provisions of any applicable Tariff on file with this State’s regulatory agency having jurisdiction over gas utilities or its successor. In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of this Franchise and such Tariff, the provisions of such Tariff shall control.

B. In consideration of Grantee’s undertaking hereunder as evidenced by its acceptance hereof the Grantor agrees not to engage in the business of distribution and selling Gas during the life of this Franchise or any extension thereof in competition with the Grantee, its successor and assigns; but nothing herein contained shall be construed or deemed to prevent the Grantor from exercising at any time, any power or eminent domain granted to it under the laws of this State.

SECTION 15. NON-INTERFERENCE WITH EXISTING FACILITIES.

A. All construction, installation, repair or relocation of lines and appurtenances performed by Grantee along or under the roads, rights-of-way or properties subject to this Franchise shall be done in such a manner as not to interfere with existing facilities of other utilities, public or private, including drains, drainage ditches and structures, irrigation ditches and structures located therein, nor with the grading or improvement of such roads, rights of way or other public property subject to this Franchise.

B. Grantee shall provide the Grantor, upon the Grantor’s reasonable request, copies of available drawings in use by Grantee showing the location of its Facilities at specific locations within the Franchised Area. As to any such drawings so provided, Grantee does not warrant the accuracy thereof and, to the extent the location of Facilities are shown; such Facilities may be shown in their approximate location. With respect to any excavations within the Franchised Area undertaken by or on behalf of Grantee or the Grantor, nothing herein is intended, nor shall be construed, to relieve either Party of their respective obligations arising under applicable law with respect to determining the location of utility facilities.

SECTION 16. REMOVAL OF TREES/VEGETATION ENCROACHMENT. The right of Grantee to maintain its Gas lines, Facilities and appurtenances shall include the right, as exercised in Grantee’s sole discretion, to utilize an integrated vegetation management program, including the right to cut or trim any and all trees, brush or shrubs growing in, on, or hanging over any Grantor roads, rights of way, streets, alleys or Grantor property, whether such trees or vegetation originate within or outside said Right-of-way, property, or place, that interfere with or may interfere with Grantee’s Facilities, including pipes, valves, services, conduits or other apparatus of Grantee, its successors and assigns. A growth inhibitor treatment may be utilized for trees and vegetation species that are fast growing and problematic. Nothing contained in this Section shall prevent Grantee, with the approval of the owner of the property on which they may be located, from cutting down and removing any trees which overhang public rights-of-way that may interfere with Grantee’s Facilities.

SECTION 17. RIGHT OF EXCAVATION. For the purpose of carrying into effect the privileges granted hereunder, after all necessary and required permits are secured, without additional cost to the Grantee, Grantee shall be authorized at any time, with the exception of those times wherein noise is specifically prohibited in the Myrtle Creek Municipal Code, to make all necessary excavations in the streets, alleys, roads, rights of way and public grounds within the Franchised Area, but such excavation shall be carried out with reasonable dispatch and with as little interference with or inconvenience to the rights of the public as may be feasible. Grantee shall restore all streets, alleys, roads, rights of way and public grounds to a standard as agreed upon for conditions of safety and use after excavation. In case any obstruction caused by Grantee shall remain longer than ten (10) business days after notice to remove it, or in case of neglect by Grantee to safeguard any dangerous places, Grantor may remove such obstruction or safeguard such dangerous places at the expense of Grantee which shall include any penalty set by the Myrtle Creek Municipal Code for failure to remove such obstruction from the public way.

Emergency Work. In the event of an emergency requiring immediate action by Grantee to protect the public health and safety or for the protection of its Gas Facilities, or the property of the Grantor or other persons in the Franchise Area, Grantee may immediately proceed with excavation or other Right-of-way work, with concurrent notice to Grantor to the extent possible. 

SECTION 18. EXPANSION OF GRANTEE’S FACILITIES. Any Facilities and appurtenances in streets, alleys, rights of way and public places, incidental to the franchise system, that have been, or are at any future time acquired, newly constructed, leased, or utilized in any manner by Grantee are thereupon to be deemed authorized by and shall be subject to all provisions of this Franchise.

SECTION 19. VACATION OF PROPERTIES BY GRANTOR. If, at any time, the Grantor shall vacate any road, right of way or other public property which is subject to rights granted by this Franchise, to the extent permitted by law, such vacation shall be subject to the reservation of a perpetual easement for the purpose of operating, maintaining, repairing or replacing all existing public and private utilities, including those of Grantor and Grantee. The Grantor shall, in its vacation procedure, reserve said easement and shall also expressly prohibit any use of the vacated properties, which will interfere with the Grantee’s full enjoyment and use of said easement.

SECTION 20. RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.

A. Upon request of the Grantor, the Grantee shall relocate its Facilities as necessary within the present and future streets, alleys, highways and other public places owned by the Grantor. Grantor shall notify Grantee of any intended or expected requirement or request to relocate Grantee’s Facilities as early as practicable, but not less than 120 calendar days prior to any such relocation. Grantor shall endeavor to cause any such relocation to be consistent with any applicable long-term development plan or projection of Grantor or approved by Grantor. If, at any time, the Grantor shall cause or require the alteration or the improvement of any road, highway or Right-of-way wherein Grantor maintains facilities subject to this Franchise by grading or re-grading, planking or paving the same, changing the grade, altering, changing, repairing or relocating the same or by constructing drainage or potable water facilities, the Grantee upon written notice from the Grantor shall, with all convenient speed, change the location or readjust the elevation of its system and other facilities so that the same shall not interfere with such work and so that such equipment and facilities shall conform to such new grades or routes as may be established. If the relocation forces the Grantee off public Right-of-way then Grantor will make a reasonable effort to accommodate said relocation on alternative public Right-of-way.

B. In the event federal, state or other funds are available in whole or in part for utility relocating purposes, the Grantor may apply for such funds and the Grantee will be reimbursed to the extent any such funds are actually obtained.

SECTION 21. RELOCATION COSTS.

A. The Grantor shall have no responsibility for the costs of such relocations unless: 

1. Grantor has failed to provide the required advanced notice; then any and all reasonable excess costs caused by the failure to provide such notice shall be paid by the Grantor.

2. The Facilities are to be relocated for the benefit of a third party, in which case the third party shall pay the costs of relocation. Grantee shall have the right as a condition of such relocation, to require such developer, person or entity to make payment to Grantee, at a time and upon terms acceptable to Grantee, for any and all costs and expenses incurred by Grantee in the relocation of Grantee’s Facilities. Grantor shall not require any improvement or change until the benefited developer, person or entity has paid Grantee for the cost of relocation.

3. If the Grantor requires the subsequent relocation of a Grantor funded capital improvement to the public Right-of-way of any Facilities within five (5) years from the date of relocation of such Facilities, the Grantor shall bear fifty percent (50%) of the entire cost of such subsequent relocation.

B. Nothing in the “Relocation of Facilities” shall require Grantee to bear any cost or expense in connection with the location or relocation of any Facilities then existing pursuant to easement or such other rights not derived from this Franchise.

SECTION 22. PRESERVATION OF GRANTOR’S RIGHTS TO CONTROL. The Grantor, in granting this Franchise, does not waive any rights which it may now have or may hereafter acquire with respect to road rights of way or other property of Grantor under this Franchise, and this Franchise shall not be construed to deprive the Grantor of any such powers, rights or privileges which it now has or may hereafter acquire to regulate the use of and to control the Grantor’s roads, rights of way and other public property covered by this Franchise.

SECTION 23. CHANGE OF BOUNDARIES OF GRANTOR. Any subsequent additions or modifications of the boundaries of the Grantor, whether by annexation, consolidation or otherwise, shall be subject to the provisions of this Franchise as to all such areas. Grantor shall notify Grantee, as required by state law, of the precise scope of any change of boundaries prior to such change becoming effective.

SECTION 24. NECESSARY CONSTRUCTION/MAINTENANCE BY GRANTOR. The laying, construction, operation and maintenance of Grantee’s Facilities authorized by this Franchise shall not preclude the Grantor, its agents or its contractors, from grading, excavating, or doing other road or utility work contiguous to the said Facilities of Grantee. The Grantor shall notify Grantee through the Oregon Utility Notification Center in advance of such contemplated excavation or work to enable Grantee to take such measures as may be deemed necessary to protect Grantee’s Facilities from damage and possible inconvenience or injury to the public. In the instance of blasting, Grantee shall be given not less than 10 days’ notice of such work. 

SECTION 25. REMOVAL OF ABANDONED FACILITIES. Only under circumstances of demonstrated threat to public health and safety or obstruction of public construction projects within the Right-of-way, the Grantor may require the Grantee to remove affected abandoned Facilities. Upon a forfeiture of this Franchise, or non-renewal of this Franchise, the Grantor may require the Grantee, to remove such Facilities from the public properties at its own expense and as soon as practicable, but only where such abandoned Facilities constitute a demonstrated threat to public health and safety or an obstruction to a public construction project. If it becomes necessary for the Grantor to do so, the Grantor shall be paid the reasonable and actual costs of removal by the Grantee, which shall include any penalty set by the Myrtle Creek Municipal Code for failure to remove such obstruction from the public way.

SECTION 26. EQUALITY OF FRANCHISE FEES AND COSTS. In the event that Grantor charges or imposes upon Grantee any fees, taxes or other costs in connection with the issuance, Gas, existence, continuation, or use of this Franchise, or the public rights-of-way governed hereby, granted pursuant to this document, then Grantor shall impose equivalent charges, fees, taxes or costs upon any other franchisee in the same business or competing with Grantee.

SECTION 27. INDEMNITY.

A. Grantee shall indemnify, defend, and hold the Grantor (including its officers, agents, employees and volunteers) harmless for, from and against any and all claims for injury, damage, loss, cost, expense (including court and appeal costs and attorney, architect, and engineering fees or expenses) and liability of any kind arising from or connected with:

1.    any act or omission of Grantee to keep its Gas Facilities in a safe condition; 

2.    any casualty or accident caused by the officers, employees, agents, contractors, or subcontractors of Grantee in the construction, operation, repair or removal of its Gas Facilities; and

3.    any breach of this Franchise.

However, this provision shall not apply to the negligent or willful acts or omissions of the Grantor, for which Grantor will indemnify Grantee to the extent allowable under the Oregon Tort Claims Act. 

B. The Grantor shall provide Grantee with prompt notice of any such claim, which Grantee shall defend with counsel reasonably acceptable to Grantor, and no settlement or compromise of any such claim will be done by the Grantor without the prior written approval of Grantee. Grantee and its agents, contractors and others shall consult and cooperate with the Grantor while conducting its defense.

SECTION 28. INSURANCE.

A. Grantee shall secure and maintain automobile, comprehensive general liability and property damage insurance that protects Grantee and the Grantor, as well as the Grantor’s officers, agents, employees and volunteers as follows:

1. Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than ten million dollars ($10,000,000) for bodily injury or death to each person; ten million dollars ($10,000,000) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and, ten million dollars ($10,000,000) for all other types of liability.

2. Commercial automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000) for each person and three million dollars ($3,000,000) for each accident.

3. Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse hazard and underground hazard with limits of not less than ten million dollars ($10,000,000), which may be included in the general liability policy.

B. The liability insurance policies required by this Franchise shall be maintained by the Grantee throughout the term of this Franchise, and such other period of time during which the licensee is engaged in the removal of its Gas Facilities. Upon request, Grantee shall furnish certificates of insurance acceptable to the Grantor. The certificate shall include the deductible or retention level.

C. The insurance policies may provide for self-retention or deductibles in reasonable amounts. The limits of the insurance shall be subject to statutory changes as to maximum limits of liability imposed on municipalities of the State of Oregon during the term of this Franchise. 

D. The insurance shall be without prejudice to coverage otherwise existing and shall name as an additional insured the Grantor and its officers, agents, volunteers, and employees. Notwithstanding the naming of an additional insured, the insurance shall protect each insured in the same manner as though a separate policy had been issued to each, but nothing in this Section shall operate to increase the insurer’s liability as set forth elsewhere in the policy beyond the amount or amounts for which the insurer would have been liable if only one person or interest had been named as insured. The coverage must apply as to claims between those insured on the policy. 

E. The insurance shall provide that the insurance shall not be canceled or materially altered without thirty (30) days’ prior written notice first being given to the Grantor. If the insurance is canceled or materially altered within the term of this Franchise, Grantee shall provide a replacement policy with the same terms. Grantee shall maintain continuous uninterrupted coverage, in the terms and amounts required, upon and after the effective date of this Franchise.

F. Grantee may self-insure to meet the requirements of this Section if Grantee maintains sufficient insurance reserves. In such event, Grantee shall notify Grantor and provide reasonable assurances of such reserves within 30 days of acceptance of this Franchise. In the event Grantee’s insurance reserves, for any reason, drop below the minimums necessary to cover potential liabilities as set forth in this Section, Grantee shall immediately notify Grantor of the reserve deficiency and shall take necessary steps to bring the insurance reserves back up to the minimum required amounts.

SECTION 29. FORFEITURE. If Grantee shall willfully violate or fail to substantially comply with any of the provisions of this Franchise through willful and unreasonable neglect or willful and unreasonable failure to heed or comply with any notice given Grantee under the provisions of this grant, then Grantee shall forfeit all rights conferred hereunder and this Franchise may be revoked or annulled by the Grantor; provided, however, the Grantor shall give ninety (90) days written notice of its intention to revoke or annul the Franchise during which period Grantee shall have the opportunity to remedy any breach.

SECTION 30. ASSIGNMENT OF FRANCHISE. Grantee shall have the right to assign its rights, benefits and privileges in and under this Franchise. Any assignee shall, within thirty (30) days of the date of any assignment, file written notice of the assignment with the Grantor together with its written acceptance of all terms and conditions of this Franchise. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Grantee shall have the right, without such notice or such written acceptance, to mortgage its rights, benefits and privileges in and under this Franchise for the benefit of bondholders.

SECTION 31. DISPUTE RESOLUTION. Disputes regarding the interpretation or execution of the terms of this Franchise that cannot be resolved between the Grantor and Grantee shall be submitted to the Grantor’s attorney and a representative of the Grantee’s legal department for resolution. If a mutually satisfactory or timely resolution cannot then be reached by the above process, prior to resorting to a court of competent jurisdiction, the matter will be submitted to a non-binding alternate dispute resolution process agreed to by both the Grantor and Grantee. Each Party shall pay for its own attorneys’ fees and costs incurred in any dispute resolution process or legal action arising out of the existence of this Franchise. 

SECTION 32. ACCEPTANCE OF FRANCHISE. Grantee shall notify Grantor in writing of its acceptance of this Franchise within thirty (30) days of the approval of this Franchise by Grantor. If Grantee does not accept this Franchise within 30 days of adoption, it shall become void and null. 

ADOPTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL ON THIS 15TH DAY OF OCTOBER, 2013.

APPROVED BY THE MAYOR ON THIS 15TH DAY OF OCTOBER, 2013.




Chapter 13.65 DOUGLAS FAST NET FRANCHISE

Ordinance 11-007 

AN ORDINANCE GRANTING DOUGLAS SERVICES, INC., A FRANCHISE TO USE THE PUBLIC WAYS OF THE CITY OF MYRTLE CREEK FOR PURPOSES OF PROVIDING TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES 

WHEREAS, the City of Myrtle Creek, a municipal cooperation of the State of Oregon, hereinafter called “MYRTLE CREEK” or “the City”, owns and operates utility services within the community. Douglas Services, Inc., dba Douglas Fast Net, a wholly owned subsidiary of Douglas Electric Corporation, hereinafter called “DFN” or “the Franchisee”, is a provider of telecommunications services in Douglas County, Oregon.

WHEREAS, DFN wishes to install telecommunications facilities in the public ways in MYRTLE CREEK, and the City is willing to consider granting permits to DFN to do so, subject to City approval, on the terms and conditions hereafter.

NOW, THEREFORE, the City of Myrtle Creek ordains as follows:

1.    Grant of Franchise. MYRTLE CREEK hereby grants DFN the non-exclusive right to use and occupy all public ways within the City, solely for the purposes described herein for a period of ten (10) years beginning on the effective date of this Ordinance, following DFN’s acceptance of the Franchise as provided in Section 11 of this Ordinance.

2.    Definitions. As used herein:

“Gross Revenue” means all revenue earned by DFN from operations within the City, including but not limited to telecommunications service to customers located within the City and other persons who use DFN’s facilities within the City to provide telecommunications service to customers.

“Public Ways” means the space in, upon, above, along, across, over or under the public streets, roads, highways, lanes, courts, ways, alleys, boulevards, bridges, trails, paths, sidewalks, bicycle lanes, public utility easements and all other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over these areas within the City, but does not include parks or other City-owned property. This definition applies only to the extent of the City’s right, title, interest and authority to grant a license or franchise to occupy and use such areas for telecommunications facilities.

“Telecommunications Provider” means: (1) any person that provides telecommunications service to any person or premises within the City, including both telecommunications carriers and non-carrier providers; (2) any person that directly or indirectly owns, leases, operates, manages, or otherwise controls telecommunications facilities which occupy public way within the City; and (3) any person that is directly or indirectly owned or controlled by any person described in this definition. For purposes of this definition, “owns” or “controls” means that one person or entity owns more than 25% of the stock or assets or has more than 25% common partners, directors or owners with another entity. In addition, any person that leases, purchases or otherwise receives telecommunications service or use of a telecommunications facility for less than a reasonable price, so as to create a reasonable inference that the two parties did not deal at arm’s length, shall be deemed to be owned or controlled by the second party.

“Telecommunications Facilities” means the plant and equipment, other than customer premises equipment, including but not limited to line, pipe, wire, cable, fiber, pedestals, and similar facilities or equipment used, designed or intended for use by DFN to provide telecommunications service. “Telecommunications Facilities” does not include facilities for the provision of wireless services, including cell phone or internet access services.

“Telecommunications Service” means the transmission for money or other valuable consideration of voice, video or data in electromagnetic, electronic or optical form. It includes, but is not limited to, telephone service, other forms of voice service, non-cable video service, data transport, internet access service, video and cable television. It does not include (1) one-way broadcast of radio or television signals; (2) direct-to-home satellite service within the meaning of Section 602 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996; (3) surveying; (4) private telecommunications networks that do not use the public way; (5) communications of the customer which take place on the customer side of on-premises equipment; or (6) cell phone or wireless services.

“Regional Fiber Consortium” means several units of local governments formed for the ownership and operation of a fiber optic system. Ordinance No. RES-11-003 establishes an intergovernmental agreement between MYRTLE CREEK and the Regional Fiber Consortium.

3.    Rights Granted. This Franchise authorizes and permits DFN, subject to and provided DFN is in compliance with the provisions of the Municipal Code and other applicable provisions of state or federal law, to construct, place, maintain and operate telecommunications facilities in the public ways for the term of the Franchise. This Franchise shall not convey equitable or legal title in the public ways, and may not be assigned or transferred without the written consent of the City. Neither the issuance of the Franchise nor any provisions contained herein shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power, police power or regulatory power of the City as may exist at the time the Franchise is granted or thereafter obtained. This Franchise does not confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways for delivery of telecommunications facilities or services or any other purpose. The City expressly reserves the right to grant licenses, franchises or other rights to other persons, as well as the City’s right to use the public ways, for similar or different purposes. This Franchise does not permit DFN to attach to any City-owned poles or other facilities of the City in the public ways. DFN agrees that use of such poles or facilities will require separate agreement with and compensation to the City.

4.    Placement of Facilities. DFN shall apply for and receive all required permits from the City, and pay all applicable permit fees, prior to construction and placement of telecommunications facilities in the public ways. The telecommunications facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with the permit requirements and all applicable federal, state and local codes, rules and regulations. Upon expiration or termination of the Franchise, DFN shall remove its telecommunications facilities and repair or restore the public ways as required in Section 7 within a reasonable time and at no cost to the City.

5.    Franchise Fees. Franchise fees shall be based on DFN’s annual use of the City’s public ways, as provided below:

a.    Fee Base. For the privileges granted by this Franchise, DFN shall pay seven percent (7%) of its gross revenue derived from telecommunication services provided to customers within the City limits of Myrtle Creek.

b.    Payment. All payments due hereunder shall be paid to the City of Myrtle Creek by check or money order delivered to the address of the City for notices as set forth herein.

c.    Due Date. Franchise fees shall be paid to the City on a quarterly basis, based on the revenues derived from the quarter just passed, not more than 30 days following the end of each quarter.

d.    Late Fee. If DFN fails to pay the Franchise fee when due, DFN shall be charged a penalty of ten percent (10%), and the legal rate of interest established by state statue on the unpaid balance.

e.    DFN shall provide a single 10 Mbps handoff of Internet connectivity to the City of Myrtle Creek at City Hall. All Internet connectivity shall be for City’s direct use only and not for resale or use by others.

6.    Conditions on Street Use. All telecommunications facilities erected by DFN within the City shall be located so as not to interfere with the proper use of the public ways, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said public ways, and not to interfere with existing public utility installation.

If DFN disturbs any pavements, sidewalks, driveways or other surfacing, it shall, at its own expense, and in the time and manner provided by the City, replace and restore all such paving, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces of any streets or alleys thus disturbed to at least that condition which existed prior to the disturbance.

If at any time during the period of this Franchise, the City shall lawfully elect to alter, or change the grade of, any public ways, or otherwise find removal or relocation of DFS’s facilities to be in the public interest, DFN shall upon reasonable notice by the City, remove and relocate its telecommunications facilities and other fixtures at its own expense, and in each instance comply with the requirements of the City.

7.    Insurance.

a.    The Franchise shall not be effective until the Franchisee secures, and shall at all times be conditioned upon the Franchisee maintaining a comprehensive liability insurance policy which shall contain the following provisions:

	Workers’ Compensation	Statutory Limits

	Commercial General Liability	$1,000,000.00 per occurrence, Combined Single Liability C.S.L., $2,000,000.00 General Aggregate

	Auto Liability including coverage On all owned, non-owned and hired Autos	$1,000,000.00 per occurrence C.S.L.

	Umbrella Liability	$1,000,000.00 per occurrence C.S.L.

b.    The City shall be added as an Additional Insured to the above Commercial General Liability and Auto Liability Insurance Coverage.

c.    The Franchisee shall furnish the City with current Certificates of Insurance evidencing such coverage.

8.    Indemnification.

a.    The Franchisee shall at all times conduct its operations under this Franchise, including installation, construction or maintenance of its facilities in a safe and workmanlike manner so as not to present a danger to the public or to the City.

b.    The Franchisee shall pay, save harmless, defend and indemnify the City for any loss or claim against the City on account of or in connection with any activity of the Franchisee in the construction, operation or maintenance of its telecommunications facilities and the provision of services.

9.    Additional Capacity. DFN shall have the right, without prior MYRTLE CREEK approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to another telecommunications provider for resale or service to end-user customers, provided that the grantee shall notify MYRTLE CREEK that such lease or agreement has been granted to a customer or lessee.

10.    Acceptance of Franchise. Upon receipt of this Ordinance, DFN shall sign in the space below to indicate its unconditional acceptance of the terms and conditions upon which MYRTLE CREEK has offered the Franchise described herein, and immediately return such acceptance to the CITY. If DFN fails to accept the Franchise and return acceptance to Myrtle Creek within 30 days of the adoption of this Ordinance, this Ordinance and the Franchise granted herein shall become void and have no force or effect.

PASSED BY CITY COUNCIL ON THE FIRST READING THIS 15th DAY OF NOVEMBER, 2011.

APPROVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL ON THE SECOND READING THIS 20th DAY OF DECEMBER, 2011.

APPROVED BY THE MAYOR THIS 20th DAY OF DECEMBER, 2011.


Title 14 (Reserved)


Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:

15.05    Building Code

15.10    Building Safety and Maintenance Code

15.15    Fire Code

15.20    Fire Prevention Code

15.25    Standards for the Installation of Gas Appliances and Gas Pipes

15.30    Television and Radio Antennas


Chapter 15.05 BUILDING CODE

Sections:

15.05.010    Title.

15.05.020    Adoption of building code.

15.05.030    City administration and enforcement of code.

15.05.040    Permit fees.

15.05.050    Special permit fees.

15.05.060    Plan check certificate.

15.05.070    Permit refunds.

15.05.080    Plans and specifications.

15.05.090    Driveway requirements.

15.05.100    Roof and site drainage.

15.05.110    Subsoil drains.

15.05.120    Penalties.

15.05.130    Liability.


15.05.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as the city of Myrtle Creek building code. [Ord. 474 § 1, 1980].


15.05.020 Adoption of building code.

The city of Myrtle Creek hereby adopts the Structural Specialty Code and Fire and Life Safety Code, the Plumbing Specialty Code, the Mechanical Specialty Code and the Electrical Specialty Code, as adopted or amended by the state of Oregon, for regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings and/or structures within the city of Myrtle Creek, providing for issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor and providing penalties for violation of such regulations. The aforementioned specialty codes in their entirety shall hereafter be known as the city of Myrtle Creek building code. [Ord. 474 § 2, 1980].


15.05.030 City administration and enforcement of code.

For each specialty code administered, the city of Myrtle Creek shall notify the director of commerce pursuant to ORS 456.800 and shall file one copy, identified by endorsement thereon of the number of this chapter, in the office of the city recorder. The city of Myrtle Creek shall retain the right to yield the administration or enforcement of all projects, individual projects, or any portion thereof for the purpose of administration, plans examination, inspection, or enforcement of the provisions of the codes in accordance with Oregon laws. [Ord. 474 § 3, 1980].


15.05.040 Permit fees.

Permit fees shall be as established by the Oregon State Specialty Codes, except that the building official may charge less for plans examining fees with the approval of the city administrator. [Ord. 474 § 4, 1980].


15.05.050 Special permit fees.

Fees for permits for structures to be moved shall be $0.02 per square foot of ground floor area, with a minimum of $5.00. Fees for permits for structures to be demolished shall be $5.00. [Ord. 474 § 5, 1980].


15.05.060 Plan check certificate.

To verify compliance with this chapter and other ordinances, a certificate of plan check will be required on fences between 30 inches and 72 inches vertical, inclusively, and on all items exempted under Section 301(a), Exception, of the Oregon State Structural and Fire and Life Safety Code, if the construction, alteration, addition or relocation adds or changes the roof area of the lot. The applicant shall submit two plot plan drawings of the proposed work, after which the building official shall note any corrections required and will return one copy to the applicant. His endorsement of approval thereon shall constitute a plan check certificate. There shall be no charge for a plan check certificate. [Amended during 2012 recodification; Ord. 474 § 6, 1980].


15.05.070 Permit refunds.

The building official may make a partial refund of fees for permits relinquished by the permit holder with the approval of the city administrator upon written request by the permit holder to the building official, providing the request is made within 60 days of the issuance of the permit and prior to commencement of work authorized by the permit. A service charge of $5.00 will be withheld on all refunds. Refunds will not be made of plans checking fees or surcharges. The permit shall be surrendered before payment of refund. [Ord. 474 § 7, 1980].


15.05.080 Plans and specifications.

In addition to other plans and specifications required by the codes, the building official may require a site plan to be drawn for all new residential construction. The site plan will be on eight-and-one-half-inch by 14-inch paper in a form acceptable to the building official and will be drawn to a scale of sufficient clarity to accurately show the location of property lines, dimensions, and locations of structures, overhangs, utility services, easements, drainage patterns, elevations, driveways, right-of-way, streets, legal description, address, zone, occupancy or use, valuation or other items relevant to the improvements covered by the permit. Drawings shall be done in a workmanlike manner with sufficient dimensions to accurately locate improvements. [Ord. 474 § 8, 1980].


15.05.090 Driveway requirements.

In addition to other requirements of this chapter and other ordinances, the building official may require a design for driveways to ensure their workability when affected by steep grades, large cuts or fills, cross-slopes, or other factors. All new driveways shall be graded to accommodate future sidewalks. The maximum permissible slope shall be 14 percent measured along a straight grade or tangent to a vertical curve, except the building official may approve slopes up to 18 percent if the steeper slope will not impede the workability of the driveway. New driveways ascending from a surfaced public street shall not be steeper than three percent for a distance of 10 feet from the nearest curb line, edge of pavement or edge of sidewalk unless they are surfaced in an approved manner to a point 20 feet from said curb, pavement or sidewalk edge. [Ord. 474 § 9, 1980].


15.05.100 Roof and site drainage.

All roof, storm or other unpolluted surface runoff waters shall be piped to a street gutter. The building official may approve diversion to a storm sewer, an existing natural drainage course, ditch, drywell or other approved location providing it is installed in a manner which will not cause flooding or increase runoff intensity to adjacent property. [Ord. 474 § 10, 1980].


15.05.110 Subsoil drains.

Subsoil drains shall be required and installed to encircle the outer walls of all structures with habitable space and/or be placed under basement floors when deemed necessary by the building official; such system shall be made of open jointed earthenware (clay) or concrete drain tile or other approved material made for such use and so approved. The size of such pipe shall not be less than three inches inside diameter. [Ord. 474 § 11, 1980].


15.05.120 Penalties.

Any firm, partnership, corporation, person, or other legal entity who knowingly or willfully violates or fails to comply with any provisions of Chapter 15.15 MCMC or this chapter, upon conviction therefor in the municipal court, shall be punished by a fine in an indeterminate amount not exceeding $1,000, or by imprisonment in the jail of the city of Myrtle Creek, Oregon, for a period not exceeding six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation of any of the terms and provisions of either chapter continues to exist after notice to the violator shall be deemed as a distinct and separate violation. [Ord. 474 § 11A, 1980].


15.05.130 Liability.

The granting of approval of any structure or use shall not constitute a representation, guaranty or warranty of any kind or nature by the city of Myrtle Creek or any official or employee thereof or the practicality or safety of any structure or use proposed, and shall create no liability upon or cause of action against such public body, official or employees for any damage that may result thereto. [Ord. 474 § 13, 1980].


Chapter 15.10 BUILDING SAFETY AND MAINTENANCE CODE

Sections:

15.10.010    Title.

15.10.020    Purpose.

15.10.030    Public nuisance.

15.10.040    Securing a public nuisance.

15.10.050    Unsafe buildings.

15.10.060    Substandard buildings.

15.10.070    Derelict buildings prohibited.

15.10.080    Derelict building registration.

15.10.090    Enforcement.

15.10.100    Inspection and notice.

15.10.110    Abatement of substandard and unsafe buildings.

15.10.120    Posting of signs.

15.10.130    Unsafe structure signs.

15.10.140    Substandard structure signs.

15.10.150    Derelict structure signs.

15.10.160    Abatement by demolition.

15.10.170    Summary abatement.

15.10.180    Assessment of abatement costs.

15.10.190    Agreement to defer, extend, or modify abatement assessment payments.

15.10.200    Deferral of abatement assessment payment – Eligibility criteria.

15.10.210    Board of appeals.

15.10.220    Prohibited action – Separate violations – Penalties.


15.10.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as the city of Myrtle Creek building safety and maintenance code, and may be cited as such and will be referred to herein as “this code.” [Ord. 734 § 1, 2003].


15.10.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this code is to provide minimum requirements for the protection of life, health, safety and the general welfare of the public and the owners and occupants of buildings in the city of Myrtle Creek. [Ord. 734 § 2, 2003].


15.10.030 Public nuisance.

Any building, structure or portion thereof, including an open or abandoned building, which is determined to be unsafe, substandard, or derelict as defined by MCMC 15.10.050, 15.10.060, or 15.10.070 is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedures specified in this code. [Ord. 734 § 3, 2003].


15.10.040 Securing a public nuisance.

Any building, structure, or portion thereof shall be secured at all points of ingress and egress for that area declared a public nuisance. For purposes of this chapter, securing shall be defined as that action deemed necessary by the building official or designee to protect the general safety and welfare of occupants and the public. Securing shall include the use of materials with sufficient strength and structural value to comply with building codes and restrict or prohibit access. Securing shall not create an unsafe condition. [Ord. 734 § 3.1, 2003].


15.10.050 Unsafe buildings.

Any building, structure or portion thereof which is determined to be structurally unsafe, or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitutes a fire hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to its existing use constitutes a hazard to public health, safety or welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, lack of repair, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment, as specified in this code or any other effective ordinance, or in which there exists any of the following listed conditions to an extent that they endanger the life, health, safety and welfare of the public or the occupants thereof, shall be deemed and hereby is declared to be an unsafe building.

(1) Deteriorated or inadequate foundation; or

(2) Defective or deteriorated flooring or flooring supports; or

(3) Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety; or

(4) Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration; or

(5) Members of walls, partitions, ceilings, roof and roof supports or other members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety, or which sag, split or buckle due to defective material or deterioration; or

(6) Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or strength to carry imposed loads with safety, or which list, bulge or settle due to defective material or deterioration. [Ord. 734 § 4, 2003].


15.10.060 Substandard buildings.

Any building, structure or portion thereof, including any dwelling unit, guest room or suite of rooms, or the premises on which the same is located, in which there exists any of the following listed conditions to an extent that they endanger the life, health, safety and welfare of the public or the occupants thereof shall be deemed and hereby is declared to be a substandard building.

(1) Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system; or

(2) Inadequate or improper sanitation facilities for the purpose for which the building is used or intended to be used; or

(3) Dampness of habitable rooms; or

(4) Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents; or

(5) Lack of removal of garbage and rubbish. [Ord. 734 § 5, 2003].


15.10.070 Derelict buildings prohibited.

No person responsible shall cause or allow a derelict building to exist. No structure shall be boarded, uncoupled and unsecured, partially constructed, abandoned, maintained in a condition that is unfit for human habitation, or maintained in a condition that is an imminent hazard. For purposes of this chapter, a derelict building shall be defined as any building or structure which is unoccupied and boarded, or which is unoccupied and unsecured. If the person responsible for a derelict building fails to correct the conditions which cause a building to be a derelict building within the time frames set forth in MCMC 15.10.080(3), the derelict building shall be declared a public nuisance by the building official or designee. [Ord. 734 § 6, 2003].


15.10.080 Derelict building registration.

(1) Except when allowed by this section, no owner shall maintain a derelict building or allow such building to exist.

(2) Registration of a derelict building under the terms of this section shall be completed on an application form to be provided by the building official or designee and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable derelict building registration application fee as set by the Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges. The application shall include information relating to the location and ownership of the building, the expected period of its vacancy, a plan for regular maintenance and securing of the building during the period of vacancy, and a plan for reoccupancy and use, marketing or demolition. All of the information required under this section shall be reviewed and approved by the city administrator. The building official or designee shall provide a copy of said list to the city administrator for monthly fee billing purposes.

(3) The following standards shall be followed by the building official or designee with respect to the repair, marketing, or demolition of any derelict building.

(a) Any building declared to be a derelict building under this chapter shall, within one year from the date of notice provided by the building official or designee under this section, be made to comply with one of the following:

(i) The building shall be repaired in accordance with the current building code or other current code applicable to the type of substandard conditions requiring repair.

(ii) The building shall be demolished at the option of the building owner.

(b) If, within the initial one-year time period and extension period, if any, the derelict building is not repaired or demolished by the owner, the city administrator or building official or city administrator’s or building official’s designee may declare the derelict building to be a nuisance which must be abated in accordance with the provisions of this section. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, if any owner has not properly registered the derelict building, the city administrator may declare a derelict building to be a nuisance upon the expiration of 90 days from the notification date.

(c) The building official or designee may extend the derelict building repair, marketing or demolition period of one year for an additional one time period required by, and consistent with, the owner’s approved plans to repair, market or demolish the building. The following criteria shall be evaluated by the building official or designee when considering the granting of such extension:

(i) Whether all delinquent fees and penalties have been paid in full; and

(ii) Whether a timetable for the repair, marketing, or demolition of the structure has been submitted by the owner and approved by the building official or designee; and

(iii) The value of the building; and

(iv) Whether all appropriate permits have been obtained for the repair or demolition of the structure; and

(v) Whether the owner will complete, or is in the process of completing, the repairs or demolition of the structure in a timely fashion. At no time shall an extension exceed a maximum period of 12 months.

(4) Upon approval of the application for derelict building registration, the owner shall immediately submit payment of the first monthly derelict building registration fee as set by the Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges and thereafter be responsible for the following payment terms:

(a) The owner of a registered derelict building shall be responsible for paying the monthly derelict building registration fee as set by the Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges in advance by the tenth day of each month for each month, or portion thereof, during which the building remains registered as a derelict building. Any payment of the fee that is more than 30 days past due may be considered delinquent and subject to a penalty in an amount set by the Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges for every delinquent monthly payment.

(b) In the event that the fees due under the terms of this section become delinquent for more than 90 days, the building official or designee shall file a statement of the amount due with the city recorder. The city recorder shall thereafter mail a notice of the city’s intent to assess the subject property for the delinquent amount plus applicable penalty and an additional 10 percent. In the event the amount set forth in the notice is not paid in full within 30 days of the date of the notice, it shall become a lien against the property and thereupon be entered in the city’s lien docket. The lien shall be enforced as outlined in MCMC 15.10.180.

(c) In addition to the lien described above, the owner of the derelict building receiving notice under this chapter shall be personally liable for the amount of the lien including all interest, civil penalties and other charges.

(d) All fees imposed under the terms of this section are to be paid prior to any purported or actual transfer of an ownership interest in a derelict building as well as prior to the issuance of any permit required for the demolition, alteration, or repair of a derelict building subject to the terms of this section.

(e) The building official or designee may waive fees imposed under this section. The following criteria shall be evaluated by the building official or designee when considering waiver of such fees:

(i) Whether all delinquent fees and penalties have been paid in full; and

(ii) Whether a timetable for the repair, marketing, or demolition of the structure has been submitted by the owner and approved by the building official or designee; and

(iii) The value of the building; and

(iv) Whether all appropriate permits have been obtained for the repair or demolition of the structure; and

(v) Whether the owner will complete, or is in the process of completing, the repair or demolition of the structure in a timely fashion.

(5) Any change in the information provided pursuant to this section shall be given to the building official or designee within 30 days, except where changes in an approval plan are contemplated, in which case approval of the building official or designee is required prior to their effectiveness.

(6) When all violations have been corrected, the owner shall contact the building official or designee and request an inspection to determine compliance and removal of the dangerous or derelict building designation. [Ord. 734 § 6.1, 2003].


15.10.090 Enforcement.

(1) Authority. The city administrator is hereby authorized to administer and enforce all the provisions of this code. The city administrator may designate another person or persons who possess professional competency to interpret and apply specific provisions of the state building code to act as the building official and assist in carrying out the provisions of this code.

(2) Right of Entry. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the building official or his designated representative may enter at reasonable times any building, structure or premises in the city to perform any duty imposed upon him by this code. Provided:

(a) In the event that entry is not voluntarily permitted by the owner or person occupying the building, structure, or premises, the building official must first obtain an order from a court of competent jurisdiction allowing such entry.

(b) Where the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure a condition which is unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous and said structure is unoccupied, the building official or designee is authorized to enter the structure or premises after first making a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. [Ord. 734 § 7, 2003].


15.10.100 Inspection and notice.

The building official shall examine or cause to be examined every building or structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged; and if such is found to be an unsafe or substandard building as defined in this code, the building official shall give to the owner and person or persons in possession of such building or structure written notice stating the defects thereof. The notice may require the owner or person in charge of the building or premises to commence either the required repairs or improvements, or demolition and removal of the building or structure or portions thereof within 48 hours of such notice being given; but all such work shall be completed within 90 days from the date of notice being given, unless otherwise stipulated by the building official.

If necessary, such notice shall also require the building, structure or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the required repairs and improvements are completed, inspected and approved by the building official.

Proper service of such notice shall be by personal service upon the owner of record, if he shall be found within the city limits. If he is not found within the city, such service may be made upon said owner by certified mail; provided, that if such notice is by certified mail, the designated period within which said owner or person in charge is required to comply with the order of the building official shall begin as of the date he receives such notice. [Ord. 734 § 8, 2003].


15.10.110 Abatement of substandard and unsafe buildings.

Whenever the building official or designee believes that a building or structure is an unsafe or substandard building, the building official or designee shall cause an inspection to be done to determine if it complies with this chapter and all other applicable health, housing, building and safety codes.

(1) If the building official or designee has determined that a building is an unsafe, substandard, or derelict building, the building official or designee shall provide notice and include:

(a) The building’s address and tax lot number or legal description of the property; and

(b) A description of the derelict condition; and

(c) A direction to correct the conditions causing the building to be a derelict building within the time frame prescribed by this section; and

(d) A statement that a derelict building must be registered with the city and fees paid as provided in this section; and

(e) A statement that failure to correct the conditions causing the building to be a derelict building or to comply with the registration requirements may result in late payment penalties and assessments against the property and the building being declared a nuisance; and

(f) A statement that failure to correct the conditions causing the building to be a derelict building may result in a court prosecution, or the abatement of the nuisance with the costs thereof becoming a lien against the property, or both.

(2) The building official or designee shall cause an unsafe, substandard, or derelict building notice to be recorded and made a permanent part of the deed or records.

(3) Within five days after the posting and serving or mailing of the notice required by this section, an owner shall remove the nuisance or show that no nuisance exists.

(4) The person responsible, protesting that a nuisance exists, shall file with the city administrator a written statement specifying the basis for protesting and shall pay an appeal fee set by council resolution. No protest shall be heard unless the appeal fee is paid. If the council or its designee determines that no nuisance exists, the appeal fee shall be refunded to the person who paid it. [Ord. 734 § 9, 2003].


15.10.120 Posting of signs.

If the building official or designee finds a structure in violation of this chapter, the city administrator, police chief, fire chief or building official or designee shall cause to be posting of signage. Signage shall be readable from a public right-of-way and at no time less than eight-and-one-half-inch by 11-inch minimum. Signs must be posted at minimum of two sides. Signs must be affixed by staple or stencil (painted). [Ord. 734 § 10, 2003].


15.10.130 Unsafe structure signs.

Signage for an unsafe structure shall be at each entrance to an unsafe structure or at the entrance to an unsafe portion of a structure; and the notice shall read, “By Order of the Building Official. Do not enter. Unsafe to occupy. City of Myrtle Creek.” Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs, demolition, or removal is completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written permission of the building official or designee, and no person shall enter the structure except for the purpose of making the required repairs or for demolishing the structure. [Ord. 734 § 10.1, 2003].


15.10.140 Substandard structure signs.

Signage for a substandard structure shall be at each entrance to a substandard structure or at the entrance to a substandard portion of a building; and the notice shall read, “By Order of the Building Official. Do not occupy. City of Myrtle Creek.” Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs, demolition or removal is completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written permission of the building official or designee, and no person shall enter the structure except for the purpose of making the required repairs or for demolishing the structure. [Ord. 734 § 10.2, 2003].


15.10.150 Derelict structure signs.

Signage for a derelict structure shall be at each entrance to a derelict structure or at the entrance to a derelict portion of the structure; and the notice shall read, “By Order of the City of Myrtle Creek. Do not enter. This Structure is Declared a Derelict Structure.” Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs, demolition, or removal is completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written permission of the city administrator or designee, and no person shall enter the building except for the purpose of making the required repairs or for demolishing the building. [Ord. 734 § 10.3, 2003].


15.10.160 Abatement by demolition.

(1) In addition to and not in lieu of the abatement remedies provided in MCMC 15.10.100, the building official, city administrator, or designee may request a public hearing before council for the purpose of seeking authority to order the demolition of a derelict structure.

(2) Upon receipt of such a request from the building official, city administrator, or designee, the city recorder shall set the matter for prompt public hearing before the council and give the owner(s) and occupant(s) notice by certified mail of the date and time set for hearing. Notice shall also be posted on or near the derelict structure and comply with MCMC 18.185.170 for public hearing. Failure of the owner(s) or occupant(s) to receive such notice or an error in the name or address of an owner(s) or occupant(s) shall not render the notice void; and in such case, the notice shall be sufficient.

(3) At the hearing, the building official, city administrator, or designee shall present whatever information, evidence or testimony he may deem relevant in support of the building official’s, city administrator’s or designee’s determination, and the determination. Any information, opinion, testimony, or evidence may be received which the council deems material, relevant, and probative of the matters in issue. The owner(s) and occupant(s) may represent themselves or be represented by counsel of their choice; provided, that such counsel is admitted to the practice of law in the state of Oregon.

(4) The council may authorize the building official, city administrator or designee to order the structure demolished if a majority present is persuaded to such determination by a preponderance of the evidence. The burden of proof shall be upon the building official, city administrator or designee.

(5) In determining whether a structure is so derelict as to require its owner to demolish the structure, the council may consider the number and extent of the following factors:

(a) Dilapidation; or

(b) Disrepair; or

(c) Structural defects noted by the building official or designee; or

(d) Defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamity, such as parts standing or attached in such manner as to be likely to fall and cause damage or injury; or

(e) Uncleanness; or

(f) Sanitary facilities; or

(g) The presence of a public nuisance; or

(h) The history of unlawful activity in or around the derelict structure. [Ord. 734 § 11, 2003].


15.10.170 Summary abatement.

The procedures of this code need not be followed if a building is unmistakably dangerous and imminently endangers human life or property. In this instance, the fire chief, fire marshal or the chief of police may summarily demolish the building. [Ord. 734 § 12, 2003].


15.10.180 Assessment of abatement costs.

(1) The city recorder, by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, shall forward to the person responsible a notice stating:

(a) The total cost of abatement including the administrative overhead; and

(b) That the cost as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien against the property or turned over for collection, unless paid within 10 days from the date of the notice; and

(c) That if the person responsible objects to the cost of the abatement as indicated, the person may file a written notice of objection with the city administrator not more than 10 days from the date of the notice.

(2) The person responsible for objecting to the costs of abatement shall be heard by the city administrator. The objector shall be given at least five days’ prior written notice of the time set to consider the objections. The city administrator shall take oral or written testimony at the time and place specified in the notice. The city administrator shall determine the abatement costs to be assessed and shall communicate the decision in writing to the objector, which writing shall also state that if the costs of abatement are not paid within 10 days from the date of the decision, the costs shall be turned over for collection or entered in the lien docket of city liens and, upon such entry, shall constitute a lien upon the property from which the nuisance was removed or abated.

(3) If no objection is filed, or if the costs of the abatement are not paid within 10 days from the date of the notice, an assessment of the costs as stated shall be made by the city recorder and shall thereupon be turned over for collection or entered in the docket of city liens; and, upon such entry being made, shall constitute a lien upon the property from which the nuisance was removed or abated from the adjoining public way.

(4) If a lien is filed, it shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street improvements and shall bear interest at the rate of 10 percent per annum. The interest shall commence from date of entry of the lien in the lien docket. For qualifying property owners, the payment of the lien may be deferred, extended or modified as provided in MCMC 15.10.190.

(5) An error in the name of a person responsible shall not void the assessment, nor will a failure to receive the notice of the proposed assessment render the assessment void; but if a lien is filed, it shall remain a valid lien against the property. [Ord. 734 § 13, 2003].


15.10.190 Agreement to defer, extend, or modify abatement assessment payments.

For any person requesting such information, the city recorder shall provide information regarding eligibility for deferral, modification, or extension of abatement assessment payments. An eligible real property owner who requests such a deferral, extension or modification shall submit evidence of eligibility on forms provided by the city recorder. After review of the evidence submitted, the city recorder shall notify the applicant whether the request has been granted. If it has, the applicant shall enter into a contract to pay the assessment in accordance with the terms of the deferral, extension, or modification. The contract shall be on a form approved by the city and may be recorded in the official records of Douglas County, Oregon. [Ord. 734 § 14, 2003].


15.10.200 Deferral of abatement assessment payment – Eligibility criteria.

Collection of a portion of the derelict building abatement assessment may be deferred for a period of 90 days if the real property is owner-occupied and the structure is a single-family dwelling. [Ord. 734 § 15, 2003].


15.10.210 Board of appeals.

(1) There is hereby established a board of appeals which shall consist of five members appointed by the city council, two of whom shall be members of the city council, two of whom shall be members of the planning commission, and one member appointed from the community at-large who by training or experience is qualified to pass judgment upon matters pertaining to building construction and structural safety. The council shall be the judge of the qualifications of any person appointed to the board of appeals. The terms of the board members appointed from the city council and planning commission shall be the term for which the member was elected or appointed to the council or commission. The term of the at-large member shall be four years.

(2) All appeal hearings before the board of appeals shall be public, and the appellant, his representatives, the city administrator, the building official and any other person whose interests may be affected by the matter on appeal shall be given an opportunity to be heard. A majority of the board may affirm, modify or reverse the decision or order of the building official. The board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the city administrator, with duplicate copies to the appellant, the building official and any other person who requests notice of the board’s decision. The board may recommend to the city council such new legislation as is consistent with the intent of this code.

(3) Duties of the Board of Appeals.

(a) Upon receipt of written notice of appeal of a decision or order of the building official authorized by this code which has been filed by the property owner or other party in interest within 30 days from the date of service of said decision or order, or upon receipt of a request in writing from the city administrator or the building official to review the building official’s decision, the board shall conduct a hearing thereon as provided for herein.

(b) The board shall conduct a hearing to receive such evidence as may be presented by any official of the city of Myrtle Creek or the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee or any other person having an interest in said building.

(c) The board of appeals shall resolve all matters submitted to it within 60 days from the date of receipt of notice of the appeal. In the event the board fails to resolve all matters within 60 days as above provided, then the order and finding of the building official shall be deemed affirmed in full on the sixtieth day, and the parties may appeal therefrom to the city council.

(4) Persons aggrieved under the provisions of this section shall have the right of appeal to the city council from the decisions of the board of appeals. Request for an appeal shall be made within 10 days from the date of the decision of the board of appeals. [Ord. 734 § 16, 2003].


15.10.220 Prohibited action – Separate violations – Penalties.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this code. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this code is committed, continued or permitted; and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. [Ord. 734 § 17, 2003].


Chapter 15.15 FIRE CODE

Sections:

15.15.010    Adoption of Uniform Fire Code.

15.15.020    Designation of officials to enforce code.

15.15.030    Definitions.

15.15.040    Limits of districts in which storage of explosives or blasting agents is prohibited.

15.15.050    Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of flammable and combustible liquids in outside above ground storage tanks is prohibited.

15.15.060    Establishment of limits for new bulk plants.

15.15.070    Establishment of limits in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases is restricted.

15.15.080    Deliveries of flammable liquids.

15.15.090    Appeals.

15.15.100    Penalties.


15.15.010 Adoption of Uniform Fire Code.

For the purpose of safeguarding life, health, property and public welfare by regulating the storage, use and handling of dangerous and hazardous materials, substances and processes, and by governing the regulations of the maintenance of buildings and premises, and egress facilities, the city of Myrtle Creek, Oregon, hereby does adopt that certain code known as the 1973 Edition of the Uniform Fire Code, copyrighted in 1973 by the International Conference of Building Officials and the Western Fire Chiefs Association, a copy of which has appropriately been marked as having been adopted by this chapter, and has been and now is filed in the office of the recorder of said city, together with the provisions of said code, but subject, however, to the deletions, additions and modifications set forth in this chapter. Said code, together with said deletions, additions and modifications, is adopted and incorporated herein as fully as if set forth at length herein. From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter the same shall be controlling within the limits of the city. [Ord. 434 § 1, 1977].


15.15.020 Designation of officials to enforce code.

(1) The code shall be enforced by the fire department of the city of Myrtle Creek under the supervision of the chief of the department.

(2) With the approval of the city administrator, the chief may appoint a fire marshal to act under him as the head of the bureau of fire protection which shall be charged with the enforcement of the code.

(3) The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the fire department as officials as shall from time to time be necessary or advisable, and such designations shall continue only at and during the pleasure of the fire chief. [Ord. 434 § 2, 1977].


15.15.030 Definitions.

Code. Whenever the word “code” is used in this chapter, it shall be held to mean the 1973 Edition of said Uniform Fire Code subject to the deletions, additions and regulations set forth in this chapter.

Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention. Whenever the words “chief of the bureau of fire prevention” are used in this chapter, they shall be held to mean either the fire marshal or the chief of the fire department of said city.

Corporation Counsel. Whenever the term “corporation counsel” is used, it shall be held to mean the attorney for said city.

Fire Prevention Bureau. Whenever the terms “fire prevention bureau” or “bureau of fire prevention” are used in this chapter, the same shall be held to mean the fire department of said city.

Fireworks. The definition of “fireworks” as set forth in Section 12.101 of the fire code is amended by deleting therefrom the word “sparklers.”

Jurisdiction. Whenever the word “jurisdiction” is used in this chapter, it shall be held to mean the city of Myrtle Creek, Oregon.

Unattended. Whenever the word “unattended” is used in connection with the provisions of Article 11 of the fire code, it shall be held to mean that the driver of the vehicle in question or other authorized person, competent to operate the vehicle and having keys for the vehicle on his person, is not at all times in the vehicle, constantly observing it and its immediate surroundings. [Ord. 434 § 3, 1977].


15.15.040 Limits of districts in which storage of explosives or blasting agents is prohibited.

The limits referred to in Section 11.106(b) of the fire code, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, hereby are established as being the entire corporate limits of the city. [Ord. 434 § 4, 1977].


15.15.050 Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of flammable and combustible liquids in outside above ground storage tanks is prohibited.

The limits referred to in Section 15.201 of the fire code in which flammable and combustible liquids in outside above ground tanks is prohibited hereby are established as being the entire corporate limits of the city with the exception that installation and use of above ground tanks for the storage of combustible liquids (Class III), in aggregate capacity of containers, interconnected or otherwise, not in excess of 300 gallons on any one property, shall be permitted on properties on which one- and two-family dwellings are located. [Ord. 434 § 5, 1977].


15.15.060 Establishment of limits for new bulk plants.

The limits referred to in Section 15.601 of the fire code, within which no new bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids shall be established after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, hereby are fixed as being the entire corporate limits of the city, excepting in areas by ordinance designated as industrial zones, subject, however, to approval of the bureau of fire prevention as to the size and location of the same before installation. [Ord. 434 § 6, 1977].


15.15.070 Establishment of limits in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases is restricted.

The limits referred to in Section 20.105(a) of the fire code, in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, hereby are established as being the entire corporate limits of the city, excepting in areas by ordinance designated as industrial zones, subject, however, to approval of the bureau of fire prevention as to the size and location of the same before installation and also subject to the following additional provisions:

(1) Storage of such gas in containers of five gallons or less water capacity, or in portable containers, as distinguished from permanently installed containers, is not considered to be bulk storage.

(2) The use, storage, and handling of such gases in portable containers of over five gallons water capacity shall be permitted upon approval of the bureau of fire prevention as to the location and size of such containers. Said approval shall be secured before the use or installation of any such containers.

(3) The bureau of fire prevention may prohibit the use or storage of compressed or liquefied petroleum gases in portable containers in any area within the corporate limits of the city when such use or storage would create a hazard or increase an existing hazard. [Ord. 434 § 7, 1977].


15.15.080 Deliveries of flammable liquids.

In making deliveries of flammable liquids (Class I and II), the delivery tank vehicles shall wholly be confined within the property lines upon which delivery is being made. However, when it is impractical to make such deliveries wholly within said property lines, the bureau of fire prevention may issue permits for deliveries from public streets, or ways under such conditions and restrictions as the bureau may deem necessary for safety. When making deliveries, all tank vehicles shall proceed in and out of the properties upon which deliveries are being made in a forward manner. Where this is impractical, the bureau of fire prevention may issue permits to do otherwise, but may require such safety measures as may be necessary for the protection of the public. Without limitations as to such safety measures, they may include limiting the time of deliveries to specific times of the day. [Ord. 434 § 8, 1977].


15.15.090 Appeals.

Whenever the chief of the fire department or fire marshal shall disapprove an application or refuse a permit applied for, or when it is contended that the provisions of this chapter do not apply, or that the true intent of the meaning of this chapter has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant or aggrieved person may appeal any such decision to the city council within 30 days of the date of the decision so appealed from by filing with the city recorder a written notice of appeal generally specifying the grounds or basis upon which the appeal is taken. Thereupon, the council at the earliest practicable date shall give the applicant or aggrieved person a right to be heard relative thereto. If the city administrator, prior to the hearing, shall revise or modify the decision of the fire chief or fire marshal, the appeal shall be ended. [Ord. 434 § 9, 1977].


15.15.100 Penalties.

Any firm, partnership, corporation, person, or other legal entity who knowingly or willfully violates or fails to comply with any provisions of this chapter or Chapter 15.05 MCMC, upon conviction therefor in the municipal court, shall be punished by a fine in an indeterminate amount not exceeding $1,000, or by imprisonment in the jail of the city of Myrtle Creek, Oregon, for a period not exceeding six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation of any of the terms and provisions of either chapter continues to exist after notice to the violator shall be deemed as a distinct and separate violation. [Ord. 488; Ord. 434 § 9A, 1977].


Chapter 15.20 FIRE PREVENTION CODE

Sections:

15.20.010    Adopted.

15.20.020    Bulk storage of flammable liquids.

15.20.030    Invalidity.


15.20.010 Adopted.

The city of Myrtle Creek does hereby adopt in full that certain code known as the Fire Prevention Code, Abbreviated Edition, recommended by the National Board of Fire Underwriters of New York, being particularly the 1950 Edition thereof with all amendments and additions thereto, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated and marked “Exhibit A” as fully as if set out in length herein. [Ord. 235 § 1, 1956].


15.20.020 Bulk storage of flammable liquids.

The limits in Section 312 of said code in which bulk storage of flammable liquids in outside above ground tanks is prohibited are hereby established as follows: the entire city of Myrtle Creek. [Ord. 235 § 2, 1956].


15.20.030 Invalidity.

The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter or of the code hereby adopted shall not invalidate other sections or provisions thereof. [Ord. 235 § 3, 1956].


Chapter 15.25 STANDARDS FOR THE INSTALLATION OF GAS APPLIANCES AND GAS PIPES

Sections:

15.25.010    Standards adopted.

15.25.020    Violations – Penalties.


15.25.010 Standards adopted.

The city of Myrtle Creek does hereby adopt, in toto, the standards for the installation of gas appliances and gas pipes, in toto, as set out in the National Fire Protection Association Manual No. 54. [Ord. 308 § 1, 1964].


15.25.020 Violations – Penalties.

Any person, firm or corporation who violates or refuses to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or by imprisonment of not more than 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each provision violated. It shall be the responsibility of the offender to abate the violation, and each day that such violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. [Ord. 308 § 2, 1964].


Chapter 15.30 TELEVISION AND RADIO ANTENNAS

Sections:

15.30.010    Definitions.

15.30.020    Permit required.

15.30.030    Permit fees.

15.30.040    Application for permit.

15.30.050    Building official – Duties, rights, and powers.

15.30.060    Unlawful to interfere with building officials.

15.30.070    Notice of inspection.

15.30.080    Regulations.

15.30.090    Hazardous installation, special permit.

15.30.100    Materials to be approved type.

15.30.110    Minor repairs without a permit.

15.30.120    Application to existing antennas.

15.30.130    Authorizing additional rules.

15.30.140    Penalties.


15.30.010 Definitions.

The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:

“Antenna” as used in this chapter shall mean the outdoor portion of the receiving equipment used for receiving television or radio waves from space, when such antenna is 20 feet or more in height above the ground if supported upon the ground, or more than 12 feet from the base thereof, if supported upon a building or structure.

“Building official” shall mean the building official of the city of Myrtle Creek or any of his authorized assistants.

“Height” shall mean the overall vertical length of the antenna system above the ground, or, if such system be located on a building, then above that part of the level of such building upon which the system rests.

“Person” shall mean and include any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, company or organization of any kind. [Ord. 234 § 1, 1956].


15.30.020 Permit required.

It shall be unlawful for any person to install, repair or maintain any outside television or radio receiving antenna, or any addition to or substitutes for said antenna, unless and until an inspection permit shall have first been obtained from the city recorder. [Ord. 234 § 2, 1956].


15.30.030 Permit fees.

The permit fee for the installation of antennas as herein defined shall be the sum of $2.00 for any antenna less than 50 feet in height from the base thereof, and $5.00 for any such antenna in excess of 50 feet in height from the base thereof. [Ord. 234 § 3, 1956].


15.30.040 Application for permit.

Applications for permits to erect, install, or construct an antenna shall be made upon blanks provided by the city recorder and shall be accompanied with the permit fee hereinbefore mentioned. Such application shall contain the following information:

(1) Name and address of the owner for whom to be made.

(2) Location and construction of antenna.

(3) Location of nearby public utility wires or lines.

(4) Whether it is a new installation, repair or maintenance work.

(5) Name of person making installation.

If the antenna for which a permit is applied for shall comply with the provisions of this chapter, the city recorder shall issue a permit for the construction, erection, or installation thereof. [Ord. 234 § 4, 1956].


15.30.050 Building official – Duties, rights, and powers.

(1) It shall be the duty of the building official and his authorized assistants to inspect all television and radio receiving antennas to ascertain if the work has been done in a workmanlike manner and to investigate all complaints from the general public pertaining to said antenna installations and interference caused thereby.

(2) The building official and his assistants are hereby empowered to inspect or reinspect any wiring, equipment or apparatus conducting or using electric current for radio and television receiving service in the city, and if conductors, equipment or apparatus are found to be unsafe to life or property, or not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, the building official shall notify the person owning or operating the hazardous wiring or equipment to correct the condition within a 48-hour period or within the time the building official specifies. Failure to correct violations within the specified time shall constitute a violation of this chapter. [Ord. 234 § 5, 1956].


15.30.060 Unlawful to interfere with building officials.

It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or interfere with the building official or his authorized representatives in the discharge of their duties under the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 234 § 6, 1956].


15.30.070 Notice of inspection.

The person to whom a permit has been granted for the installation of a television or radio receiving antenna shall immediately notify the building official when the work covered by the permit has been completed and is ready for final inspection. Upon such notice, the building official or his authorized representative shall promptly inspect and approve the installation if the work complies in all respects with the provisions of this chapter and the permit, and shall disapprove said installation if it fails to comply, stating in writing the reasons for disapproval and specifying a time within which said defect must be corrected. A reinspection shall be made after notice to the building official that the defects have been corrected. [Ord. 234 § 7, 1956].


15.30.080 Regulations.

Antennas, as herein defined, shall be constructed, erected and maintained in accordance with the following requirements:

(1) No antenna shall be attached to or supported by a parapet wall, chimney or vent pipe.

(2) No antenna shall be installed in such close proximity to any electric, telephone, telegraph, or other public utility wires so that the same, if overturned, would or could come in contact with, or within two feet of, any such line or wire; this provision shall not, however, apply to a service lead or drop from antennas.

(3) Antenna masts shall be guyed at intervals of not less than 10 feet, except antennas equipped with masts three inches or more in diameter. The guy spacing may be increased subject to the approval of the building official. Antennas shall be grounded with not less than No. 14 copper or No. 12 aluminum wire, and the ground shall be attached to a cold water pipe with an approved ground clamp, or a ground rod approved by the building official not less than one-half inch in diameter and eight feet in length.

(4) All screw eyes or snubbed screw hoods used shall be not less than one-quarter inch in diameter and shall be set not less than two inches in a solid structural member; not more than three guys or guy lines shall be attached to any screw eye or hook.

(5) Guy wires shall be not less than 6-20 stranded steel cables.

(6) Not less than three guy anchors shall be used to guy any antenna mast, and if not more than three thereof are used, they shall be spaced 120 degrees apart.

(7) Guy wires shall not extend over or across any part of any street, alley, or public way, without permission therefor first being had from the council.

(8) Antenna installations shall be structurally sound and of weatherproofed metal construction and comply with all provisions of state law and ordinances of the city of Myrtle Creek relating to electrical installations and building code requirements; antennas need not, however, be of all-metal construction. [Ord. 234 § 8, 1956].


15.30.090 Hazardous installation, special permit.

In the event an antenna, as herein defined, cannot be constructed or erected upon any premises and comply with the provisions of MCMC 15.30.080(2), application may be made to the council for a permit for the construction or erection thereof. Such request shall be accompanied by the application to the city recorder for permit to construct such antenna and shall contain such information as may be required to set forth the particular conditions relating to the construction or erection of such antenna. If the council shall determine that such antenna can be constructed and maintained upon such premises in such manner that the same shall not be hazardous to or a menace to persons or property, the council may direct the city recorder to issue such permit subject to such safeguards or conditions as it shall determine necessary for such purposes. [Ord. 234 § 9, 1956].


15.30.100 Materials to be approved type.

No electrical materials, devices or equipment designed for attachment to or installation on any electrical circuit or system for television and radio receiving antennas shall be installed, used, sold, or offered for sale for use in the city of Myrtle Creek, unless they are in conformity with the approved methods of construction for safety to life and property, and unless the electrical materials, devices or equipment conforms with the standards of the Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc., current as of the time of installation. [Ord. 234 § 10, 1956].


15.30.110 Minor repairs without a permit.

Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, minor repairs to an antenna may be made without the necessity of a permit; provided, however, that a prompt report thereof is made to the building official showing the extent thereof. Should an investigation of said minor repairs by the building official disclose defects, the same shall be pointed out and corrected as required by MCMC 15.30.050(2). [Ord. 234 § 11, 1956].


15.30.120 Application to existing antennas.

Every television or radio receiving antenna erected prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be maintained and operated in its present location, unless said antenna is so constructed and maintained as to be unsafe and dangerous as determined by the building official as provided in MCMC 15.30.050. [Ord. 234 § 12, 1956].


15.30.130 Authorizing additional rules.

In order to take advantage of progress and change in the industry, the building official may consult with members of the industry and other qualified persons and may put into effect any reasonable rules and regulations not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 234 § 13, 1956].


15.30.140 Penalties.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not exceeding $100.00 or by imprisonment in the city jail not exceeding 50 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such violation is committed, or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. [Ord. 234 § 14, 1956].


Title 16 (Reserved)


Title 17 SUBDIVISIONS1

Chapters:

17.05    Introductory Provisions

17.10    Definitions

17.15    Administration and Enforcement

17.20    Tentative Subdivision Plan

17.25    Subdivision Plat

17.30    Land Partitioning

17.35    Design Standards

17.40    Creation of Streets Outside a Subdivision

17.45    Improvement Guarantee

17.50    Improvements

17.55    Exceptions, Variances and Enforcement1

    Legislative history: Ords. 572, 609, 742, 747, 749, 767 and 768. 


Chapter 17.05 INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS

Sections:

17.05.010    Title.

17.05.020    Purpose and intent.

17.05.030    Scope of regulations.

17.05.040    Fees and charges.


17.05.010 Title.

This title shall be known as the city of Myrtle Creek subdivision ordinance of 1980. An ordinance regulating the subdivision of land and other land partitioning standards and procedures and repealing all parts of Ordinance Nos. 327, 352, 368 and 411. [Ord. 469 § 1.010, 1980].


17.05.020 Purpose and intent.

This title is enacted to establish procedures and standards for the partitioning and subdivision of land within the city of Myrtle Creek and to implement the comprehensive plan. These regulations prescribe the proper width and arrangement of streets, provisions for installation of public utilities and provision of adequate open space (for recreation and community facilities) with the aim of accomplishing:

(1) The creation of satisfactory living conditions in new subdivisions.

(2) A population density which is neither undue nor excessive.

(3) The protection, conservation, and proper use of land.

(4) The extension of public utilities without excessive expenditures.

(5) The simplification and increased accuracy of land description.

(6) The protection of land purchases from excessive assessment for further utility installations.

(7) The protection of health, safety, and general welfare of the public. [Ord. 469 § 1.020, 1980].


17.05.030 Scope of regulations.

No land may be subdivided or partitioned except in accordance with these regulations and no person shall create a street or road for the purpose of partitioning an area or tract of land without the approval of the city. A person desiring to subdivide or partition land shall submit tentative plans and final documents for approval as provided by this title and state law. [Ord. 469 § 1.040, 1980].


17.05.040 Fees and charges.

(1) Processing Fee. Fees to defray the cost incurred in the review and investigation of and action upon proposed subdivisions and partitions submitted for approval pursuant to this title shall be paid to the city treasurer at the time of filing petitions and applications and shall be the city of Myrtle Creek’s handbook of fees and charges.

(2) Inspection Fee. A service charge for inspection of improvement installed and any other services provided shall be paid to the city treasurer prior to acceptance by the city of improvements in an amount not to exceed the actual cost of performing the inspection or other services which have been provided.

(3) Planned Development. A planned development, when individual parcels are created, is subject to the same processing and inspection fees as a subdivision or partition.

(4) Other Fees. Any filing or recording fees required by Douglas County or the state of Oregon shall be paid by the applicant. [Ord. 469 § 1.050, 1980].


Chapter 17.10 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

17.10.010    Definitions.


17.10.010 Definitions.

As used in this title the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

“Building line” means a line on a plat or map indicating the limit beyond which buildings or structures may not be erected.

“Building site” means the ground area of a building or buildings, together with all open spaces required by MCMC Title 18.

“City” means the city of Myrtle Creek.

“Comprehensive plan” means a city plan for the guidance of growth and improvement of the city, including modifications or refinements which may be made from time to time.

“Easement” means a grant of the right to use a strip of land for specific purposes not a transfer of ownership of that land.

“Lot” means a unit of land that is created by a subdivision of land.

(1) “Corner lot” means a lot abutting on two or more streets, other than alleys, at their intersection. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.

(2) “Flag lot” means a lot which has its main building area not fronting on a street and that is connected to a street by a strip of land 25 feet or more in width.

(3) “Reversed corner lot” means a corner lot, the side street line of which is substantially a continuation of the front line of the first lot to its rear.

(4) “Through lot” means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets other than alleys.

“Map” means a final diagram, drawing or other writing concerning a land partition.

“Parcel” means a unit of land that is created by a partitioning of land.

“Partition” means either an act of partitioning land or an area or tract of land partitioned as defined in this section.

“Partition land” means to divide an area or tract of land into two or three parcels within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under single ownership at the beginning of such year. “Partition land” does not include divisions of land resulting from lien foreclosures; divisions of land resulting from the creation of cemetery lots; and divisions of land made pursuant to a court order, including, but not limited to, court orders in proceedings involving testate or intestate succession; and “partition land” does not include any adjustment of a lot line by the relocation of a common boundary where an additional parcel is not created, and where the existing parcel reduced in size by the adjustment is not reduced below the minimum lot standards of MCMC Title 18.

“Pedestrian way” means a right-of-way for pedestrian traffic.

“Person” means a natural person, firm, partnership, association, social or fraternal organization, corporation, trust, estate, receiver, syndicate, branch of government, or any group or combination acting as a unit.

“Planned development” means one which stays within the density requirements of the area in which it is located for the overall project while allowing a degree of latitude in describing individual lot sizes and also has a percentage of its gross area devoted to recreational development or open space uses.

“Planning commission” means the planning commission of the city of Myrtle Creek.

“Plat” means the final map, diagram, drawing, replat or other writing containing all the descriptions, locations, specifications, dedications, provisions and information concerning a subdivision.

“Property line” means the division line between two units of land.

“Property line adjustment” means the relocation of a common property line between two abutting properties.

“Right-of-way” means the area between boundary lines of a street or other easement.

“Roadway” means the portion of a street right-of-way developed for vehicular traffic.

“Sidewalk” means a pedestrian walkway with permanent surfacing.

“Street” means an improved public or private right-of-way which provides access to adjacent properties for vehicular and pedestrian traffic, public utilities and other such uses. The term “street” shall include such designations as highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, court, place or other such terms. A right-of-way 20 feet or less in width shall not be recognized as a street (except for an alley).

(1) “Arterial” means a thoroughfare of considerable length primarily for providing through movement to traffic, distributing it to collector streets and principal highways, while providing limited access to adjacent properties. Arterials are designed to handle large volumes of traffic.

(2) Collector. The primary function of a “collector” is to move traffic between arterials, collectors, and local streets, and to provide access to adjacent uses. Major collectors help define neighborhoods and land use patterns. Minor collectors move local traffic between minor collectors, major collectors and/or arterial streets. Property access onto minor collectors is typically allowed, while access is often limited along major collectors. Collector roads form barriers between neighborhoods and are designed for higher speeds and traffic volumes than are minor streets.

(3) Major (Necessary) Local. A “necessary local” performs the function of a regular local street, except that it provides an essential connection between otherwise isolated areas. Transit and heavy truck traffic are generally discouraged from using local streets.

(4) Local. The primary function of “local” streets is to provide access to private dwellings and businesses. Local streets should focus on serving passenger cars, bicycles, and pedestrians. Generally, local streets have two lanes and can include parking on one or both sides. Short roads that are less than 2,400 feet in length and cannot be extended may have a narrower travel way with parking on one side.

(5) “Cul-de-sac” means a short, dead-end minor street with vehicular turnaround at or near the dead end.

(6) “Dead-end street” is similar to a cul-de-sac, usually longer, which may be extended, and with no turnaround at the present dead end. (New dead-end streets require temporary turnarounds.)

(7) “Alley” means a narrow street through a block primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties abutting on another street.

“Subdivide land” means to divide an area or tract of land into four or more lots within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under a single ownership at the beginning of such year.

“Subdivision” means either an act of subdividing land or an area or tract of land subdivided as defined in this section.

“Utility easement” means an easement noted on a subdivision plat or partition plat for the purpose of installing or maintaining public or private utility infrastructure for the provision of water, sewer, storm drains, power, heat or telecommunications to the public. Unless specifically requested by a public or private utility provider, the decision-making authority may not require a utility easement except for a utility easement abutting a street. Utility infrastructure may not be placed within one foot of a survey monument location noted on a subdivision or partition plat. The decision-making authority may not place additional restrictions or conditions on a utility easement granted under these provisions. [Amended during 2012 recodification; Ord. 469 § 1.030, 1980].


Chapter 17.15 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

17.15.010    Amendments to preliminary plans and final plats.

17.15.020    Penalties for violation.

17.15.030    Amendments.


17.15.010 Amendments to preliminary plans and final plats.

(1) Definitions.

“Major amendment” means any change which is not a minor amendment.

“Minor amendment” means a change which:

(a) Does not increase the number of lots or parcels created by the subdivision or partition;

(b) Does not enlarge the boundaries of subdivided or partitioned area;

(c) Does not change the general location or amount of land devoted to a specific land use; or

(d) Includes only minor shifting of the established lines, location of buildings, proposed public or private streets, pedestrian ways, utility easements, parks or other public open spaces.

(2) Approval of Minor Amendments. A minor amendment to an approved preliminary subdivision or partition plan or to an approved final subdivision plat or final partition plat may be approved by the city administrator.

(3) Approval of Major Amendments. Approval of a major amendment to an approved preliminary subdivision or partition preliminary plan or to an approved final subdivision plat or final partition plat shall be an administrative action subject to the provisions of Chapters 18.185, 18.190 and 18.195 MCMC. [Ord. 469 § 9.030, 1980].


17.15.020 Penalties for violation.

In addition to penalties provided by state law, a person who violates or fails to comply with a provision of this title shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 100 days, or both. A violation of this title shall be considered a separate offense for each day the violation continues. [Ord. 469 § 9.040, 1980].


17.15.030 Amendments.

Amendments to these regulations and notice of hearing thereon shall be in accordance with the procedures set forth in ORS 92.048. [Ord. 469 § 9.050, 1980].


Chapter 17.20 TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION PLAN

Sections:

17.20.010    Submission of tentative subdivision plan.

17.20.020    Scale.

17.20.030    General information.

17.20.040    Existing conditions.

17.20.050    Proposed plan of subdivision.

17.20.060    Partial development.

17.20.070    Explanatory information with tentative plan.

17.20.080    Supplemental proposals with tentative plan.

17.20.090    Preliminary review of tentative plan.

17.20.100    Approval of tentative subdivision plan.

17.20.110    Staged development for subdivision.


17.20.010 Submission of tentative subdivision plan.

A subdivider shall prepare a tentative plan together with improvement plans and other supplementary material as may be required to indicate the general program and objectives of the project, and shall submit 10 copies of the tentative plan to the city administrator’s office at least 30 days prior to the planning commission meeting at which consideration of the plan is desired. [Ord. 469 § 2.010, 1980].


17.20.020 Scale.

The tentative plan of a subdivision shall be drawn on a sheet 18 inches by 24 inches or a multiple thereof at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet or, for areas over 100 acres, one inch equals 100 feet, or as otherwise approved by the city engineer. [Ord. 469 § 2.011, 1980].


17.20.030 General information.

The following general information shall be shown on the tentative plan of a subdivision:

(1) The proposed name of the subdivision, which shall be subject to approval by the county surveyor. The name shall not duplicate nor resemble the name of another subdivision or as is otherwise provided by ORS 92.090.

(2) Date, north point and scale of drawing.

(3) Appropriate identification of the drawing as a “tentative plan.”

(4) Location of the subdivision sufficient to define its location and boundaries and a legal description of the tract boundaries.

(5) Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, and engineer or surveyor. [Ord. 469 § 2.020, 1980].


17.20.040 Existing conditions.

The following existing conditions shall be shown on the tentative plan:

(1) The location, widths and names of both opened and unopened streets within or adjacent to the tract, together with easements and other important features such as section lines, section corners, city boundary lines, and monuments.

(2) Contour lines related to some U.S. Coast and Geodetic benchmark or other datum approved by the city engineer and having two-foot contour intervals.

(3) The location of at least one temporary benchmark within the subdivision boundaries.

(4) The identification of areas of potential natural hazards which shall include, but are not limited to, areas of greater than 25 percent slope, areas of mass movement, and areas of potential flooding hazards, where the special site criteria of zoning district R-H or SD/FHA shall apply.

(5) The location and direction of water courses and the identification of natural features such as rock outcroppings, marshes, wooded areas, orchards, isolated preservable trees, riparian vegetation, wildlife habitat or other significant natural resource.

(6) Existing uses of the property and location of existing structures to remain on the property after platting.

(7) Zoning within and adjacent to the tract.

(8) The location and size, if known, of any existing water or sewer service lines, culverts and drainage way or other underground utilities within the parcel to be subdivided, or immediately adjacent, and the location of power poles.

(9) The location of adjacent roadways or driveways on adjacent properties. [Ord. 469 § 2.021, 1980].


17.20.050 Proposed plan of subdivision.

The following information shall be included on the tentative plan of a subdivision:

(1) The location, width, names, approximate grades and radii of curves of proposed streets. The relationship of streets to projected streets as shown in the future street plan and functional classification maps.

(2) The location, width and purpose of proposed easements.

(3) The location and approximate dimensions of proposed lots, the proposed lot and block numbers, and square footage in each proposed lot.

(4) Proposed sites, if any, allocated for purposes other than single-family dwellings. [Ord. 469 § 2.022, 1980].


17.20.060 Partial development.

If the subdivision proposal pertains to only part of the tract owned or controlled by the subdivider, a sketch of a tentative layout for streets in the unsubdivided portion shall be required. [Ord. 469 § 2.030, 1980].


17.20.070 Explanatory information with tentative plan.

Any of the following information may be required. If it cannot be shown practicably on the tentative plan of a subdivision, it shall be submitted in separate statements accompanying the plan.

(1) A vicinity map showing existing subdivisions and unsubdivided land ownerships adjacent to the proposed subdivision and showing how proposed streets and utilities may be extended to connect to existing streets and utilities.

(2) Proposed deed restrictions, if any, in outline form.

(3) The location within the subdivision, and in the adjoining streets and property, of existing sewers, water mains, culverts, drain pipes and electric lines. [Ord. 469 § 2.040, 1980].


17.20.080 Supplemental proposals with tentative plan.

Any of the following may be required by the planning commission to supplement the plan of subdivision:

(1) Approximate centerline profiles with extensions for a reasonable distance beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision showing the finished grade of streets and the nature and extent of street construction.

(2) A plan for domestic water supply lines and sewer service lines.

(3) Proposals for stormwater drainage and flood control, including profiles of proposed drainage ways.

(4) If lot areas are to be graded, a plan showing the nature of cuts and fills and information on the character of the soil.

(5) Proposals for other improvements such as electric services, telephone, gas, cable television, street lights and sidewalks. [Ord. 469 § 2.050, 1980].


17.20.090 Preliminary review of tentative plan.

The developer shall provide the city administrator and all agencies believed to have an interest with copies of the tentative plan. A coordination meeting of the city administrator and the affected agencies, along with the developer and his engineer, shall take place prior to review by the planning commission. [Ord. 469 § 2.060, 1980].


17.20.100 Approval of tentative subdivision plan.

(1) Within 40 days following submission of a tentative plan, the planning commission shall conduct a public hearing thereon and shall review the plan for completeness and compliance with MCMC Title 18 and other applicable regulations. Notice and conduct of hearing shall be in accordance with Chapters 18.185, 18.190 and 18.195 MCMC. The planning commission may approve a tentative plan as submitted or as it may be modified. Final action on an application for approval of a tentative subdivision plan shall be taken within 120 days after the application is found to be complete, pursuant to MCMC 18.185.150(6), unless the 120-day period has been extended by written request of the applicant.

(2) Approval of the tentative plan shall not constitute final acceptance of the plat for recording; however, approval of the tentative plan shall be binding upon the city for the purposes of preparation of the plat and the city may require only such changes in the plat as are necessary for compliance with the terms of approval.

(3) The action of the planning commission shall be noted on two copies of the tentative plan, including reference to any attached documents describing conditions. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider and the other shall be retained by the city.

(4) The action or ruling of the planning commission may be appealed by an affected or aggrieved party to the city council within 10 days after the planning commission has rendered its decision on the tentative plan. Written notice of the appeal shall be filed in accordance with MCMC 17.55.050. [Ord. 469 § 2.070, 1980].


17.20.110 Staged development for subdivision.

When an applicant desires to record and develop subdivision plats covering portions of an approved tentative plan in stages, the planning commission may authorize a time schedule for platting up to as many as three stages in periods of time such as one year for first stage, two years for second stage, and three years for third stage, but in no case shall the total time period for platting all stages be greater than four years without resubmission of the tentative plan as a new application. Each stage so platted and developed shall conform to the applicable requirements of this title. If any other secondary permits are required for the development, the time period shall be included in the initial approval of the permit applications. The city administrator or the city administrator’s designee may extend authorization for an additional one year, provided a written request from the applicant is submitted prior to the expiration date, stating the reason(s) why an extension should be granted. [Ord. 469 § 2.080, 1980].


Chapter 17.25 SUBDIVISION PLAT

Sections:

17.25.010    Submission of the subdivision plat.

17.25.020    Scale.

17.25.030    Information on plat.

17.25.040    Supplemental information with plat.

17.25.050    Technical plat review.

17.25.060    Approval of the plat.

17.25.070    Filing of plat.

17.25.080    Payment of taxes required.


17.25.010 Submission of the subdivision plat.

Within one year after approval of the tentative plan, the subdivider shall cause the subdivision or any part thereof to be surveyed and a plat prepared in conformance with the tentative plan as approved. The subdivider shall submit the original drawing, five prints and any supplementary information to the city. The city administrator or the city administrator’s designee may extend authorization for an additional one year, provided a written request from the applicant is submitted prior to the expiration date, stating the reason(s) why an extension should be granted. If the subdivider wishes to proceed with the subdivision after the expiration of the approval period of the tentative plan, he must submit a new tentative subdivision plan and application, and make any revision necessary to meet conditions. [Ord. 469 § 3.010, 1980].


17.25.020 Scale.

All plats, dedications of streets or roads or public parks and squares and other writings made a part of such plats offered for records shall be made in black India ink, upon material that is 18 inches by 24 inches in size and is approved as suitable for binding and copying purposes (five-mil mylar or similar material). The plat shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet or one inch equals 100 feet, and the lettering of approvals, and of the dedication and affidavit of the surveyor, shall be of such size or type as will be clearly legible, but no part shall come nearer to any edge of the sheet than one inch. All information on the plat shall be enclosed by a black border. The plat may be placed on as many sheets as necessary, but a face sheet and an index page shall be included for plats placed upon two or more sheets. Plat materials may be placed on both sides of a sheet. [Ord. 469 § 3.011, 1980].


17.25.030 Information on plat.

In addition to what may be otherwise specified by law, the following information shall be shown on the plat:

(1) The name of the subdivision as approved (reference MCMC 17.20.030(1)).

(2) Date, north arrow and scale of drawing.

(3) Reference points of existing surveys identified, related to the plat by distances and bearing, and referenced to a field book or map as follows:

(a) Stakes, monuments or other evidence found on the ground and used to determine the boundaries of the subdivision.

(b) Adjoining corners of adjoining subdivisions.

(c) Other monuments found or established in making the survey of the subdivision or required to be installed by provisions of this title.

(4) The exact location and width of streets and easements intercepting the boundary of the tract.

(5) Tract, block and lot boundary lines and street right-of-way and centerlines, with dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, radii, arcs, points of curvature and tangent bearings, and normal high water lines for any creek or other body of water. Tract boundaries and street bearings shall be shown to the nearest 30 seconds with basis of bearings. Distances shall be shown to the nearest 0.01 feet. No ditto marks shall be used.

(6) The width of the portion of streets being dedicated and the width of existing right-of-way. For streets on curvature, curve data shall be based on the street centerline. In addition to the centerline dimensions, the radius, tangent, long chord and central angle shall be indicated.

(7) Easements denoted by fine dotted lines, clearly identified and, if already of record, their recorded reference. If an easement is not definitely located of record, a statement of the easement shall be given. The width of the easement, its length and bearing, and sufficient ties to locate the easement with respect to the subdivision shall be shown. If the easement is being dedicated by the map, it shall be properly referenced in the owner’s certificate of dedication.

(8) Lot numbers beginning with the number “1” and numbered consecutively in each block.

(9) Block numbers beginning with the number “1” and continuing consecutively without omission or duplication throughout the subdivision. The numbers shall be solid, of sufficient size and thickness to stand out and so placed as not to obliterate any figure. Block numbers in an addition to a subdivision of the same name shall be a continuation of the numbering in the original subdivision.

(10) Identification of land to be dedicated for any purpose, public or private, to distinguish it from lots intended for sale.

(11) Building setback lines, if any, are to be made a part of the subdivision restrictions.

(12) Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, surveyor and engineer.

(13) The following certificates (which may be combined where appropriate):

(a) A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title interest in the land, consenting to the preparation and recording of the plat.

(b) A certificate signed and acknowledged as above, dedicating all land intended for public use except land which is intended for the exclusive use of the lot owners in the subdivision, their licenses, visitors, tenants and servants.

(c) A certificate with the seal of and signed by the engineer and/or surveyor responsible for the survey and plat preparation.

(d) Other certifications now or hereafter required by law.

(14) A space for the date and signatures of the city administrator and county surveyor. [Ord. 469 § 3.020, 1980].


17.25.040 Supplemental information with plat.

The following data shall accompany the plat:

(1) A preliminary title report issued by a title insurance company in the name of the owner of the land, showing all parties whose consent is necessary and their interest in the premises.

(2) Sheets and drawings showing the following:

(a) Traverse data including the coordinates of the boundary of the subdivision and ties to section corners and donation land claim corners, and showing the error of closure, if any.

(b) The computation of distances, angles and courses shown on the plat.

(c) Ties to existing monuments, proposed monuments, adjacent subdivisions, street corners and state highway stationing.

(3) A copy of any deed restrictions applicable to the subdivision.

(4) A copy of any dedication requiring separate documents.

(5) A list of all taxes and assessments on the tract which have become a lien on the tract.

(6) A certificate by the city engineer that the subdivider has complied with the requirements of Chapters 17.35 and 17.45 MCMC. [Ord. 469 § 3.030, 1980].


17.25.050 Technical plat review.

(1) Upon receipt by the city, the plat and other data shall be reviewed by the city engineer who shall examine them to determine that the subdivision as shown is substantially the same as it appeared on the approved tentative plan and that there has been compliance with provisions of the law and of this title.

(2) The city engineer may make such checks in the field as are desirable to verify that the map is sufficiently correct on the ground, and his representatives may enter the property for this purpose.

(3) If the city engineer determines that full conformity has not been made, he shall advise the subdivider of the changes or additions that must be made and shall afford the subdivider an opportunity to make the changes or additions. [Ord. 469 § 3.040, 1980].


17.25.060 Approval of the plat.

Upon receipt of the plat, the city administrator or the city administrator’s designee shall determine whether the plat is in substantial conformance with the provisions of the tentative plan as approved. If the city administrator or the city administrator’s designee does not approve the plat, the subdivider shall be advised of the changes or additions that must be made and shall be afforded an opportunity to make corrections. The city administrator or the city administrator’s designee shall determine that the plat conforms to all requirements, and that the required supplemental documents and provisions for any necessary improvements have been satisfied. When compliance with conditions has been assured, the plat shall be signed by the city administrator. The approval of the plat does not constitute or effect an acceptance by the city for maintenance of any dedicated street or easement shown on the plat. [Ord. 469 § 3.050, 1980].


17.25.070 Filing of plat.

A subdivider shall, without delay, submit the plat for signatures of other public officials required by law. Approval of the plat shall be null and void if the plat is not recorded within 90 days after the date of the last required approving signature. After filing and approval of the plat by the county, the subdivider shall submit one print and one three-mil mylar to the city. [Ord. 469 § 3.060, 1980].


17.25.080 Payment of taxes required.

No plat shall be recorded unless all ad valorem taxes and all special assessment fees, or other charges required by law to be placed upon the tax roll, have been paid in accordance with ORS 92.095. [Ord. 469 § 3.061, 1980].


Chapter 17.30 LAND PARTITIONING

Sections:

17.30.010    General requirements.

17.30.020    Application procedure.

17.30.030    Approval of preliminary plan.

17.30.040    Preparation of final map.

17.30.050    Approval of final map.

17.30.060    Filing of map.


17.30.010 General requirements.

Whenever acreage tracts or parcels are to be partitioned, the following procedures shall apply:

The creation of one to three lots for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development requires a partition map to be filed with the city. [Ord. 469 § 5.010, 1980].


17.30.020 Application procedure.

Application for a land partition requires a completed application form and a suitable preliminary plan to be submitted to the city administrator. The preliminary plan shall be drawn to scale on paper which is eight and one-half inches by 11 inches, 11 inches by 14 inches, or 11 inches by 17 inches in size and shall include the following information:

(1) The date, north point, scale and sufficient description to define the location and boundaries of the tract to be partitioned and its location.

(2) The name and address of the record owner and of the person who prepared the preliminary plan.

(3) The approximate acreage of the land under single ownership or, if more than one ownership is involved, the total contiguous acreage of the landowners directly involved in the partitioning.

(4) The locations, names and width of existing streets; location and size of sewer lines, water lines, culverts and drainage ways or other underground utilities within the tract to be partitioned or immediately adjacent; and the location of power poles.

(5) An outline and location of existing buildings to remain in place.

(6) Parcel layout, including a plan of the proposed partitioning, showing lot dimensions and the relationship to existing streets and utility easements.

(7) The location, widths, and names of all proposed streets and rights-of-way to be dedicated.

(8) Such additional information as required by the administrator. [Ord. 469 § 5.015, 1980].


17.30.030 Approval of preliminary plan.

(1) The administrator shall review the preliminary plan for compliance with this title, the comprehensive plan and the applicable zoning regulations of the city. The administrator may require dedication of land and easements and may specify conditions or modifications in the preliminary plan as necessary to establish compliance. In no event, however, shall the administrator require greater conditions than would be required of a subdivision.

(2) The action of the administrator shall be noted on two copies of the preliminary plan, including reference to any attached documents describing conditions of approval. One copy shall be returned to the partitioner and one copy shall be retained by the city.

(3) Approval of the preliminary plan shall not constitute acceptance of the final map for recording; however, approval of the preliminary plan shall be binding upon the city for the purpose of preparation of the map, and the city may require only such changes in the map as are necessary for compliance with the terms of approval.

(4) Appeal.

(a) The action or ruling of the administrator on a land partition may be appealed by an affected or aggrieved party to the planning commission within 12 days after the administrator has rendered his decision on the preliminary plan.

(b) Written notice of the appeal shall be filed in accordance with MCMC 17.55.050. [Ord. 469 § 5.020, 1980].


17.30.040 Preparation of final map.

(1) Within one year after approval of the preliminary plan by the administrator there shall be submitted to the city a final map prepared in conformance with the preliminary plan as approved. The partitioner shall submit the original map and one print along with any supplemental information to the city. The city administrator or the city administrator’s designee may extend authorization for an additional one year, provided a written request from the applicant is submitted prior to the expiration date, stating the reason(s) why an extension should be granted.

(2) All maps and other writings made a part of such map offered for record shall be made in black India ink, upon material that is 15 inches by 18 inches in size and is approved as suitable for binding and copying purposes (five-mil mylar or similar material). The map shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, one inch equals 100 feet, one inch equals 200 feet, or one inch equals 400 feet. The lettering of approvals, and of the dedication and affidavit of the surveyor, shall be of such size or type as will be clearly legible, but no part shall come nearer any edge of the sheet than one inch. All information on the map shall be enclosed by a black border. The information shown on the final map shall be as follows:

(a) Recorded reference of property (including township, range, section) and description of each parcel partitioned.

(b) North arrow, title block, scale and date.

(c) A plan of the proposed partitioning showing lot dimension (in feet and hundredths), bearings of all lines (in degrees and minutes) and area of each parcel.

(d) A tie by actual survey to a section or donation land claim corner. When partitioning is a redivision of all or part of an existing subdivision, a tie shall be given to either the initial point or a block corner of the original subdivision.

(e) A statement regarding contemplated water supply and sewage disposal for each lot.

(f) Easements denoted by fine dotted lines, clearly identified, and, if already of record, their recorded reference. If an easement is not definitely located of record, a description of the easement shall be given. The width of the easement, its length and bearing, and sufficient ties to locate the easement with respect to the property shall be shown. If an easement is to be dedicated, it shall be accomplished by separate document(s) accompanying the partition map and referenced in the owner’s certificate of dedication.

(g) The location of existing permanent buildings, railroad rights-of-way, and other important features.

(h) The location, widths and names of existing and/or platted streets or other public ways within or adjacent to the property. If a street is to be dedicated with a land partition, it shall be accomplished by separate document(s) accompanying the partition map and referenced in the owner’s certificate of dedication. For streets on a curvature, curve data shall be shown on the map and shall be based on the street centerline. In addition to the centerline dimensions, the radius, tangent, long chord and central angle shall be indicated.

(i) A space for date and signatures of city administrator indicating approval of the map. The city administrator is authorized to endorse approval on behalf of the city council for a land partition which includes the creation of a street.

(j) A signature line indicating approval of map by the county surveyor.

(k) A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title interest in the land, consenting to the preparation and recording of the map.

(l) Documents, signed and acknowledged as above, dedicating all land for public use.

(m) A certificate with the seal of and signed by the surveyor responsible for the survey and final map.

(n) Other certificates now or hereafter required by law.

(o) A copy of any dedication requiring separate documents and a list of all taxes and assessments on the property which have become a lien on the property shall accompany the map. [Ord. 469 § 5.025, 1980].


17.30.050 Approval of final map.

(1) Upon receipt of the final map by the city, the map and other data shall be reviewed by the city engineer who shall examine them to determine that the final plan as shown is substantially the same as it appeared on the approved preliminary plan and that there has been compliance with provisions of the law and of this title.

(2) The city engineer may make such checks in the field as are desirable to verify that the map is sufficiently correct on the ground, and his representative may enter the property for this purpose.

(3) If the city engineer determines that full conformity has not been made, he shall advise the partitioner of the changes or additions that must be made and shall afford the partitioner an opportunity to make the changes or additions.

(4) The final map will then be forwarded to the administrator and, when compliance with conditions has been assured, the map shall be signed by the administrator. All copies shall be marked with the date of approval. Approval of a land partition shall be considered final. Approval of a land partition which includes the creation of a street requires the map to be submitted and endorsed by the city administrator on behalf of city council. [Ord. 469 § 5.030, 1980].


17.30.060 Filing of map.

The city shall submit the partition map to Douglas County for recording. Any fees required by the county shall be paid by the partitioner. Following recording of the map, one print and one reproducible copy (three-mil mylar) shall be returned to the city. [Ord. 469 § 5.040, 1980].


Chapter 17.35 DESIGN STANDARDS

Sections:

17.35.010    Principles of acceptability.

17.35.020    Subdivision general standards.

17.35.030    Streets.

17.35.040    Blocks.

17.35.050    Building sites.

17.35.060    Grading of building sites.

17.35.070    Building lines.

17.35.080    Large building sites.

17.35.090    Land for public purposes.

17.35.100    Special district/flood hazard area.


17.35.010 Principles of acceptability.

A land division, whether by a subdivision, creation of a street, or a partitioning, shall conform to the comprehensive plan and its implementing ordinances and shall conform to the design standards established by this title. [Ord. 469 § 7.010, 1980].


17.35.020 Subdivision general standards.

(1) A subdivision shall conform to the following standards:

(a) Each proposed lot must be buildable in conformance with the requirements of this title and all other applicable regulations.

(b) Each lot shall abut upon a public street other than an alley for a width of at least 25 feet.

(c) If any lot abuts a street right-of-way that does not conform to the design specifications of this title, the owner may be required to dedicate up to one-half of the total right-of-way required by this title.

(d) Lot Width-to-Depth Ratios. To provide for proper site design and prevent the creation of irregularly shaped parcels, the depth of any lot or parcel shall not exceed three times its width (or four times its width in rural areas) unless there is a topographical or environmental constraint or an existing manmade feature such as a railroad line.

(2) Further subdivision of the property shall be prohibited unless the applicant submits a plat or development plan in accordance with the requirements of this title. [Ord. 469 § 7.015, 1980].


17.35.030 Streets.

(1) General. The location, width and grade of streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, and to the proposed use of land to be served by the streets. The street system shall be laid out in accordance with the future street plan and functional classification maps to assure adequate traffic circulation that is convenient and safe. Intersection angles, tangents and curves shall be appropriate for the traffic to be carried, considering the terrain. Street determinations shall be made in accordance with the street standards provided in the future street plan and functional classification maps. The criteria contained in the following subsections shall be coordinated with adopted street standards as outlined in the this title and will consider both solar access to building sites and the need for utility location. Additional setbacks may be required as set forth in MCMC 18.145.020. Where appropriate location of streets within and/or adjacent to a development is not shown in the comprehensive plan (future street plan and functional classification maps), the arrangement of streets shall either:

(a) Provide for the continuation of appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or

(b) Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the planning commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impractical.

(2) Minimum Right-of-Way and Roadway Width. Unless otherwise indicated in the comprehensive plan, the street right-of-way and roadway widths shall not be less than the minimum width in feet shown in the following table, except:

(a) Where conditions, particularly topography or the size and shape of the tract, make it impractical to otherwise provide buildable sites, narrower right-of-way may be accepted, ordinarily not less than 50 feet. If necessary, slope easements may be required.

(b) Where it is determined that two-level streets best serve lots in the residential hillside district (R-H), the right-of-way shall be of sufficient width to provide, on each level, space for one sidewalk and a minimum width of 20 feet for pavement, curbs and drainage facilities. Between the two street levels and out to the right-of-way lines there shall be space for all cut and fill slopes.

(c) Paths and Bicycle Ways. To provide appropriate circulation, an accessway for pedestrians and bicycles shall be required to connect to all cul-de-sacs. Accessways are also required to allow passage between unusually long or oddly shaped blocks.

(3) Reverse Frontage Lots.

(a) Lots that front on more than one street shall be required to locate motor vehicle accesses on the street with the lower functional classification. Direct access to arterials or major collector streets shall not be permitted for reverse frontage lots or parcels.

(b) When a residential subdivision is proposed which abuts an arterial, it shall be designed so the lots abutting the arterial will only take access from a frontage road or interior local road. A planting screen easement or buffer yard at least 10 feet wide, across which there shall be no rights of access, may be required along the line of lots abutting such traffic arterial. Such area shall be considered the rear portion of the lot or parcel. The planting screen easement or buffer yard shall not be located within the public right-of-way.

(4) Flag Lot Standards.

(a) Flag lots shall not be permitted when the result would be to increase the number of properties requiring direct and individual access connections to the state highway system or other arterials unless the property would otherwise be landlocked.

(b) Flag lots may be permitted for residential development when necessary to achieve planning objectives, such as reducing direct access to roadways, providing internal platted lots with access to a residential street, or preserving natural or historic resources, under the following conditions:

(i) Flag lot driveways shall be separated by a minimum of 120 feet (twice the minimum lot width). Adjacent, or side-by-side, flag lot driveways shall not be permitted.

(ii) The flag lot driveway shall have a minimum width of 12 feet and maximum width of 20 feet.

(iii) In no instance shall flag lots constitute more than 10 percent of the total number of building sites in a recorded or unrecorded plat, or three lots or more, whichever is greater.

(iv) The lot area occupied by the flag driveway shall not be counted as part of the required minimum lot area of that zoning district.

(v) No more than one flag lot shall be permitted per private right-of-way or access easement.

Table 17.35.030 Minimum Street Widths 

	Type of Street	Right-of-Way Width	Roadway Width

	Arterial	 	 

	– Within CBD (downtown)	64 feet	46 feet

	– Non-CBD	80 feet	48 feet

	Collector	 	 

	– Major Collector	60 – 80 feet	36 – 46 feet

	– Minor Collector	60 feet	36 – 40 feet

	Local Street	 	 

	– Major (Necessary) Local	60 feet	36 feet

	– Local Street (minor street less than 2,400 feet in length which cannot be extended)	50 feet	28 feet

	Radius for turnaround at end of cul-de-sacs	50 feet	40 feet

	Alleys	20 feet	20 feet

(5) Reserve Strips. Reserve strips or plugs controlling access to streets will not be approved unless necessary for the protection of the public welfare or of substantial property rights, and in these cases they may be required. The control and disposal of the land comprising such strips shall be placed with the jurisdiction of the city under conditions approved by the city council.

(6) Street Alignment. As far as is practical, streets other than minor streets shall be in alignment with existing streets by continuations of the centerlines thereof. Staggered street alignment resulting in T intersections shall, wherever practical, leave a minimum distance of 200 feet between the centerlines of streets having approximately the same direction and, in no case, shall be less than 100 feet.

(7) Future Extensions of Streets. Where necessary to give access to or permit a satisfactory future division of adjoining land, a public street will be extended to the boundary of the development and the resulting dead-end street may be approved without a turnaround. A reserve strip or street plug may be required to preserve the objective of the street extension. A turnaround will be required if the dead-end street is more than 100 feet from an intersection. The street shall be located to align with any future streets identified in the future street plan and functional classification maps.

(8) Bicycle Routes. As identified in the bicycle plan map, bicycle lanes within streets, separate bicycle paths, or bike route signage shall be required when developing new, or reconstructing existing, streets. These new bicycle facilities will provide connections to improve the overall bicycle network for the community. Bicycle lanes shall be four to six feet wide and located on both sides of the street, where practical. Refer to MCMC Table 17.50.030 for affected street types.

(9) Sidewalks. Sidewalk improvements shall be installed to serve each building site as is required for a subdivision unless alternative pedestrian routes are available and such facilities are not called for in the pedestrian plan map. Required sidewalk widths shall vary between five and eight feet, depending on the roadway’s functional classification. Refer to MCMC Table 17.50.030 for affected street types.

(10) Shared Access. Subdivisions with frontage on an arterial or major collector shall be designed to indirectly access the roadway via a secondary lower classification road. If access via a secondary road is infeasible, the partition or other land division shall utilize a single shared access onto the arterial or major collector.

(11) Connectivity. The street system of proposed subdivisions shall be designed to connect with existing, proposed, and planned streets outside of the subdivision as identified in the future street plan and functional classification maps.

(a) Wherever a proposed development abuts unplatted land or a future development phase of the same development, street stubs shall be provided to provide access to abutting properties or to logically extend the street system into the surrounding area. All street stubs more than 100 feet from an intersection shall be provided with a temporary turnaround, unless specifically exempted by the city engineer, and the restoration and extension of the street shall be the responsibility of any future developer of the abutting land.

(b) Collector and local residential streets shall connect with surrounding streets to permit the convenient movement of traffic between residential neighborhoods or facilitate emergency access and evacuation. Connections shall be designed to avoid or minimize through traffic on local streets.

(12) Cul-de-sacs and Accessways.

(a) Cul-de-sacs or permanent dead-end streets may be used as part of a development plan; however, through streets are encouraged except where topographical, environmental, or existing adjacent land use constraints make connecting streets infeasible. Where cul-de-sacs are planned, accessways shall be provided connecting the ends of cul-de-sacs to each other, to other streets, or to neighborhood activity centers.

(b) A cul-de-sac shall be as short as possible and shall have a maximum length of 400 feet and serve building sites for not more than 18 dwelling units. A cul-de-sac shall terminate with a circular turnaround.

(c) For subdivision developments creating blocks of 1,000 feet or more, accessways for pedestrians and bicyclists shall be 10 feet wide and located within a 20-foot-wide right-of-way or easement. If the streets within the subdivision are lighted, the accessways shall also be lighted. Stairs or switchback paths may be used where grades are steep.

(13) Intersection Angles. Streets shall be laid out to intersect at angles as near to right angles as practical except where topography requires a lesser angle, but in no case shall the acute angle be less than 80 degrees unless there is a special intersection design. An arterial or collector street intersecting with another street shall have at least 100 feet of tangent adjacent to the intersection unless topography requires a lesser distance. Other streets, except alleys, shall have at least 50 feet of tangent adjacent to the intersection unless topography requires a lesser distance. Intersections which contain an acute angle of less than 80 degrees or which include an arterial street shall have a minimum corner radius sufficient to allow for a roadway radius of 20 feet and maintain a uniform width between the roadway and the right-of-way line. Ordinarily, the intersection of more than two streets at any one point will not be approved.

(14) Existing Streets. Whenever existing streets adjacent to or within a tract are of inadequate width, additional right-of-way shall be provided at the time of the land division.

(15) Street Names. Except for extensions of existing streets, no street name shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the name of an existing street. Street names and numbers shall conform to the established pattern in the city and shall be subject to the approval of the city administrator or the city administrator’s designee on behalf of the city council.

(16) Grades and Curves. Grades shall not exceed six percent on arterials, 10 percent on collector streets or 12 percent on other streets. Centerline radii of curves shall not be less than 300 feet on major arterials, 200 feet on secondary arterials or 100 feet on other streets, and shall be to an even 10 feet. Where existing conditions, particularly the topography, make it otherwise impractical to provide buildable sites, the city council may accept steeper grades and sharper curves. In flat areas, allowance shall be made for finished street grades having a minimum slope, preferably, of at least 0.5 percent.

(17) Streets Adjacent to Railroad Right-of-Way. Wherever the proposed land division contains or is adjacent to a railroad right-of-way, provision may be required for a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the land between the streets and the railroad. The distance shall be determined with due consideration at cross streets of the minimum distance required for approach grades to a future grade separation and to provide sufficient depth to allow screen planting along the railroad right-of-way.

(18) Alleys. Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, unless other permanent provisions for access to off-street parking and loading facilities are approved by the planning commission. The corners of alley intersections shall have a radius of not less than 12 feet. [Ord. 469 § 7.020, 1980].


17.35.040 Blocks.

(1) General. The length, width and shape of blocks shall take into account the need for adequate building site size and street width and shall recognize the limitations of the topography.

(2) Size. No block shall be more than 1,000 feet in length between corner lines unless it is adjacent to an arterial street or unless the topography or the location of adjoining streets justifies an exception. The recommended minimum length of blocks along an arterial street is 1,800 feet. A block shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of building sites unless topography or the location of adjoining streets justifies an exception.

(3) Easements.

(a) Utility Lines. Easements for sewers, water mains, electric lines or other public utilities shall be dedicated wherever necessary. The easements shall be at least 12 feet wide, except for utility pole tieback easements, which may be reduced to six feet in width.

(b) Water Courses. If a tract is traversed by a water course such as a drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of the water course, and such further width as will be adequate for the purpose. Streets or parkways parallel to the major water courses may be required.

(c) Paths and Bicycle Ways. When desirable for public convenience, a pedestrian or bicycle way may be required to connect to a cul-de-sac or to pass through an unusually long or oddly shaped block or otherwise provide appropriate circulation. [Ord. 469 § 7.030, 1980].


17.35.050 Building sites.

(1) Size and Shape. The size, width, shape and orientation of building sites shall be appropriate for the location of the land division and for the type of development and use contemplated, and shall be consistent with the residential lot size provisions of MCMC Title 18 with the following exception:

Where property is zoned and planned for business or industrial use, other widths and areas may be permitted at the discretion of the planning commission. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated.

(2) Access. Except as set forth in MCMC 17.40.020, each lot and parcel shall abut upon a street other than an alley for a width of at least 25 feet.

(3) Through Lots and Parcels. Through lots and parcels shall be avoided except along streets that have been designated as limited access or restricted access streets, or where they are essential to provide separation of residential development from major traffic arteries or adjacent nonresidential activities or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. If through lots or parcels are created, the rear setback area shall be increased to equal the required front setback area. Access to through lots or parcels shall be via the street frontage on the front side of the lot or parcel; there shall be no right of access to a street via the rear frontage. In approving the creation of through lots or parcels, the planning commission may impose additional conditions or restrictions as may be found necessary to preserve or protect the character of the area.

(4) Lot and Parcel Side Lines. The lines of lots and parcels, as far as is practicable, shall run at right angles to the street upon which they face, except that on curved streets they shall be radial to the curve. [Ord. 469 § 7.040, 1980].


17.35.060 Grading of building sites.

Grading of building sites shall conform to the following standards unless physical conditions demonstrate the propriety of other standards:

(1) Cut slopes shall not exceed two feet horizontally to one foot vertically.

(2) Fill slopes shall not exceed two feet horizontally to one foot vertically.

(3) The character of soil for fill and the characteristics of lots and parcels made usable by fill shall be suitable for the purpose intended. [Ord. 469 § 7.041, 1980].


17.35.070 Building lines.

If special building setback lines are to be established in a subdivision, they shall be shown on the subdivision plat, or, if temporary in nature, they shall be included in the deed restrictions. [Ord. 469 § 7.050, 1980].


17.35.080 Large building sites.

In dividing tracts into large lots or parcels which, at some future time, are likely to be redivided, the planning commission may require that the blocks be of such size and shape so as to be suitable for redivision into building sites. They may contain such site restrictions as will provide for extension and opening of streets at intervals planned to permit a subsequent redivision of any tract into lots or parcels of smaller size. [Ord. 469 § 7.060, 1980].


17.35.090 Land for public purposes.

If the city has an interest in acquiring a portion of a proposed subdivision for a public purpose or if the city has been advised of such interest by a school district or other public agency and there is reasonable assurance that steps will be taken to acquire the land, then the planning commission may:

(1) Require that those portions of the subdivision be reserved for public acquisition for a period not to exceed one year, at a cost not to exceed the value of the land prior to subdivision; or

(2) The planning commission may require a parcel of land of not more than six percent of the gross area of the subdivision to be set aside and dedicated to the public by the subdivider for purposes to serve the area containing the subdivision. [Ord. 469 § 7.070, 1980].


17.35.100 Special district/flood hazard area.

All land division in the floodplain shall conform to the requirements of the special district/flood hazard area regulations contained in MCMC Title 18 and shall provide for:

(1) A minimum residential building site of 6,000 square feet, exclusive of floodway.

(2) Protection for streambank vegetation.

(3) Open space dedication in accordance with the greenway proposal. [Ord. 469 § 7.080, 1980].


Chapter 17.40 CREATION OF STREETS OUTSIDE A SUBDIVISION

Sections:

17.40.010    Creation of a public street outside a subdivision.

17.40.020    Creation of a private street.


17.40.010 Creation of a public street outside a subdivision.

(1) The creation of a public street and the resultant separate land parcels shall be in conformance with requirements for subdivision except, however, the planning commission shall approve the creation of a public street to be established by deed without full compliance with the regulations applicable to subdivisions, provided any of the following conditions exist:

(a) The establishment of the public street is initiated by the city council and is declared essential for the purpose of general traffic circulation, and the partitioning of land is an incidental effect rather than the primary objective of the street.

(b) The tract in which the street is to be dedicated is a partition within an isolated ownership either of not over one acre or of such size and characteristics as to make it impossible to develop more than three building sites.

(2) In those cases where approval of a public street is to be given without full compliance with the regulations applicable to subdivisions, a copy of a preliminary plan and the proposed deed shall be submitted to the planning commission at least 10 days prior to the planning commission meeting at which consideration is desired. The plan, deed and such information as may be submitted shall be reviewed by the planning commission and, if not in conflict with the standards of Chapters 17.35 and 17.50 MCMC, shall be approved with conditions necessary to preserve these standards. [Ord. 469 § 4.010, 1980].


17.40.020 Creation of a private street.

A street which is created in order to allow the partitioning of land for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, whether immediate or future, shall be in the form of a street in a subdivision or as provided in MCMC 17.40.010, except that a private street which is not in full compliance with these regulations may be approved under the planned development provisions of MCMC Title 18. [Ord. 469 § 4.020, 1980].


Chapter 17.45 IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEE

Sections:

17.45.010    Agreement for improvements.

17.45.020    Bond.


17.45.010 Agreement for improvements.

Before the approval of the city is certified on the final subdivision plat or partition map, the land divider shall either install required improvements and repair existing streets and other public facilities damaged in the development of the property or execute and file with the city an agreement between himself and the city, specifying the period within which required improvements and repairs shall be completed and providing, if the work is not completed within the period specified, that the city may complete the work and recover the full cost and expense together with court costs and attorney fees necessary to collect said amounts from the land divider. The agreement shall also provide for reimbursement to the city for the cost of inspection by the city which shall not exceed 10 percent of the cost of the improvements to be installed. [Ord. 469 § 6.010, 1980].


17.45.020 Bond.

(1) The land divider shall file with the agreement, to assure his full and faithful performance thereof, one of the following:

(a) A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state of Oregon in a form approved by the city attorney.

(b) A personal bond cosigned by at least one additional person together with evidence of financial responsibility and resources of those signing the bond sufficient to provide reasonable assurance of ability to proceed in accordance with the agreement.

(c) Currency or certificate of deposit to the city.

(2) Such assurance of full and faithful performance shall be for a sum approved by the city as sufficient to cover the cost of the improvements and repairs, including related engineering and incidental expenses, and to cover the cost of city inspection.

(3) If the land divider fails to carry out provisions of the agreement and the city has unreimbursed costs or expenses resulting from such failure, the city shall call on the bond or cash deposit for reimbursement. If the amount of the bond or cash deposit exceeds cost and expense incurred by the city, the city shall release the remainder. If the amount of the bond or cash deposit is less than the cost and expense incurred by the city, the land divider shall be liable to the city for the difference. [Ord. 469 § 6.020, 1980].


Chapter 17.50 IMPROVEMENTS

Sections:

17.50.010    Improvement procedures.

17.50.020    Specifications for improvements.

17.50.030    Improvements in subdivisions.

17.50.040    Improvements in partitions.

17.50.050    Property line adjustment.

17.50.060    Requirements of phased development plans.


17.50.010 Improvement procedures.

In addition to other requirements, improvements installed by a land divider either as a requirement of these regulations or at his own option shall conform to the requirements of this title and the improvement standards and specifications followed by the city and shall be installed in accordance with the following procedure:

(1) Improvement work shall not commence until plans have been checked for adequacy and approved by the city. To the extent necessary for evaluation of the proposal, the plans may be required before approval of the tentative plan of a subdivision or partition.

(2) Improvement work shall not commence until after the city is notified and, if work is discontinued for any reason, it shall not be resumed until after the city is notified.

(3) Improvements shall be constructed under the inspection and to the satisfaction of the city. The city may require changes in typical sections and details, in the public interest, if unusual conditions arise during construction to warrant the change.

(4) Underground utilities, sanitary sewers and storm drains installed in streets shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of the streets. Stubs for service connections for underground utilities and sanitary sewers shall be placed to a length obviating the necessity for disturbing the street improvements when service connections are made.

(5) A map showing public improvements “as built” shall be filed with the city upon completion of the improvements. This shall be drawn using good quality black ink on a 24-inch by 36-inch sheet of approved material (three-mil mylar or similar reproducible material). [Ord. 469 § 8.010, 1980].


17.50.020 Specifications for improvements.

The city administrator shall cause to be prepared specifications to supplement the standards of this title based on engineering standards appropriate for the improvements concerned. Specifications shall be prepared for the design and construction of required public improvements, such other public facilities as a developer may elect to install, and private streets. [Ord. 469 § 8.020, 1980].


17.50.030 Improvements in subdivisions.

The following improvements shall be installed at the expense of the subdivider and at the time of subdivision:

(1) Streets. Public streets, including alleys, within the subdivision and public streets adjacent to but only partially within the subdivision shall be improved to street standards. Catch basins shall be installed and connected to drainage tile leading to storm sewers or drainage ways. Upon completion of the street improvement, monuments shall be re-established and protected in monument boxes at every public street intersection and all points of curvature and points of tangency of their centerlines.

Table 17.50.030 

Myrtle Creek Street Standards  

	Classification	Total Right‑of‑Way Width (Feet)	Pavement Width (Feet)	Number of Lanes	On-Street Parking	Bike Lanes (Feet)	Sidewalk Width (Feet)

	Arterial	80	48	3 (2 + 1 TWLTL1)	None	6 – both sides	5 – both sides

	Arterial (CBD)	64	46	2	8 – both sides	None	8 – both sides

	Major Collector	60 – 80	46	2	8 – one side	4 to 6 – both sides	5 – both sides

	Minor Collector	60	40	2	8 – both sides	None	5 – both sides

	Necessary (Major) Local	60	36	2	8 – both sides	None	5 – both sides

	Local2	50	28	2

10' Travelways	8 – one side	None	5 – both sides

1 TWLTL = two-way left-turn lane.

2 Twenty-eight feet are allowed when the street is less than 2,400 feet in length and cannot be extended.

(2) Access and Connectivity. Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or with access to an approved private street within a planned development or a mobile home park (see MCMC 18.120.100(1), 18.130.140(2) and 18.145.040). All structures shall be located on lots so as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required off-street parking and loading.

Access management, street connectivity, and driveway location will help manage access to land development while preserving the movement of people and goods in terms of safety, capacity, functional classification, and performance standards. This section shall apply to all arterials and major collectors within Myrtle Creek and to all properties that abut these roadways. These standards shall be applied to properties in Tri-City if and when annexed into the city.

(a) Joint Use Driveways and Cross Access.

(i) Adjacent commercial or office properties classified as major traffic generators (i.e., developments generating more than 400 ADT) shall provide a cross access drive and pedestrian access to allow circulation between sites.

(ii) A system of joint use driveways and cross access easements shall be established wherever feasible. The property owner/developer shall provide a development plan to be reviewed and approved by the city. The development plan shall include the following:

(A) A continuous service drive or cross access corridor extending the entire length of each block served to provide for driveway separation.

(B) A design speed of 10 mph and a maximum width of 22 feet to accommodate two-way travel aisles designed to accommodate automobiles, service vehicles, and loading vehicles.

(C) Stub-outs and other design features to make it visually obvious that the abutting properties may be tied in to provide cross-access via a service drive.

(D) A unified access and circulation system plan for coordinated or shared parking areas.

(E) Shared parking areas shall be permitted a 20 percent reduction in required parking spaces if peak demands do not occur at the same time periods.

(iii) Pursuant to this section, property owners shall:

(A) Record an easement with the deed for the property which allows cross access to and from other properties served by the joint use driveways and cross access; or

(B) Record a joint maintenance agreement with the deed defining maintenance responsibilities of property owners.

(C) Myrtle Creek may modify or waive the requirements of this section where the characteristics or layout of abutting properties would make the development of a unified or shared access and circulation system impractical.

(b) Access Connection and Driveway Design. Driveways shall meet the following standards:

(i) Access driveways to parking areas having 10 or more parking spaces shall be clearly marked to indicate one-way or two-way access.

(ii) One-way driveways (one-way in or one-way out) shall have a minimum width of 12 feet.

(iii) For two-way access, each lane shall have a minimum width of 10 feet.

(iv) Driveway approaches must be designed and located to provide an exiting vehicle with an unobstructed view, meeting the requirements for clear vision areas. Construction of driveways along acceleration or deceleration lanes and tapers shall be avoided due to the potential for vehicular weaving conflicts.

(v) The length of driveways shall be designed to prevent vehicles from backing into the flow of traffic on the public street or causing unsafe conflicts with on-site circulation.

(c) Number and Location of Access Points.

(i) Number of Accesses Permitted. Access points to a public street shall be the minimum necessary to provide reasonable access while not inhibiting the safe traffic circulation and carrying capacity of the street.

(A) Excepting single-family dwellings and except as further restricted by this title, properties of less than 100 feet of frontage, which may be separate or contiguous, shall be limited to one access point.

(B) Properties exceeding 100 feet of frontage shall be limited to one access point per each 100 feet of frontage, but not to exceed four access points.

(ii) Driveway Location in Relation to Intersections. For access driveways to loading and service areas, and to parking areas having 10 or more spaces, the minimum distance between driveways and intersections shall be as provided below. Distances listed shall be measured from the stop bar at the intersection.

(A) At the intersection of a collector or arterial street, driveways shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from the intersection.

(B) At the intersection of two local streets, driveways shall be located no closer than 30 feet from the intersection.

(C) If the subject property is not of sufficient width to allow for separation between driveway and intersection as provided, the driveway shall be constructed as far from the intersection as possible, while maintaining the five-foot setback between the driveway and property line as required.

(iii) Driveway Location in Relation to Intersections for Single-Family Dwellings. The minimum distance between driveways and intersections shall be 30 feet.

(A) If the subject property is not of sufficient width to allow for separation between driveway and intersection as provided, the driveway shall be constructed as far from the intersection as possible, while maintaining the five-foot setback between the driveway and property line as required.

(iv) Driveway Location in Relation to Lot Lines. Access driveways shall not be located closer than five feet to an interior side lot line, except that common access driveways (not exceeding 40 feet in width) to two adjacent properties may be provided at the common lot line when a common driveway agreement is executed and recorded with the city.

(v) Driveway Location in Relation to Adjacent Driveways. One-way driveways to parking areas having 10 or more spaces shall not be located closer than 20 feet to any other one-way driveway, nor closer than 35 feet to any two-way driveway. Two-way driveways to parking areas having 10 or more spaces shall not be closer than 50 feet from any other two-way driveway, nor closer than 35 feet from any one-way driveway.

(3) Nonconforming Access Features. Legal access which does not conform with the standards herein are considered nonconforming features and shall be brought into compliance with applicable standards as practical under one of the following situations:

(a) When new access connection permits are requested;

(b) Changes in use, or significant enlargements or improvements that necessitate a new access permit.

(4) Surface Drainage and Storm Sewer System. Drainage facilities shall be provided within the subdivision and to connect the subdivision drainage to drainage ways or storm sewers outside the subdivision. Design of drainage within the subdivision shall take into account the capacity and grade necessary to maintain unrestricted flow from areas draining through the subdivision and to allow extension of the system to serve such areas.

(5) Sanitary Sewers. Sanitary sewers shall be installed to serve the subdivision and to connect the subdivision to existing mains. Design shall take into account the capacity and grade to allow for desirable extension beyond the subdivision. If required sewer facilities will, without further construction, directly serve property outside the subdivision, the following arrangements will be made to equitably distribute the cost:

If the area outside the subdivision to be directly served by the sewer line has reached a state of development to justify sewer installations at the time, the planning commission may recommend to the city council construction as an assessment project with such arrangement with the subdivider as is desirable to assure financing his share of the construction.

(6) Water System. Water lines and fire hydrants serving each building site in the subdivision and connecting the subdivision to city mains shall be installed. The design shall take into account provisions for extension beyond the subdivision and to adequately grid the city system.

(7) Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of a public street and in any special pedestrian way (accessway or multi-use path) within the subdivision per the pedestrian plan map.

(a) In the case of special type industrial districts, the planning commission may approve a subdivision without sidewalks if alternative pedestrian routes are available to the property.

(8) Bicycle Routes. As outlined in the bicycle plan map, the installation of bicycle lanes within streets, separate bicycle paths, or bike route signage shall be required when developing new, or reconstructing existing streets that are designated for such facilities as part of a subdivision. These new bicycle facilities will provide connections to improve the overall bicycle network for the community. Bicycle lanes shall be four to six feet wide and located on both sides of the street, where practical. Refer to MCMC Table 17.50.030 for affected street types.

(9) Street Name Signs. Street name signs shall be installed at all street intersections, the type and color as approved by the city.

(10) Street Lights. Street lights requiring new poles shall be installed with city approved metal poles and lights, and shall be served from an underground source of supply.

(11) Other. The developer shall make necessary arrangements with utility companies or other persons or corporations affected for the installation of underground lines and facilities. Electrical lines and other wires, including, but not limited to, communication, street lighting and cable television, shall be placed underground. [Ord. 469 § 8.030, 1980].


17.50.040 Improvements in partitions.

The same improvements shall be installed to serve each building site of a partition as is required of a subdivision. However, if the planning commission finds that the nature of development in the vicinity of the partition makes installation of some improvements unreasonable, the planning commission may except those improvements. In lieu of excepting an improvement, the planning commission may recommend to the city council that the improvement be installed in the area under special assessment financing or other facility extension policies of the city. [Ord. 469 § 8.040, 1980].


17.50.050 Property line adjustment.

The common property line between adjoining lots or parcels may be adjusted in accordance with this section without partition, platting or replatting procedures in ORS 92.180 and 92.185 or the vacation procedures in Chapter 368 ORS. Once a lot or parcel line has been adjusted, the adjusted line shall be the property line. The city administrator has authority to approve a property line adjustment when all of the requirements of this section have been satisfied.

(1) Application. An application for a property line adjustment shall be filed by the owners of all lots or parcels affected. The application shall contain the following information:

(a) A brief statement explaining the reason for the adjustment.

(b) A vicinity map identifying the lots or parcels to be affected by the property line adjustment.

(c) A plot plan showing the existing property lines of the lots or parcels affected by the adjustment and the location of the proposed adjusted property line. The plot plan shall also show the location of all structures within 20 feet of the proposed adjusted property line.

(2) Limitations and Exceptions.

(a) A property line adjustment is permitted only where an additional unit of land is not created and where the lot or parcel reduced in size by the adjustment will comply with the standards of the applicable zoning district, or where no increase in an existing nonconformity will occur.

(b) A property line adjustment is permitted only where existing or planned structures will not encroach within required setback areas as measured from the adjusted property line.

(c) A property line adjustment is permitted only where the sale or transfer of ownership is made between adjacent owners within the same zoning district.

(d) A property line adjustment is permitted only where any lot changed will not adversely affect access, easements, or drainfields.

(e) A property line adjustment is permitted only where off-street parking of any lot affected by the adjustment will not be reduced below the required number of spaces for the use of the lot.

(3) Preliminary Approval. Within 30 days of receiving a complete application, the city administrator shall notify the applicant in writing whether the proposed property line adjustment conforms with the requirements of this section.

(4) Final Approval and Filing Requirements.

(a) Within six months from the date of preliminary approval, a deed of conveyance conforming to the approved property line adjustment shall be recorded with the Douglas County clerk. A property line adjustment deed shall contain the names of the parties, the description of the adjusted line, references to original recorded documents and signatures of all parties with proper acknowledgments.

(b) Within six months from the date of preliminary approval, the applicant shall submit a survey map which conforms with the requirements of MCMC 17.30.040, except that the final map shall indicate that it is for a property line adjustment which does not create a new lot or parcel. If no map is required, the applicant shall submit proof that the requirements of the tentative approval have been met.

(c) Within 10 days of receiving the complete survey map meeting the requirements of this section and a copy of the recorded deed of conveyance, the city administrator shall indicate final approval by endorsement upon the map, if any, or if no map is required, the city administrator shall advise the applicant in writing that final approval has been granted.

(d) The applicant shall submit the signed survey map and a copy of the recorded deed of conveyance to the Douglas County surveyor, together with any required filing fee. When the map is filed, the county surveyor shall indicate the filing information on the face of the final map.

(e) A property line adjustment shall be effective when the survey map is properly filed by the county surveyor and an instrument reference (e.g., deed instrument or covenant recorded with the county clerk) is noted on the face of the map. If no map is required, then the line adjustment shall be effective when final approval is granted by the city administrator and an instrument (e.g., deed and/or covenant) is recorded with the county clerk.

(5) Exception for Adjustments of Greater Than 10 Acres in Size.

(a) The survey filing requirements of subsection (4) of this section shall not apply to a property line adjustment where the affected lots or parcels contain more than 10 acres before and after the adjustment.

(b) A copy of the recorded deed of conveyance, as required by subsection (4)(a) of this section, shall be submitted to the city administrator for final approval of the property line adjustment. The city administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the final approval. [Ord. 469 § 8.050, 1980].


17.50.060 Requirements of phased development plans.

(1) In the interest of promoting unified access and circulation systems, development sites under the same ownership or consolidated for the purposes of development and comprised of more than one building site shall be reviewed as single properties in relation to the access standards of this title. The number of access points permitted shall be the minimum number necessary to provide reasonable access to these properties, not the maximum available for that frontage. All necessary easements, agreements, and stipulations shall be met. This shall also apply to phased development plans. Necessary street extensions per the future street plan and functional classification maps will be planned for in all phases of development. The owner and all lessees within the affected area are responsible for compliance with the requirements of this title and both shall be cited for any violation.

(2) All access must be internalized using the shared circulation system of the principal development or retail center. Driveways shall be designed to avoid queuing across surrounding parking and driving aisles. [Ord. 469 § 8.060, 1980].


Chapter 17.55 EXCEPTIONS, VARIANCES AND ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

17.55.010    Exceptions in case of a planned development.

17.55.020    Conditions for reduced pavement width.

17.55.030    Conditions for variances to city access management requirements.

17.55.040    Variance application.

17.55.050    Appeal procedure.


17.55.010 Exceptions in case of a planned development.

The standards and requirements of these regulations may be modified by the planning commission in accordance with the planned development regulations of MCMC Title 18. [Ord. 469 § 9.010, 1980].


17.55.020 Conditions for reduced pavement width.

A variance which allows the pavement width on minor streets in residential districts to be reduced to less than 28 feet may be approved by the planning commission under the following conditions:

(1) The street is less than 2,400 feet in length, cannot be extended, and serves local traffic only.

(2) All abutting lots are of sufficient size and shape to provide the additional off-street parking that may be required as a condition of approval.

(3) If the right-of-way is to be reduced accordingly, it shall be of sufficient width to provide space for sidewalks, curbs, drainage and utilities, and the lot sizes within the parcel to be subdivided shall be increased in direct relation to the land area released from the right-of-way requirement.

(4) On-street parking restrictions shall be imposed and additional off-street parking shall be required for each lot through the use of deed restrictions as follows:

(a) Where on-street parking is to be allowed on one side of the street only, each unit shall provide three off-street parking spaces.

(b) Where no on-street parking is to be allowed, each unit shall provide four off-street parking spaces.

(c) In the case of subsection (4)(a) or (b) of this section, all required off-street parking spaces shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from the front property line.

(d) Multiple carports may be used to provide the required off-street parking. An area 12 feet in width and 20 feet in depth shall be considered one space. Each separately enclosed garage shall be considered to provide one parking space for the purpose of this exception.

(e) Parking bays may be dedicated in lieu of the additional off-street parking required by subsection (4)(a) or (b) of this section when the total number of spaces provided is equal to two spaces per unit within the subdivision. This shall not exclude each unit from providing the two off-street spaces per unit otherwise required.

(5) A petition for variance is applied for and approved as provided by MCMC 17.55.040. [Ord. 469 § 9.015, 1980].


17.55.030 Conditions for variances to city access management requirements.

It is recognized that special circumstances occasionally occur which require deviations to the city’s access management standards. In such circumstances, alternatives to the adopted standards must be carefully reviewed and proposed deviations clearly justified. Approval criteria include (1) only in cases where the authorized relaxation of the access management standards shall not be contrary to the public interest and (2) only where conditions exist which are particular to the property and which are not the result of the actions of the applicant shall variances be granted. Applications for variances shall be submitted as an element of the site development plan, shall be reviewed by the planning commission through the public hearing process, and shall be coordinated with the responsible agency for the affected facility. Variance requests shall satisfy the access management variance approval criteria as discussed above. [Ord. 469 § 9.016, 1980].


17.55.040 Variance application.

The planning commission may authorize conditional variances to requirements of this title. Application for a variance shall be made by a petition of the land divider, stating fully the grounds of the application and the facts relied upon by the petitioner. The petition shall be filed with the tentative plan. A variance may be granted only in the event that all of the following circumstances exist:

(1) Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances apply to the property which do not apply generally to other properties in the same vicinity and result from tract size or shape, topography or other circumstances over which the owners of a property, since enactment of this title, have had no control.

(2) The variance is necessary for the preservation of a property right of the applicant substantially the same as owners of other property in the same vicinity possess.

(3) The variance would not be materially detrimental to the purposes of this title, or to property in the same vicinity in which the property is located, or otherwise conflict with the objectives of any city plan or policy.

(4) The variance requested is the minimum variance which would alleviate the hardship.

(5) If the planning commission believes that a variance from requirements of this title may be detrimental to a reasonable development and if the variance cannot be adequately supported by facts on the above circumstances, the planning commission may require the developer to proceed under the requirements for a planned development in MCMC Title 18. [Ord. 469 § 9.020, 1980].


17.55.050 Appeal procedure.

An action or ruling of the planning commission pursuant to this title may be appealed by an affected or aggrieved party to the city council within a specified time period as set forth in MCMC 17.20.100 and 17.30.030. Written notice of appeal shall be filed with the city administrator accompanied by a service charge established by the city of Myrtle Creek’s handbook of fees and charges. If the appeal is not filed within the time period stated, the decision of the planning commission shall be final and binding on all parties concerned. If the appeal is filed, the city council shall receive a report and recommendation thereon from the city administrator and shall hold a public hearing on the appeal. Notice and conduct of hearing shall be in accordance with MCMC 18.190.010. [Ord. 469 § 9.025, 1980].


Title 18 ZONING1

Chapters:

18.05    Introductory Provisions

18.10    Definitions

18.15    Comprehensive Plan

18.20    Zoning Districts and Maps

18.25    R-H Residential Hillside

18.30    R-1 Low Density Residential

18.35    R-2 Medium Density Residential

18.40    R-3 High Density Residential

18.45    C-1 Central Business District

18.50    C-2 Neighborhood Commercial

18.55    C-3 General Commercial

18.60    GM General Manufacturing

18.65    SD/CS Special District – Community Services

18.70    SD/FHA Special District – Flood Hazard Area

18.75    Supplemental District Regulations

18.80    Fences, Walls and Hedges

18.85    Signs

18.90    Off-Street Parking

18.95    Cultural, Historic and Archaeological Resources

18.100    Access and Clear Vision

18.105    Basic Characteristics of a Residential Site

18.110    Standards for Commercial and Industrial Uses

18.115    Manufactured Homes

18.120    Manufactured Home Parks

18.125    Trailer Houses and Trailer Coaches

18.130    Planned Development

18.135    Access Permits and Traffic Studies

18.140    Nonconforming Uses and Structures

18.145    Exceptions to Dimensional Standards

18.150    Site Review Procedures and Standards

18.155    Functional Standards for Public Improvements

18.160    Protection Standards for Natural Features

18.165    Variances

18.170    Conditional Use Permits

18.175    Temporary Use Permits

18.180    Amendments and Zone Changes

18.185    Administration and Enforcement

18.190    Appeals

18.195    Enforcement1

    Legislative history: Ords. 512, 523, 526, 538, 555, 567, 572, 587, 598, 599, 602, 603, 606, 620, 630, 640, 641, 648, 649, 653, 660, 673, 677, 681, 694, 695, 706, 731, 740, 742, 747, 749, 767, 768, 09-004, 09-007, 11-001 and 11-004. 


Chapter 18.05 INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS

Sections:

18.05.010    Short title.

18.05.020    Purpose.

18.05.030    Intent.

18.05.040    Interpretation of regulations.

18.05.050    Provisions of this title declared to be minimum.

18.05.060    Liability.


18.05.010 Short title.

This title shall be known as the zoning ordinance of the city of Myrtle Creek, Oregon. [Ord. 508 § 1.01.0, 1982].


18.05.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this title shall be to augment and implement the Myrtle Creek comprehensive plan, to create uniform districts in which compatible uses are allowed, to prescribe standards for each district, to provide density controls, to provide procedures and standards for granting conditional uses and variance exceptions, to provide off-street parking and loading requirements, and to provide procedures for administration. [Ord. 508 § 1.02.0, 1982].


18.05.030 Intent.

The intent of these regulations is to provide a means of ensuring that land uses of the community are properly situated in relation to one another; and that development is sufficiently open to provide light, air and privacy; that adequate space is available for each type of development; that density of development in each area is held at a level which can be properly serviced by such governmental facilities as the street, fire protection, school, recreation, and utility systems; and, in general, to promote the public health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity and welfare of the people living in the community. [Ord. 508 § 1.03.0, 1982].


18.05.040 Interpretation of regulations.

This section recognizes that there is a tension inherent in the regulatory approach in that minimum standards must be set in the context of typical or anticipated development. It is not intended that such regulations frustrate good design, but some approaches by good designers which are quite atypical and therefore neither envisioned nor expressly regulated by this title’s standards are probably inevitable; therefore, whenever an administrator, judiciary, or other decision-making body is called upon to do so, this title shall be interpreted in conformance with the purposes intended by the city to be served by its enactment. Any interpretation which will result in any loss of protection or increase in intensity beyond that already permitted should only be made when the party interpreting this title has the power to impose additional restrictions or conditions to protect the public and exercises this power. The intent of the standards and supporting definitions is to protect both individual property owners and the general public from adverse impacts which might otherwise be the result of a proposed use. To this end, those called upon to interpret this title shall proceed as follows:

(1) Determine the public purpose(s) of the standard(s) with respect to which an interpretation is required.

(2) Determine the actual impact of a proposed interpretation.

(3) Determine that the proposed interpretation will ensure a just balance between the rights of a land owner and all others who will be affected by that person’s land use proposal. [Ord. 508 § 1.04.0, 1982].


18.05.050 Provisions of this title declared to be minimum.

In their interpretation, the provisions of this title shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. Whenever the requirements of any lawfully adopted rules, regulations and ordinances conflict, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern. [Ord. 508 § 9.13.0, 1982].


18.05.060 Liability.

The granting of approval of any structure or use shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind or nature by the city of Myrtle Creek or any official or employee thereof or of the practicality or safety of any structure or use proposed, and shall create no liability upon or cause of action against such public body, official or employee for any damage that may result thereto. [Ord. 508 § 9.14.0, 1982].


Chapter 18.10 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

18.10.010    Purpose.

18.10.020    Word usage.

18.10.030    Definitions.


18.10.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to define words, terms and phrases contained within this title. [Ord. 508 § 2.01.0, 1982].


18.10.020 Word usage.

In the interpretation of this title, the following words and phrases, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, are used as follows:

(1) Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses and derivative forms.

(2) Words in the singular number shall include the plural number, and words in the plural number shall include the singular number.

(3) The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the feminine gender shall include the masculine.

(4) The word “shall” is mandatory.

(5) The word “may” is permissive.

(6) The word “person” includes individuals, firms, corporations, associations, trusts, and any other similar entities.

(7) The word “employee” shall mean all persons (including proprietors, executives, professional people, production, sales and distribution employees) working on the premises during the largest shift.

(8) The word “premises” shall mean a tract of land with buildings or structures thereon.

(9) The word “city” shall mean the city of Myrtle Creek, Oregon.

(10) The word “county” shall mean Douglas County, Oregon.

(11) The words “council” or “city council” shall mean the common council of the city of Myrtle Creek.

(12) The word “administrator” shall mean the city administrator of the city of Myrtle Creek and/or his designated representative.

(13) The words “planning commission” or “commission” shall mean the city of Myrtle Creek planning commission.

(14) The words “building official” shall mean that person designated, from time to time, by the city council as the official responsible for accepting, reviewing and approving applications for building and occupancy permits and for interpretation and enforcement of ordinances and resolutions related thereto. The term shall also include designated representatives, such as a building inspector.

(15) The words “used” or “occupied” shall include within their meaning “intended,” “arranged,” or “designed” to be used or occupied.

(16) In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this title and any caption, illustration, or table, the text shall control. [Ord. 508 § 2.02.0, 1982].


18.10.030 Definitions.

When used in this title, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:

“Access” means the place, means or way by which pedestrians or vehicles shall have adequate and usable ingress and egress to a property, use or parking space.

“Access connection” means any driveway, street, turnout or other means of providing for the movement of vehicles to or from the public roadway system.

“Access management” means the process of providing and managing access to land development while preserving the regional flow of traffic in terms of safety, capacity, and speed.

“Accessory dwelling” means an interior, attached, or detached residential structure that is used in connection with, or that is accessory to, a single-family dwelling.1 (See MCMC 18.75.070 for supplemental standards for structures accessory to residential uses.)

(1) An accessory dwelling shall be permitted in any residential zone where a single-family dwelling is listed as a use, as long as lot coverage, setback and height standards of the zone can be met.

(2) A maximum of one accessory dwelling is allowed per existing, lawfully established single-family dwelling. The unit may be a detached building, in a portion of a detached accessory building (e.g., above a garage or workshop), or a unit attached or interior to the primary dwelling (e.g., an addition or the conversion of an existing floor).

(3) An attached or interior accessory dwelling shall not exceed a total floor area of 1,000 square feet of floor space, or 75 percent of the floor area of the dwelling to which the accessory dwelling is accessory, whichever is smaller.

However, accessory dwellings that result from the conversion of a level or floor (e.g., basement, attic, or second story) of the primary dwelling may occupy the entire level or floor, even if it exceeds the requisite floor area limitations.

(4) The number of entrances on the street-fronting facade of either the primary or accessory dwelling shall be limited to one entrance.

(5) The materials and design of the accessory dwelling shall be of similar character to the primary dwelling.

(6) An accessory dwelling may receive all utilities via extensions of the same service lines as that of the primary dwelling or may have separate utility services from that of the primary dwelling, including separate meters for water, sewer, electric or gas.

(7) No off-street parking is required for an accessory dwelling.

“Accessory structure” means an auxiliary building or structure or portion of a principal building, the use of which is incidental, appropriate and subordinate in area, extent and purpose to that of the principal building.

“Accessway” means a walkway that provides pedestrian and bicycle passage either between streets or from a street to a building or other destination such as a school, park, or transit stop. Accessways generally include a walkway and additional land on either side of the walkway, often in the form of an easement or right-of-way, to provide clearance and separation between the walkway and adjacent uses. Accessways through parking lots are generally physically separated from adjacent vehicle parking or parallel vehicle traffic by curbs or similar devices and include landscaping, trees, and lighting. Where accessways cross driveways, they are generally raised, paved, or marked in a manner that provides convenient access for pedestrians.

“Aircraft landing field” means an area of land or water used for the landing and take-off of aircraft, and any appurtenant areas which are used for airport buildings or other airport facilities or rights-of-way, together with all buildings and facilities located thereon.

“Alley” means a public or private right-of-way not more than 20 feet in width affording only secondary means of access to abutting property.

“Alteration” means the addition to, removal of or from, or physical modification or repair of any exterior part or portion of a historic landmark.

“Alteration, structural” means to change any of the supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.

“Amendment” means a change in the wording, context, or substances of this title or a change in the district boundaries upon the zoning map.

“Apartment” means a portion of a building which is occupied or which is intended or designed to be occupied as an independent dwelling unit and contains separate housekeeping facilities for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating. As used in this title, “apartment” refers to a secondary and accessory use of a portion of an otherwise nonresidential building although “apartment,” as it is commonly used, may refer to an individual unit within a multifamily dwelling.

“Appeal” means a means for obtaining a review or determination pursuant to the terms of this title as expressly authorized by the provisions of Chapters 18.185, 18.190 and 18.195 MCMC.

“Approving authority” means the person or body given authority to decide applications for administrative actions under the provisions of MCMC 18.185.160 (land use actions). Whenever the approving authority consists of three or more persons, the action taken by such authority may be exercised by a majority of a quorum. Upon failure of a majority to agree, the matter before the authority shall be considered denied.

“Arcade” means an indoor commercial establishment maintaining a variety of electronic and mechanical games for premises use. A nongambling enterprise intended for amusement and entertainment only.

“Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or AH zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. AO is characterized as sheet flow and AH indicates ponding.

“Area of special flood hazard” means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Designation on maps always includes the letter A or V.

“Automobile repair garage” means a use providing for the major repair and maintenance of motor vehicles, and includes any mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, or storage of inoperable motor vehicles that are being restored to operating condition (does not include auto wrecking yard).

“Automobile service station” means a use providing for the retail sale of motor fuels, lubricating oils and vehicle accessories, and includes minor servicing and repair of motor vehicles as an accessory use, but excludes all other sales and services except the sale of minor convenience goods for service station customers as accessory and incidental to the principal operation. Uses permitted at an automobile service station do not include major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, tire recapping, storage of motor vehicles not in operating condition, or other work generating noise, glare, fumes, smoke, or other characteristics to an extent greater than normally found in service stations. An automobile service station is not a repair garage or a body shop.

“Automobile wrecking yard (junkyard)” means an area of land used for the storage, wrecking or sale of two or more inoperable motor vehicles, trailers, or farm equipment, or parts thereof, where such vehicles, trailers, equipment or parts are stored in the open and are not being restored to operating condition, and includes any land used for the commercial salvaging of any other goods, articles or merchandise.

“Awning” means any stationary or folding structure, permanently attached or demountable, used in conjunction with a mobile home or travel trailer for the purpose of providing outdoor shelter from sun and rain, consisting of a roof with supports and not more than one wall or storage cabinet substituting for a wall.

“Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the “100-year flood.” Designation on maps always includes the letter A or V.

“Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

“Bed and breakfast” means an accessory use to be carried on within a structure designed for and occupied as a single-family dwelling in which no more than three sleeping rooms are provided on a daily or weekly period, not to exceed seven consecutive days, for the use of travelers or transients for a charge or fee. Provision of a morning meal is customary as implied by title.

“Below-grade crawlspace” means an enclosed area below the base flood elevation in which the interior grade is not more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade and the height, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation, does not exceed four feet at any point.

“Bicycle facilities” is a general term denoting improvements and provisions made to accommodate or encourage bicycling, including parking facilities and all bikeways.

“Bikeway” means any road, path, or way that is in some manner specifically open to bicycle travel, regardless of whether such facilities are designated for the exclusive use of bicycles or are shared with other transportation modes. The five types of bikeways are:

(1) “Multi-use path” means a paved 10- to 12-foot-wide way that is physically separated from motorized vehicular traffic; typically shared with pedestrians, skaters, and other nonmotorized users. Typically classified as a Class II bikeway.

(2) “Bike lane” means a four- to six-foot-wide portion of the roadway that has been designated by permanent striping and pavement markings for the exclusive use of bicycles. Typically classified as a Class I bikeway.

(3) “Shoulder bikeway” means the paved shoulder of a roadway that is four feet or wider, typically shared with pedestrians in rural areas.

Typically classified as a Class III or Class IIIs bikeway.

(4) “Shared road bikeway” means a travel lane that is shared by bicyclists and motor vehicles. Typically classified as a Class III or Class IIIs bikeway.

(5) “Trail” means an unpaved path that accommodates all-terrain bicycles; typically shared with pedestrians. Typically classified as a Class I bikeway.

“Bluff” means a land form having a slope in excess of 30 percent of any adjacent land including its associated erosion hazard area. The erosion hazard area consists of the area of the bluff and that area defined as a 30 percent slope drawn from the toe of the bluff inland.

“Boarding, lodging, or rooming house” means a building where lodging, with or without meals, for five or more persons but not more than 20 persons is provided for compensation and in which no provision is made for cooking in individual rooms. The terms shall not include homes for the aged, nursing homes or group care homes.

“Buffer yard” means a unit of land, together with a specified type and amount of planting thereon, and any structures which may be required between land uses to eliminate or minimize conflicts between them.

“Building” means a structure having a roof and built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. A mobile home or similar vehicle may only be considered a building if it has been certified as meeting the requirements of the building code as defined herein. Where this title requires or where special authority granted pursuant to this title requires that a use shall be entirely enclosed within a building, this definition shall be qualified by adding “and enclosed on all sides.”

“Building code” means the State of Oregon Structural Specialty Code and Fire and Life Safety Code, the Plumbing Specialty Code, the Mechanical Specialty Code, the Electrical Specialty Code and any additional codes and standards as adopted and administered by the city of Myrtle Creek.

“Building construction area” means the total area of a site affected by development; includes areas of lot coverage, roads, access drives, trails, utility locations, etc.

“Building height” means the vertical distance from the finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the building. (See Chapter 18.145 MCMC for exceptions.)

“Building line” means a line on a lot, generally parallel to a lot line or road right-of-way line, which is located a sufficient distance therefrom to provide minimum yards required by this title. The building line delimits the area in which structures (from four feet above the ground upward) are permitted subject to all applicable provisions of this title.

“Building, principal or main” means a structure in which is conducted the primary use of the lot on which the structure is located.

“Cabana” means a stationary, lightweight structure which may be prefabricated or demountable, with two or more walls, used adjacent to and in conjunction with a mobile home to provide additional living space.

“Caretaker’s residence” means an attached or detached single-family dwelling unit which is accessory to a permitted commercial or industrial use and which is located on the same parcel as the principal use. (See MCMC 18.75.100.)

“Carport” means a stationary structure consisting of a roof with its supports and not more than one wall, or storage cabinet substituting for a wall, and used for sheltering not more than two vehicles.

“Cemetery” means land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes. Does not include crematorium.

“Church” means a building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly assemble for worship, and which is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship.

“Clinic” means single or multiple offices for physicians, surgeons, dentists, chiropractors, osteopaths and other members of the healing arts for the treatment and examination of out-patients, including a dispensary in each building to handle merchandise of a nature customarily prescribed by occupants in connection with their practices.

“Club” or “lodge” means buildings and facilities, privately owned or operated for a social, educational or recreational purpose, to which membership is required for participation, and which are not operated primarily for profit nor to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. A club does not include a public rehabilitation facility of any kind.

“Common open space” means an area within a development designed and intended for the use and enjoyment of all residents of the development or for the use and enjoyment of the public in general.

“Community center or building” means buildings and facilities owned and operated by a governmental agency or nonprofit community organization providing for assembly of persons for cultural, recreational or educational purposes and whose membership is open to all residents of the community.

“Comprehensive plan” means a generalized, coordinated land use map and policy statement of the governing body that interrelates all functional and natural systems and activities relating to the use of lands, including, but not limited to, sewer and water systems, recreational facilities, natural resources, and air and water quality management programs. The comprehensive plan is the public’s conclusions about the development and conservation of the area, adopted by the city council and agreed to by all affected governmental units. It is the only all-inclusive plan for a given geographic area. The plan is the basis for other public implementation actions, such as zoning and subdivision decisions.

“Conditional uses” are those uses which have some special impact or uniqueness such that their effect on the surrounding environment cannot be determined in advance of the use being proposed for a particular location. At that time, a review (pursuant to the permit procedures contained in Chapter 18.170 MCMC) is conducted which determines whether the proposed use should be permitted by weighing public need for, and benefit to be derived from, the use against the locating impact which it may cause.

Condominium. “Property” or “condominiums” means the land, whether leasehold or in fee simple and whether contiguous or noncontiguous, all buildings, improvements and structures thereon, and all easements, rights, and appurtenances belonging thereto, which are submitted according to the provisions of ORS 100.005 to 100.910 and 100.990.

“Contiguous lots” means two or more lots having at least one common boundary line.

“Convenience store” means a retail business which sells groceries and products required on a frequently recurring basis to persons within a residential area. Such uses are commonly highway oriented facilities and usually involve late hours of operation which often generate excessive litter, traffic, noise and other neighborhood concerns.

“Crematorium” means a furnace for cremating; also an establishment containing such a furnace.

“Critical facility” means a facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, or installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste.

“Cross access” means a service drive providing vehicular access between two or more contiguous sites so the driver need not enter the public street system.

“Day care facility” means any institution or establishment, including family day care home, in which are commonly received at one time children under the age of 15 years for the purpose of being given board, care, or training apart from their parents or guardians during a part of the 24 hours of the day, with or without compensation, but not including any (1) facility providing care that is primarily education, unless provided to a preschool child for more than four hours a day; (2) facility providing care that is primarily supervised training in a specific subject, including but not limited to dancing, drama, music, or religion; and (3) a facility providing care that is primarily an incident of group athletic or social activities sponsored by or under the supervision of an organized club or hobby group.

“Density” means the number of dwelling units to be contained within a specified land area as set forth in the comprehensive plan.

“Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard. Also includes the dividing of land for the purpose of development.

“Dividing land” means the process of separating a parcel of land or a lot into a number of lots or parcels by partitioning. The dividing has occurred when an approved plat or map has been filed.

Duplex. See “Dwelling, two-family.”

“Dwelling” means a structure intended for lawful residential purpose and built or placed in accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances, codes and rules, but excluding hotels and motels.

“Dwelling, multiple-family” means a building designed and used for occupancy by three or more families, all living independently of each other, and having separate housekeeping facilities for each family, with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided.

“Dwelling, single-family” means a detached building designed or used exclusively for the occupancy of one family and having housekeeping facilities for only one family (see “Family”).

“Dwelling, two-family (duplex)” means a building designed or used exclusively for the occupancy of two families living independently of each other and having separate housekeeping facilities for each family, and each unit having separate access.

“Dwelling unit” means one or more habitable rooms which are occupied or which are intended or designed to be occupied by one family and its resident domestic employees with housekeeping facilities for sleeping, cooking, and eating.

“Easement” means authorization by a property owner of the use by another for a specified purpose of any designated part of his property.

“Elevated building” means, for insurance purposes, a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.

“Exterior” means any portion of the outside of a structure which can be seen from a public place.

“Family” means an individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, or legal guardianship, living together as one housekeeping unit using one kitchen, and providing meals or lodging to no more than two additional persons (excluding servants); or a group of not more than five unrelated persons (excluding servants) living together as one housekeeping unit using one kitchen.

Fast Food Restaurant. See “Restaurant, fast food.”

“Flag lot” means a lot or parcel which has its main building area not fronting on a public street and that is connected to the street by a strip of land 25 feet or more in width.

“Flood” or “flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry area from (1) the overflow of inland or tidal water; and/or (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.

“Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

“Flood Insurance Study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Boundary/Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation at the base flood.

Floodplain. “Floodplains” may be either riverine or inland depressional area. Riverine floodplains are those areas contiguous with a lake, stream, or streambed whose elevation is greater than the normal waterpool elevation but equal to or lower than the projected 100-year flood elevation. Inland depressional floodplains are floodplains which are low points to which surrounding lands drain.

“Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

“Frontage” means all property on one side of a street between intersecting or interceptive streets, or between a street and a right-of-way, waterway, end of a dead-end street or county boundary, measured along the street line. An intercepting street shall determine the boundary of the frontage on the side of the intercepted street.

“Frontage road” means a public or private drive which generally parallels a public street between the right-of-way and the front building setback line. The frontage road provides access to private properties while separating them from the arterial street.

“Functional classification” means a system used to group public roadways into classes according to their purpose in moving vehicles and providing access.

“Garage (private)” means an accessory building or an accessory portion of the main building designed or intended to be used for the parking and storage of motor vehicles for the tenants or owners of the property and is not open for use by the general public.

“Grade (ground level)” means the average elevation of the finished ground elevation at the center of all walls of a building, except that if a wall is parallel to and within five feet of a sidewalk, the sidewalk elevation opposite the center of the wall shall constitute the ground elevation.

“Hedge” means a dense row of shrubs or low trees forming a fence, boundary or screen. A “sight obscuring hedge” consists of plant material which is 80 percent opaque when viewed horizontally from between two feet and 10 feet above grade and is at least five feet in height. A “solid hedge,” when used to enclose or protect, consists of an impervious row of evergreen or conifer plant materials which is marked by a compactness from the ground upward that restricts entrance or passage.

Height of Building. See “Building height.”

“Home occupation” means any lawful business, profession, occupation, or trade conducted for gain or support entirely within a dwelling unit (or a structure accessory thereto) by its inhabitants only, which use is accessory, incidental, and secondary to the use of the building for dwelling purposes and does not change the essential residential character or appearance of such building. A home occupation is a permitted use when authorized by the provisions of Chapter 18.75 MCMC.

“Horticultural nursery” means property which is used for the commercial growing of fruits, flowers, vegetables or ornamental plants.

“Hospital” means an establishment which provides sleeping and eating facilities to persons receiving medical, obstetrical, or surgical care with nursing service on a continuous basis.

“Hotel” means a building containing six or more rooms used, or intended to be used, for the lodging of persons for compensation.

“Impermeable surface” means a surface which does not absorb water. It consists of all buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks and any areas of concrete or asphalt.

“Intensification of use” means a measure of the magnitude and negative impact of a land use on the environment and neighboring land users.

“Internal access street” means a private road entirely within a mobile home park or a recreational vehicle park, providing vehicular access to each mobile home or recreational vehicle space and accessory structures.

“Joint access” means a driveway connecting two or more contiguous sites to the public street system.

“Kennel” means any lot used for breeding or boarding four or more dogs or cats which are six months old or older.

“Kindergarten” means an activity or facility which provides education and training for preschool children and at which each class session per day is less than four hours in duration.

“Land division” means the lot or parcel of land created through the process of dividing land.

“Landmark” means a site, structure or object recognized by the city to be of particular cultural, aesthetic, educational or historic significance to its citizens and which is listed on the city of Myrtle Creek register of cultural, historic and archaeological resources.

“Livestock” means cattle, sheep, horses, goats, fowl, poultry and any fur-bearing animal bred and maintained for food, profit or other practical purposes within pastures, pens, barns, cages and hutches.

“Loading, off-street” means an off-street space or berth on the same lot with a principal building for the parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise and which has direct access from a public street or alley.

“Lot” means a unit of land that is created by a subdivision of land.

“Lot area” means the total area of a lot measured in a horizontal plane within the lot boundary lines exclusive of public and private roads and easements of access to other property.

“Lot, corner” means a lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets other than an alley. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.

“Lot coverage” means that percentage of the total area of a lot which is covered by the principal and accessory buildings.

“Lot depth” means the perpendicular distance measured from the mid-point of the front lot line to the opposite (usually the rear) lot line. In the case of irregular or triangular lots, the lot depth will be established by a lot depth line which is located by the intersection of the perpendicular from the front lot line mid-point and a line 10 feet in length within the lot, parallel to, and at a maximum distance from, the front lot line mid-point.

Lot Frontage. The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the street. For the purposes of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to a street other than an alley shall be considered frontage and yards shall be provided conforming to front yard requirements.

“Lot, interior” means a lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street.

“Lot line, front” means, for an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street; and for a corner lot, a line separating the narrowest frontage of the lot from the street or, in the case of equal frontages, the line separating the lot from the established frontage. For through lots, the front lot line shall be the line separating the narrowest frontage from the street, or, in the case of equal frontages, the line separating the lot from the established frontage. The established frontage shall be construed to be that side of the structure which faces the street or that side of the lot not having restricted access.

“Lot line, rear” means the lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line.

“Lot line, side” means any lot line or lines not a front or rear lot line. An interior side lot line is a lot line common to more than one lot or to the lot and an alley; an exterior side lot line is a lot line common to the lot and a street other than an alley.

“Lot, through” means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets other than alleys.

“Lot width” means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth.

“Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this title found at MCMC 18.70.180(1)(b).

“Mall” means: (1) a public area often set with shade trees and designed as a promenade or as a pedestrian walk; (2) an open or covered passageway or concourse providing access to a row of stores and closed permanently or at stated times to motor vehicles; or (3) a complex of shops with associated passageways and parking spaces.

“Manufactured home” means a premanufactured structure designed to be transported in one or more sections and capable of being used for human habitation or for business, commercial or office purposes; and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.” For other purposes of this title, the terms “manufactured home” and “mobile home” do not include park trailers, travel trailers, and tent trailers. A manufactured home may be used as a permanent dwelling only when placed in accordance with the standards established for manufactured homes as set forth in Chapter 18.115 MCMC, or if the manufactured home has been certified as meeting standards specified for site built structures contained in the Uniform Building Code.

“Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. (See Chapter 18.120 MCMC for approval procedure and park design standards.)

“Marijuana processor (medical)” means a person who processes marijuana in accordance with Oregon Laws 2015, Chapter 614 for medicinal purposes pursuant to ORS 475.300 through 475.346.

“Marijuana processor (recreational)” means a person who processes marijuana in accordance with Oregon Laws 2015, Chapter 614 for recreational purposes.

“Marijuana producer” means a person who produces marijuana in accordance with Oregon Laws 2015, Chapter 614.

“Marijuana retailer” means a person who sells marijuana items to a consumer in accordance with Oregon Laws 2015, Chapter 614.

“Marijuana wholesaler” means a person who purchases marijuana items for resale to a person other than a consumer in accordance with Oregon Laws 2015, Chapter 614.

“Medical marijuana dispensary” means any facility or operation designed, intended or used for purposes of delivering, dispensing, or transferring marijuana to Oregon Medical Marijuana Registry identification card holders pursuant to ORS 475.300 through 475.346.

“Mobile home space” means that portion of the mobile home park that is for the exclusive use of the occupants of one mobile home and on which the mobile home is affixed. The mobile home space shall be exclusive of space provided for the common use of tenants, such as roadways, guest parking, walkways, areas for recreation purposes and other areas and structures intended for common use.

“Motel” means an individual building or group of attached or detached buildings on the same lot containing guest units, which building or group is used, or intended to be used, primarily for the temporary lodging and accommodation of transient travelers for a charge or fee.

“Motor home (RV)” means a motor vehicle that is reconstructed, permanently altered, or originally designed to provide facilities for human habitation or a vehicle that has a structure permanently attached to it that would be a camper if the structure was not permanently attached to the motor vehicle.

“New construction” means structures for which “start of construction,” as defined herein, commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title.

“Nonconforming use or structure” means any land use or structure legally established prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title or subsequent amendment to it which would not be permitted by or is not in full compliance with the regulations of this title. (See Chapter 18.140 MCMC.)

“Nursery school” or “preschool” means an activity or facility providing care that is primarily educational to five or more preschool children not residents therein for a period or periods not exceeding four hours.

“Nursing home” or “convalescent home” means any home, place, or institution which operates and maintains facilities providing convalescent or nursing care, or both, for a period exceeding 24 hours for two or more ill or infirm patients not related to the nursing home administrator or owner.

“Occupancy” means the purpose for which a building, or part thereof, is used or intended to be used.

“Occupancy, change of” means a change in the character of occupancies or use of any building. For the purposes of this title, a change in the building code occupancy classification shall be considered a change in the character of use.

“Open space” means natural areas of undisturbed vegetation or areas replanted with vegetation after construction; lawns and garden plots for cultivation by residents; recreational areas designed for specific, active recreational uses such as tot lots, tennis courts, ball fields, and similar uses; and/or greenways. Physical structures may be allowed only as minor, incidental accessories to the open space use.

“Owner” means the person who is owner of record of real property as shown on the latest tax roll or deed records of Douglas County, or a person who is purchasing a parcel of property under recorded contract.

“Parcel” means a unit of land that is created by a partitioning of land.

“Parking area or parking structure (public)” means a structure or an open area, other than a public street or an alley, designed or used for the temporary parking of vehicles and available for public use, whether free, for compensation, or as an accommodation to customers or clients. 



“Parking space, off-street” means space for the temporary parking of a vehicle which has access from but is located off any public right-of-way and which is adequate in size for the parking of a standard sized automotive vehicle in accordance with the design standards contained in this title. (Includes room to get out on either side of the vehicle and adequate maneuvering room.)

Party. The following persons or entities only, who file a timely statement or request for hearing as provided by general provisions of this title, are hereby defined as a “party”:

(1) The applicant and all owners or contract purchasers of record, as shown in the files of the Douglas County assessor’s office, of the property which is the subject of the application.

(2) All property owners of record, as provided in subsection (1) of this definition, within 150 feet of the property which is the subject of the application.

(3) Any affected unit of local government or state or federal agency which has entered into an agreement with the city to coordinate planning efforts and to receive notices of land use actions.

(4) Any other person or entity, whether or not a timely statement or request is made, may be recognized at the hearing if the person or entity is found by the presiding officer to be specially, personally, or adversely affected or aggrieved in the subject matter.

“Patron area” means an area within a retail store or business or manufacturing facility which is open to, and available for, customer use.

“Pedestrian facilities” is a general term denoting improvements and provisions made to accommodate or encourage walking, including walkways, accessways, and crosswalks.

“Personal service” means a business which is neither the practice of a profession nor dealing primarily with the sale of products as stock in trade on the premises.

“Pharmacy” means a dispensary for physicians, surgeons, dentists, chiropractors, osteopaths, and other members of the healing arts to handle merchandise primarily of a nature customarily prescribed.

“Planned development” means a self-contained development for which subdivision and zoning controls are applied to the project as a whole rather than to individual lots; often contains a mixture of housing types and densities or a combination of compatible uses or uses made compatible by buffer yards or other means; and which contains a percent of gross area devoted to open space; or, in other words, a development which is planned as a single unit which allows for design flexibility from traditional siting regulations. A planned development can have the characteristics of any one of the following types or a combination of related characteristics:

(1) Residential Planned Development. A type of self-contained development designed to be used for residential purposes. Densities are calculated for the entire development usually permitting a trade-off between clustering of structures and provision of common open space.

(2) Professional Office Planned Development. A type of self-contained development designed to be used for the location of office space for clinics and other similar uses; planned, developed, managed and otherwise treated as a single unit. Often designed with attached or semi-detached buildings grouped around a landscaped area or mall and having each office face and take access from such pedestrian mall.

(3) Commercial Planned Development. A type of self-contained development designed to be used for the grouping of a variety of retail stores; planned, developed and managed as a single unit. Open areas and various other amenities are included in the design to increase compatibility. The impact, use, size and design of a commercial planned development can range from a small neighborhood convenience center to a large scale regional shopping center.

(4) Industrial Park/Planned Development. A type of self-contained development designed for the grouping of structures used for manufacturing, assembly, processing, storage and other industrial uses; often combined with wholesale offices or management offices. The industrial park is planned, developed, and managed as a single unit and often gives special consideration to off-street loading facilities which access roads and access points used to the maximum extent possible to serve the greatest number of uses. Uses permitted within the park shall conform to the district regulations unless authority is granted to mix certain uses when physical barriers or other additional buffers are provided to minimize impacts and increase compatibility.

“Prefabricated structure” means a structure whose parts are fabricated at a factory so that construction consists mainly of assembling and uniting standardized parts, such as a modular home.

“Premanufactured structure” means a structure manufactured and assembled at a factory and transported (in one or more sections) to the construction site, such as a manufactured or mobile home.

“Processing” means the application of labor and/or machinery to change materials from one form to another.

“Professional office” means an office occupied by persons providing a personal or professional service such as accountant, architect, artist, attorney-at-law, professional engineer, land surveyor, insurance agent, real estate broker, landscape architect, practitioner of the human healing arts or other similar services.

“Projection” means eaves, cornices, platforms, porches, or any type of structure attached to the main building.

“Public building or use” means a building or use operated by a governmental agency such as school, auditorium, meeting hall, library, museum, fire station, park, playground, or community center or a substation for a public utility as defined herein.

“Public hearing” means a legal hearing in accordance with Oregon law which is open to the public; at which testimony is given concerning a specific proposal; for which individual notice is usually given to interested parties in addition to general public notice; and where procedures are followed giving all parties the opportunity to be heard and present their side of the case.

“Public improvement” means any improvement, facility, or service, together with customary improvements and appurtenances thereto, necessary to provide for public needs such as vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems, storm sewers, flood control improvements, water supply and distribution facilities, sanitary sewage disposal and treatment, public utility and energy services.

“Public utility” means any corporation, company, individual, association of individuals or its leases, trustees or receivers, that owns, operates, manages or controls all or any part of any plant or equipment for the conveyance of telegraph or telephone messages with or without wires, for the transmission of common carriers, or for the production, transmission, delivery or furnishing of heat, light, water or power, directly or indirectly to the public.

“Ramada” means a stationary structure consisting of supporting poles and a roof which extends over a mobile home, the principal purpose of which is to protect the mobile home from sun and rain.

“Ravine” means an area constituting a “young valley” which adjoins a perennial or intermittent water course. It includes the bottom lands of the ravine and the ravine side walls to a point where the slope is less than 15 percent. (See the following illustration.)
[IMAGE]


“Ravine buffer” means the area extending 150 feet beyond the top of the ravine wall (see the illustration following the definition of ravine).

“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is (1) built on a single chassis; (2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (3) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

“Recreational vehicle park” means a development designed primarily for transient service on which campsites are established for the parking of recreational vehicles and travel trailers for the purpose of supplying to the public a temporary location for traveling, vacationing or recreating.

“Rehabilitate” means to return a property to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of the property which are significant to its historic, architectural or cultural value.

“Rehabilitation center” means a domiciliary structure housing or intended to house persons for care or treatment for and rehabilitation from alcoholic, drug, criminal or comparable or allied social and personal problems.

“Religious quarters” means a multifamily dwelling or institution maintained and controlled by a religious body containing residential units and group facilities for members of their organization. Often includes a chapel for private use and/or reception/office area.

“Reserve strip” means a strip of land, usually one foot in width, reserved across the end or along the edge of a street or alley and terminating at the boundary of a subdivision, or a strip of land between a dedicated street of less than full width and adjacent acreage. In either case, reserved or held for future street extension or widening.

Residence. See “Dwelling.”

“Residential care facility” means a facility licensed by the Oregon Department of Human Resources which provides residential care, treatment or training for six or more individuals who need not be related, and for staff persons who need not be related to each other or any other resident of the residential facility.

“Residential home” means a facility licensed by the Oregon Department of Human Resources which provides residential care, treatment or training for not more than five individuals who need not be related, and for staff persons who need not be related to each other or any other resident of the residential facility.

“Resolution” means a document adopted by the city council which is administrative in nature, stating policy or executing a law already in effect.

“Rest home” shall mean the same as “Nursing home.”

“Restaurant” means an establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and/or beverages to customers in a ready-to-consume state, and whose principal method of operation includes one or both of the following characteristics: (1) customers, normally provided with an individual menu, are served their foods and beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter at which food and beverages are consumed; and (2) a cafeteria-type operation where food and beverages generally are consumed within the restaurant building.

“Restaurant, fast food” means an establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and/or beverages to customers in a ready-to-consume state for consumption (1) within the restaurant building; (2) within a motor vehicle parked on the premises; or (3) off the premises as carry-out orders, and whose principal method of operation includes the following characteristics: Food and/or beverages are usually in edible containers or in paper, plastic, or other disposable containers.

“Retirement home” means a multifamily dwelling or institution containing individual residential units and group activity facilities that also maintains facilities for rendering board and domiciliary care for compensation to three or more persons who are of the age of 65 or more or who otherwise desire or need domiciliary care.

“Review committee” means the Myrtle Creek historic resource review committee.

“Right-of-way” means a parcel of land which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use. Commonly refers to land which is used for streets, utilities, railroads and other public uses.

“Riparian vegetation” means plant life or total plant cover relating to, or living or located on, the bank of a natural watercourse (as a river).

“Safe and convenient” means routes that are reasonably free from hazards, and provide a reasonably direct route of travel between destinations, considering that the optimum travel distance is generally one-quarter to one-half mile for pedestrians and three miles for bicyclists.

“School” means an institution for learning, whether public, private or parochial, meeting state of Oregon accreditation standards, but excluding trade schools.

“School, trade” means a commercially operated school for vocational and occupational training.

“Screen” means to conceal or cut off from view or to block out, separate, protect, seclude or shield in order to eliminate or minimize conflicts between uses or structures.

“Setback” means the horizontal perpendicular distance from a lot line to the closest part of a building or structure that is subject to a yard requirement. Architectural projections may intrude into a required yard as set forth in Chapter 18.145 MCMC.

“Sign” means any painted or fabricated display for use outdoors, including its structure, consisting of any letter(s), figure, character, mark, point, plane, design, poster, picture, stroke, stripe, line, trademark, reading matter or illuminating device which is constructed, attached, erected, fastened or manufactured in any manner whatsoever to attract the public for recognized purposes to any place, subject, person, firm, corporation, public performance, article, machine or merchandise display. However, the term “sign” shall not include the flag, emblem, or insignia of a nation, government unit, school or religious group, except that such emblems shall conform to illumination standards set forth in this title and such emblems shall not be considered to include display boards or signs describing school, church, or similar actives.

“Sign area” means the entire area within a single, continuous perimeter formed by lines joined at right angles which encloses the extreme limits of such sign face, and which in no case passes through or between any adjacent elements of the same. However, such perimeter shall not include any structural elements, lying outside and below the limits of such sign face, and not forming any integral part of the display.

“Sign, flashing” means a sign where all or part of the lights go on and off, or appear to go on and off intermittently.

“Significant element” means a particular property’s materials and features which are important in defining its historic character. Examples may include a building’s wall, cornice, window sash and frames, roof, rooms, hallways, stairs, and mantels or a site’s walkway, fences and gardens.

“Slopes, steep” means land area where the inclination of the land’s surface from horizontal is greater than 12 percent and is determined from site topographic surveys prepared in accordance with the requirements of this title.

“Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundation or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

“State Building Code” means the combined specialty codes.

“Street” means a right-of-way which provides access to adjacent properties for vehicular and pedestrian traffic, public utilities and other such uses. The term “street” shall include such designations as highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, court, place or other such terms. A right-of-way 20 feet or less in width shall not be recognized as a street (except for an alley).

(1) “Arterial” means a thoroughfare of considerable length primarily for providing through movement to traffic, distributing it to collector streets and principal highways, while providing limited access to adjacent properties. Arterials are designed to handle large volumes of traffic.

(2) Collector. The primary function of a “collector” is to move traffic between arterials, collectors, and local streets, and to provide access to adjacent uses. Major collectors help define neighborhoods and land use patterns. Minor collectors move local traffic between minor collectors, major collectors and/or arterial streets. Property access onto minor collectors is typically allowed, while access is often limited along major collectors. Collector roads form barriers between neighborhoods and are designed for higher speeds and traffic volumes than are minor streets.

(3) Major (Necessary) Local. A “necessary local” performs the function of a regular local street, except that it provides an essential connection between otherwise isolated areas. Transit and heavy truck traffic are generally discouraged from using local streets.

(4) Local. The primary function of “local” streets is to provide access to private dwellings and businesses. Local streets should focus on serving passenger cars, bicycles, and pedestrians. Generally, local streets have two lanes and can include parking on one or both sides. Short roads that are less than 2,400 feet in length and cannot be extended may have a narrower travel way with parking on one side.

(5) “Cul-de-sac” means a short, dead-end minor street with vehicular turnaround at or near the dead end.

(6) Dead-End Street. Similar to cul-de-sac, usually longer, which may be extended, and with no turnaround at the present dead end. (New dead-end streets require temporary turnarounds.)

(7) “Alley” means a narrow street through a block primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties abutting on another street.

“Structure” means that which is built or constructed. An edifice or building of any kind or any piece or work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some manner and which requires location on the ground or which is attached to something having a location on the ground including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. (See “Building.”)

“Stub-out (stub-street, street plug)” means a portion of a street or cross access drive used as an extension to an abutting property that may be developed in the future.

“Subdivide land” means to divide an area or tract of land into four or more lots within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a single unit or contiguous units of land under a single ownership at the beginning of such year.

“Subdivision” means either an act of subdividing land or an area or tract of land subdivided for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development.

“Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 

“Substantial improvement” means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the assessed market value of the structure either:

(1) Before the improvement or repair is started; or

(2) If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.

The term does not, however, include either:

(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

(2) Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places.

“Temporary mobile commercial vendor” means a commercial business operating within a prefabricated structure that is constructed for movement on the public highway. Such a use may locate in any commercial zone so long as (1) the structure has been reviewed by the building department; (2) the structure remains road ready (i.e., chassis, wheels, and trailer tongue attached); (3) the parking requirements of Chapter 18.90 MCMC have been met; and (4) the health department has licensed the vendor for goods and beverage handling. The structure shall be subject to permit renewal every six months if it was not constructed according to State Building Code.

“Temporary sign” means a temporary off-premises business sign as described in MCMC 18.85.040. A temporary sign also includes endorsing candidates or ballot measures, or advertising events of public interest (such as fairs, rodeos, or similar temporary activities); signs may be erected on a property, provided such signs will be removed by the property owner within 15 days following cessation of the activity for which the sign was erected. 

Trailer Park. A term of common usage which is more properly defined as “mobile home park” or “recreational vehicle park,” whichever is applicable.

“Transportation improvement maintenance” means transportation improvements and maintenance uses permitted in any zone, including: normal operation, maintenance, repair, and preservation activities of existing transportation facilities; installation of culverts, pathways, medians, fencing, guardrails, lighting, and similar types of improvements within the existing right-of-way; projects specifically identified as not requiring a land use permit; landscaping as part of a transportation facility; emergency measures necessary for the safety and protection of property; acquisition of right-of-way for public roads, highways, and other transportation improvements; and construction of a street or road as part of an approved subdivision or land partition consistent with the applicable land division ordinance.

“Travel trailer” means a type of trailer that is designed to be used on the highways, is capable of being used for human habitation, is not more than eight feet in width and is six feet or more in height. Includes tent trailer.

“Use” means the purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, let or leased.

“Use, accessory” means a use incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of a lot or building.

“Use, permitted” means a use expressly authorized to locate within a particular zoning district when compliance with all of the regulations applicable in the district is assured.

“Use, principal or main” means the specific primary purpose for which land is used.

Use, Temporary. A “temporary use” is one established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of such time. Such uses do not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent structure. 

“Utility easement” means an easement noted on a subdivision plat or partition plat for the purpose of installing or maintaining public or private utility infrastructure for the provision of water, sewer, storm drains, power, heat or telecommunications to the public. Unless specifically requested by a public or private utility provider, the decision-making authority may not require a utility easement except for a utility easement abutting a street. Utility infrastructure may not be placed within one foot of a survey monument location noted on a subdivision or partition plat. The decision-making authority may not place additional restrictions or conditions on a utility easement granted under these provisions.

“Utility facility” means a communication facility or a facility constructed for a public utility, including but not limited to: facilities for generating power on less than 10 acres; new distribution lines (gas, oil or geothermal) with a right-of-way of 50 feet or less width, or new distribution lines for electric transmission with a right-of-way of 100 feet or less width; water intakes, treatment, pumping and distribution; wastewater treatment; rural fire protection facility; utility lines, accessory facilities or structures not limited to an individual end user and not in a public right-of-way which are necessary for public service (electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable); and equipment for the production, transmission, delivery or conveyance of communications, with or without lines, including towers. These uses may be subject to limitations as specified in the applicable zoning designation. Utility facilities are locationally dependent if they must cross or be located on land to achieve reasonably direct routes or service or to meet unique geographic needs.

“Value” means market value or assessed value of land and/or structures as established by the Douglas County assessor.

“Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this title which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this title. (See Chapters 18.170 and 18.175 MCMC.)

“Vehicle” means any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway and includes vehicles that are propelled or powered by any means. A manufactured or mobile home is a vehicle except when or until permanently placed in compliance with mobile home placement permit and zoning regulations.

“Vicinity map” means a drawing or diagram, drawn to scale, showing the location of a parcel of land in relation to abutting properties, major streets and other known landmarks.

“Walkway” means a hard-surfaced area intended and suitable for pedestrians, including sidewalks and the surfaced portions of accessways.

“Water dependent” means a structure for commerce or industry which cannot exist in any other location and is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operations.

“Yard” means the open space on a lot between the lot line and the building line which is unoccupied and unobstructed by structures from four feet above the ground upward.

“Yard, front” means space extending across the full width of the lot between the front building line and the front lot line.

“Yard, rear” means a yard extending across the full width of the lot between the nearest part of the buildings and the rear lot line. For an irregular or triangular lot, the rear yard shall be measured from the lot depth line established when calculating the lot depth, to the nearest part of the building to the lot depth line.

“Yard, side” means a yard between the front and rear yards measured horizontally and at right angles from the side lot line to the side building line. In the case of a corner lot, the side yard bordering the street shall extend from the front yard to the rear lot line.

“Zone” means a division of the territory of the city established by the city council and designated on the official zoning map and within which certain land use restrictions, regulations and requirements apply under the provisions of this title. [Ord. 830 § 1 (Exh. A), 2020; Ord. 807 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 800 § 2, 2015; Ord. 798 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 795, 2014; amended during 2012 recodification; Ord. 508 § 2.03.0, 1982]. 1

    Consistent with the state definition from ORS 197.312. 


Chapter 18.15 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN

Sections:

18.15.010    Adopted.


18.15.010 Adopted.

The Myrtle Creek comprehensive plan, 1978-2000, prepared by the staff of the city of Myrtle Creek and the Umpqua regional council of governments and including all appendices and maps referenced therein and all of which is attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit “A” is specifically incorporated in its entirety and adopted as the comprehensive plan for the city of Myrtle Creek, Oregon. [Ord. 513, 1982].


Chapter 18.20 ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAPS

Sections:

18.20.010    Establishment of zoning districts.

18.20.020    Special districts.

18.20.030    Official zoning map.

18.20.040    Alterations to zoning map.

18.20.050    Replacement of zoning map.

18.20.060    Interpretation of district boundaries.

18.20.070    Zoning of annexed areas.

18.20.080    Resolution of intent.


18.20.010 Establishment of zoning districts.

The city of Myrtle Creek is hereby divided into the regular and special district classifications (zones) as set forth in MCMC Table 18.20.010. Where the abbreviated designation is used in this title, it has the same meaning as the entire classification. The district regulations of Chapters 18.25 through 18.70 MCMC specify the purpose and intent of the district classifications established by this section.

Table 18.20.010 – District Classifications 

	District Classification Title	Designation

	Regular Districts:	 

	Residential Hillside	R-H

	Low Density Residential	R-1

	Medium Density Residential	R-2

	High Density Residential	R-3

	Central Business District	C-1

	Neighborhood Commercial	C-2

	General Commercial	C-3

	General Manufacturing	GM

	Special Districts:	 

	Community Services	SD/CS

	Flood Hazard Area	SD/FHA

[Ord. 508 § 1.05.0, 1982].


18.20.020 Special districts.

The special districts set forth in MCMC Table 18.20.010 are each an overlay district which may be combined with any portion of any regular district as appropriate to the purpose of the special district. The regulations of a special district may consist of additional sections of this title and additional standards. These shall be supplementary to the regulations of the underlying zone and, as such, uses and structures in a special district shall conform to the regulations of both the special district and the underlying zone. In the event of a conflict in regulations, the more restrictive shall apply unless otherwise specified. [Ord. 508 § 1.05.1, 1982].


18.20.030 Official zoning map.

Zoning districts established by this title are bounded and defined as shown on the official zoning map of the city of Myrtle Creek, which is hereby made a part of this title. The official map shall bear the signature of the mayor, attested by the city recorder and the seal of the city. Such attest shall identify the map as an integral and essential part of this title. The official zoning map and all available records pertaining to the adoption and subsequent amendments or corrections thereto shall be preserved by the city recorder. [Ord. 508 § 1.06.0, 1982].


18.20.040 Alterations to zoning map.

(1) A change in district boundaries and the addition of further district classifications may be made by the amendment procedure set forth in Chapter 18.180 MCMC. Legislative action to correct errors or omissions in the zoning map may be made by ordinance of the city council.

(2) Whenever alterations to the district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the zoning map have been approved by the city council in accordance with the provisions of this title, such alterations shall be entered on the map within 10 days of the effective date of action and shall indicate the ordinance or resolution number and date of change. It shall be the responsibility of the city recorder to keep the official zoning map up-to-date and current. A copy of the map as it existed on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall be retained for reference. [Ord. 508 § 1.06.1, 1982].


18.20.050 Replacement of zoning map.

In the event the zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret due to a number of amendments, the city council may, by resolution, adopt a new map to supersede the old one. A new map may correct errors or omissions in the prior map, but no such corrections shall have the effect of amending the prior map. The new map shall be identified and attested in the manner described in MCMC 18.20.030 accompanied by the following statement:

This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced) as part of Ordinance No. 508 of the city of Myrtle Creek.

[Ord. 508 § 1.06.2, 1982].


18.20.060 Interpretation of district boundaries.

Where an uncertainty exists as to boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply:

(1) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.

(2) Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.

(3) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the city limits shall be construed as following such city limits.

(4) Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be the centerline of the railroad right-of-way.

(5) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines.

(6) Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map.

(7) Where physical or natural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map or other circumstances not covered by subsections (1) through (6) of this section, the planning commission shall interpret the district boundaries.

(8) When a line divides property which is in single ownership at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this title, the city council may permit, as a special exception, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to extend 50 feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot. [Ord. 508 § 1.06.3, 1982].


18.20.070 Zoning of annexed areas.

The district classification(s) of zone(s) which implement the land use designation set forth in the Myrtle Creek comprehensive plan future land use and urban growth area map shall be applied to areas hereafter annexed to the city. The procedures set forth in MCMC 18.20.040 shall apply to said zoning map amendment and the ordinance which annexes the area shall specify the district classification(s) in which the properties involved shall be placed. [Ord. 508 § 1.07.0, 1982].


18.20.080 Resolution of intent.

To supplement, or otherwise coordinate, procedure affecting an annexation and the zoning of annexed areas where the council determines that the public health, safety, welfare and convenience will best be served by a proposed annexation, or any portion thereof, the council may indicate its general approval in principle by the adoption of a “resolution of intent to annex” which specifies the zone in which the properties involved shall be placed, and, in doing so, shall utilize the same procedures set forth for a “resolution of intent to change zone” in MCMC 18.180.060 through 18.180.080. [Ord. 508 § 1.07.1, 1982].


Chapter 18.25 R-H RESIDENTIAL HILLSIDE

Sections:

18.25.010    Purpose.

18.25.020    Intent.

18.25.030    Objective.

18.25.040    Designation of slope hazard area.

18.25.050    Permitted uses and structures.

18.25.060    Conditional uses and structures.

18.25.070    Dimensional standards.

18.25.080    Density factor.

18.25.090    Site capacity calculation.

18.25.100    Development standards and review criteria.


18.25.010 Purpose.

To serve as a low density residential district which is similar to the purpose and intent of the R-1 district but where it is recognized that densities should vary according to location and topography. [Ord. 508 § 3.01.0, 1982].


18.25.020 Intent.

The intent of the residential hillside district is to maintain and enhance the visual and physical identify of the hills as well as native geologic conditions and to identify areas of potential natural hazards due to soil conditions and/or slope. [Ord. 508 § 3.01.1, 1982].


18.25.030 Objective.

The approach set forth in the residential hillside district regulations takes a larger than lot-by-lot perspective in regulating environmental degradation. The objective is to permit maximum development while, at the same time, protecting resources by requiring a site capacity rather than a lot capacity analysis of developmental constraints. The site capacity calculation uses the open space ratio as a standard to ensure protection of the natural environment in a dependable and consistent fashion. In addition, developmental limits are specified on a resource-by-resource basis. For example, no disturbance of a very unstable or rare resource is permitted, whereas some level of disturbance of a less sensitive feature may be allowed. In summation, the residential hillside district regulations endeavor to:

(1) Provide site and design standards intended to minimize impacts in hazardous areas;

(2) Provide review procedures intended to preserve the environmental quality of the area; and

(3) Encourage clustered development and a variety of housing types to better utilize lands with topographic constraints. [Ord. 508 § 3.01.2, 1982].


18.25.040 Designation of slope hazard area.

(1) Properties classified as residential hillside by the provisions of this title are recognized as containing areas where slope may be a development factor. The soil series survey and the topography information compiled for the natural features element of the comprehensive plan (support document) and records of known steep slopes are the basis for establishing the R-H district boundaries. Because the general mapping and studies prepared for the comprehensive plan are not intended for development purposes, detailed information for individual parcels or ownerships shall be submitted with each application for development.

(2) The city engineer is hereby designated to review all applications for development in the R-H district to identify the slope hazard and to determine the acreage of land with development constraints to implement the site capacity calculation of MCMC 18.25.090. The city engineer shall have the authority to require a site investigation report (as described in MCMC 18.150.040) to be submitted with an application when, in his professional judgment, the site contains areas of potential hazard likely to be affected by the proposed development, except that a site investigation report is specifically required for all building sites containing areas of greater than 25 percent slope or identified mass movement hazard areas.

(3) The initial review of an application may provide information calling for an adjustment of the R-H district boundaries for an individual parcel. Property which is zoned R-H, but where slope does not appear to be a development factor, may be corrected legislatively to R-1 (as provided by MCMC 18.20.040(1)) if all of the following circumstances exist:

(a) All slopes within the building construction site are less than 12 percent;

(b) The natural development constraints listed in Step 2 of MCMC 18.25.090 total less than six percent of the site area; and

(c) The property is contiguous to an R-1 district or consists of five or more contiguous acres. [Ord. 508 § 3.01.3, 1982].


18.25.050 Permitted uses and structures.

The following uses and structures and similar uses and structures are permitted outright upon site review approval:

(1) Dwelling, single-family.

(2) Residential home.

(3) All uses and structures customarily accessory to permitted uses subject to the “limitations and exceptions” set forth in Chapter 18.75 MCMC. [Ord. 508 § 3.01.4, 1982].


18.25.060 Conditional uses and structures.

The following uses and structures and similar uses and structures may be permitted as a conditional use subject to the procedures of Chapter 18.170 MCMC, whereupon, (1) a conditional use permit may be granted when the criteria for approval are met or can be met by observance of conditions; or (2) a conditional use permit may be denied if the findings of fact conclude that the permit criteria cannot be met:

(1) Child day care facilities (see MCMC 18.75.050).

(2) Church.

(3) Community building.

(4) Duplex.

(5) Home instruction classes (see MCMC 18.75.060).

(6) Planned development/residential (subject to the approval criteria set forth in Chapter 18.130 MCMC).

(7) Preschool/kindergarten/nursery school. [Ord. 508 § 3.01.5, 1982].


18.25.070 Dimensional standards.

(1) Lot Requirements.

(a) In the residential hillside district the minimum lot size shall be 10,000 square feet except that a minimum lot size of 6,000 square feet shall be allowed for parcels meeting circumstances of MCMC 18.25.040(3)(a) and (b).

(b) The width of the lot at the building line shall be not less than 60 feet.

(c) The depth of the lot shall be not less than 90 feet.

(d) The maximum lot coverage shall be 40 percent.

(2) Yard Requirements (See Chapter 18.145 MCMC for Exceptions).

(a) The minimum front yard shall be 20 feet.

(b) The minimum side yard shall be 10 feet, except the minimum side yard shall be 20 feet where the side yard abuts a street.

(c) The minimum rear yard shall be 10 feet.

(3) Building Height (see Chapter 18.145 MCMC for “Exceptions”).

(a) Except as provided by subsection (3)(b) of this section, no main building shall exceed a height of 35 feet and no accessory building shall exceed a height of one story or 20 feet.

(b) Where building height will obscure vision from the main floor of other buildings in the area, the maximum building height shall be 20 feet or as otherwise designated by the planning commission in order to retain visibility from windows facing the front yard for a minimum of 45 degrees in each direction. The provisions of this subsection do not apply to the relationship between buildings that are all part of a single development. [Ord. 508 § 3.01.6, 1982].


18.25.080 Density factor.

Elsewhere in this title, residential land use intensity is expressed as “gross density” or “number of units per gross acre”; the regulations of the R-H district are based on the use of a “density factor” which applies only to buildable land and results in a determination of site capacity. Therefore, the intensity of use of any piece of buildable land within the district is held constant, although the gross density may vary depending on the characteristics of the individual property. The reason for this is that the “gross density” cannot accommodate variations in the physical site. The “density factor” is a direct measurement of the impact of a given development on road systems, community facilities, schools and services. The residential hillside “maximum density factor” is 6.88. This is comparable to a “gross density” of four units per acre when calculated for a site which is free of development constraints. [Ord. 508 § 3.01.7, 1982].


18.25.090 Site capacity calculation.

The site capacity for any proposed development is equal to the net buildable area of the site multiplied by the density factor. The site capacity calculation provides the mechanism for subtracting from the base site area all portions of a site inappropriate for development to determine the extent to which a site may be utilized, given its unique physical characteristics. The following four steps are utilized to calculate the site capacity. The totals of Steps 1, 2 and 3 are used to determine the net buildable site area, which is then multiplied by the density factor to determine the number of units permitted (Step 4).

(1) Step 1 – Base Site Area. Certain portions of a tract may not be useable for the activity proposed for the site. These are subtracted from the total acreage involved to determine base site area, as follows:

	(a) Gross site as determined by actual on-site survey:	______ Acres

	(b) Subtract land constituting roads and land within existing or required right-of-way for streets and rights-of-way or easements for utilities. (Does not include any future internal roads or utility easements which may ultimately serve the proposed development.)	______ Acres

	(c) Subtract land which is not contiguous, or is cut off in such a way that common use is hindered or that the land is unavailable for building purposes or is land that will be calculated separately. (Such as a separate parcel which does not abut, adjoin or share common boundaries with the rest of the development or land which is cut off from the main parcel by road, railroad, existing land uses or major stream.)	______ Acres

	(d) Subtract land which is proposed for nonresidential use:	______ Acres

	(e) Equals base site area:	______ Acres

(2) Step 2 – Protected Land. All land area consisting of the natural development constraints listed below shall be mapped and measured. The total acreage of each feature shall be multiplied by its respective open space ratio to determine the amount of land to be kept in open space in order to protect the feature. The sum total of all land on the site to be protected from development equals total protected land, and is calculated as shown in MCMC Table 18.25.090.

 

Table 18.25.090 – Development Constraints Calculation 

	COLUMN A	COLUMN B	COLUMN C	COLUMN D

	Natural Development Constraints*	Open Space Ratio	Area of Land Involved**	Protected Land* (Acres in Column C x Open Space Ratio)

	Steep Slopes (12% to 15%)	0.60	______________	______________

	Steep Slopes (16% to 25%)	0.70	______________	______________

	Steep Slopes (16% to 25%) plus poor soil suitability***	0.80	______________	______________

	Steep Slopes (greater than 25%)	0.95	______________	______________

	Very Poor Soil Suitability***	0.95	______________	______________

	Erosion Hazard Area	1.00	______________	______________

	Bluffs	1.00	______________	______________

	Ravines	0.98	______________	______________

	Ravine Buffers	0.80	______________	______________

	Ponds or Watercourse	1.00	______________	______________

	Drainage Ways	0.50	______________	______________

	TOTAL LAND IN NATURAL FEATURE:	_______ Acres

	TOTAL PROTECTED LAND:	_______ Acres

*    MCMC 18.160.010 through 18.160.070 detail how development of such natural features shall be restricted. See Chapter 18.10 MCMC for a definition of each feature.

**    This total is the actual acres involved. Do not use the land area more than once. For example, if there is land containing two of the features listed, the feature with the greater open space ratio shall be used.

***    See “Soils Information Chart,” Myrtle Creek Comprehensive Plan; Support Document, Natural Features Element.

(3) Step 3 – Recreation/Common Land. When it is required by this title or MCMC Title 17 or as a condition of approval that a certain amount of land be set aside for park purposes, recreation areas, common land or other open space purposes, this calculation provides guidelines to ensure that a minimum amount of land not restricted by the two previous steps is retained for such purposes. (Exception: Residential sites which would be required to provide less than one-quarter acre by the following calculation are exempted from Step 3 and sum total of zero shall be used.) Total recreation land is calculated as follows:

	Take:	Base Site Area (Step 1 Total):	______ Acres

	Subtract:	Total acres of land in natural feature (Step 2, Column C)	– ______ Acres

	Equals:	TOTAL UNRESTRICTED LAND:	= ______ Acres

	Multiply:	Above total by 6%:	x 6%

	Equals:	Total recreation land required:	= ______ Acres

	Subtract:	Any protected land which will be improved for recreation	– ______ Acres

	Equals:	TOTAL RECREATION LAND REMAINING TO BE PROVIDED:	= ______ Acres

(4) Step 4 – Determination of Site Capacity. Individual site capacity is determined by calculating the net buildable site area. The number of dwelling units permitted is determined by multiplying the density factor by the net buildable site area. The calculations are as follows:

	Take:	Total protected land (Step 2, Column D):	______ Acres

	Add:	Total recreation land remaining to be provided (Step 3 Total)	+ ______ Acres

	Equals:	TOTAL OPEN SPACE:	= ______ Acres

	Take:	Base Site Area (Step 1 Total):	______ Acres

	Multiply:	By Open Space Ratio (40%):	x 40%

	Equals:	MINIMUM REQUIRED OPEN SPACE:	= ______ Acres

	Take:	Base Site Area (Step 1 Total):	______ Acres

	Subtract:	Total Open Space (from above), or	 

	 	Minimum Required Open Space (whichever is greater):	– ______ Acres

	Equals:	NET BUILDABLE SITE AREA:	= ______ Acres

	Take:	Net Buildable Site Area (above):	______ Acres

	Multiply:	By maximum density factor (6.88):	x 6.88

	Equals:	NUMBER OF DWELLING UNITS PERMITTED: (Do not round off; use lower whole number)	= ______ Units

[Ord. 508 § 3.01.8, 1982].


18.25.100 Development standards and review criteria.

Notwithstanding the conditional use provisions of MCMC 18.25.060, any project involving the erection of a new building or structure, the enlargement in height or ground coverage, or the intensification of use of any building or structure shall:

(1) Be reviewed in accordance with the site review criteria contained in Chapter 18.150 MCMC. The planning commission or city administrator or the city administrator’s designee shall conduct the site review for all such development in the R-H district except for projects involving the construction of a single-family/detached dwelling located on a single parcel, which will be reviewed by the planning department;

(2) Provide improvements and comply with the design standards applicable to the type of development proposed as set forth in Chapter 18.150 MCMC; and

(3) Provide off-street parking as set forth in Chapter 18.90 MCMC. [Ord. 508 § 3.01.9, 1982].


Chapter 18.30 R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL

Sections:

18.30.010    Purpose.

18.30.020    Intent.

18.30.030    Permitted uses and structures.

18.30.040    Conditional uses and structures.

18.30.050    Dimensional standards.

18.30.060    Density.

18.30.070    Development standards and review criteria.


18.30.010 Purpose.

To serve as a low density residential area protected as to residential quality, value, identity, environmental privacy, light, air and outdoor space. [Ord. 508 § 3.02.0, 1982].


18.30.020 Intent.

The intent of the R-1 district is to promote the development of high quality residential neighborhoods, to encourage the construction of higher income housing by retaining areas for large lot development, and to assure that development will conform to systems and facilities which support the residential quality of the area. [Ord. 508 § 3.02.1, 1982].


18.30.030 Permitted uses and structures.

The following uses and structures are permitted outright:

(1) Dwelling, single-family.

(2) Residential home.

(3) All uses and structures customarily accessory to permitted uses subject to the “limitations and exceptions” set forth in Chapter 18.75 MCMC.

(4) Child care and other home occupations (see MCMC 18.75.040). [Ord. 508 § 3.02.2, 1982].


18.30.040 Conditional uses and structures.

The following uses and structures and similar uses and structures are permitted as a conditional use subject to the procedures of Chapter 18.170 MCMC, whereupon, (1) a conditional use permit may be granted when the criteria for approval are met or can be met by observance of conditions; or (2) a conditional use permit may be denied if the findings of fact conclude that the permit criteria cannot be met:

(1) Child day care facilities (see MCMC 18.75.050).

(2) Community building.

(3) Church.

(4) Duplex.

(5) Golf course or driving range.

(6) Home instruction classes (see MCMC 18.75.060).

(7) Planned development/residential subject to the approval criteria set forth in Chapter 18.130 MCMC.

(8) Preschool/kindergarten/nursery school. [Ord. 508 § 3.02.3, 1982].


18.30.050 Dimensional standards.

(1) Lot Requirements.

(a) The minimum lot size shall be 6,000 square feet.

(b) The width of the lot at the building line shall be not less than 60 feet.

(c) The depth of the lot shall be not less than 90 feet.

(d) The maximum lot coverage shall be 40 percent.

(2) Yard Requirements (See Chapter 18.145 MCMC for Exceptions).

(a) The minimum front yard shall be 20 feet.

(b) The minimum side yard shall be 10 feet, except the minimum side yard shall be 20 feet where the side yard abuts a street.

(c) The minimum rear yard shall be 10 feet.

(3) Building Height (See Chapter 18.145 MCMC for Exceptions). In residential districts, no main building shall exceed a height of 35 feet and no accessory building shall exceed a height of one story or 20 feet. [Ord. 508 § 3.02.4, 1982].


18.30.060 Density.

The residential density shall be a maximum of five units per gross acre but in no case less than 5,500 square feet per unit (net). [Ord. 508 § 3.02.5, 1982].


18.30.070 Development standards and review criteria.

Notwithstanding the conditional use provisions of MCMC 18.30.040, any project involving the erection of a new building or structure, the enlargement in height or ground coverage, or the intensification of use of any building or structure shall:

(1) Be reviewed in accordance with the site review criteria contained in Chapter 18.150 MCMC. The planning department shall conduct the site review for permitted uses that meet all ordinance requirements, whereas the planning commission or city administrator or the city administrator’s designee shall conduct the site review for conditional uses, variances and other similar procedures as stipulated in the applicable regulations; and

(2) Provide improvements and comply with the design standards applicable to the type of development proposed as set forth in Chapter 18.150 MCMC; and

(3) Provide off-street parking as set forth in Chapter 18.90 MCMC. [Ord. 508 § 3.02.6, 1982].


Chapter 18.35 R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL

Sections:

18.35.010    Purpose.

18.35.020    Intent.

18.35.030    Permitted uses and structures.

18.35.040    Conditional uses and structures.

18.35.050    Dimensional standards.

18.35.060    Density.

18.35.070    Development standards and review criteria.


18.35.010 Purpose.

To serve as a medium density residential area providing a transition from traditional single-family residential neighborhoods to higher density multiple-family residential development. [Ord. 508 § 3.03.0, 1982].


18.35.020 Intent.

The intent of the R-2 district is to promote the development of high quality residential neighborhoods composed of a variety of housing types and price ranges commensurate with the needs and economic means of the community. [Ord. 508 § 3.03.1, 1982].


18.35.030 Permitted uses and structures.

The following uses and structures are permitted outright:

(1) Apartments (as a secondary use; defined in Chapter 18.10 MCMC).

(2) Boarding, lodging, rooming house.

(3) Child care and other home occupations; see MCMC 18.75.040.

(4) Duplex.

(5) Dwelling, multiple-family.

(6) Dwelling, single-family.

(7) Mobile home park subject to the conditions, limitations, construction and dimensional standards specified in Chapter 18.120 MCMC.

(8) Residential home.

(9) Retirement home.

(10) All uses and structures customarily accessory to permitted uses subject to the “limitations and exceptions” set forth in Chapter 18.75 MCMC. [Ord. 508 § 3.03.2, 1982].


18.35.040 Conditional uses and structures.

The following uses and structures and similar uses and structures are permitted as a conditional use subject to the procedures of Chapter 18.170 MCMC, whereupon, (1) a conditional use permit may be granted when the criteria for approval are met or can be met by observance of conditions; or (2) a conditional use permit may be denied if the findings of fact conclude that the permit criteria cannot be met:

(1) Child day care facilities (see MCMC 18.75.050).

(2) Church.

(3) Community building.

(4) Golf course and driving range.

(5) Home instruction classes (see MCMC 18.75.060).

(6) Nursing home/rest home/convalescent home.

(7) Planned development/residential subject to the approval criteria set forth in Chapter 18.130 MCMC.

(8) Preschool/nursery school/kindergarten.

(9) Religious quarters. [Ord. 508 § 3.03.3, 1982].


18.35.050 Dimensional standards.

(1) Lot Requirements.

(a) The minimum lot size shall be 6,000 square feet.

(b) The width of the lot at the building line shall be not less than 60 feet.

(c) The depth of the lot shall be not less than 90 feet.

(d) The maximum lot coverage shall be 40 percent.

(2) Yard Requirements (See Chapter 18.145 MCMC for Exceptions).

(a) The minimum front yard shall be 20 feet.

(b) The minimum side yard shall be 10 feet, except the minimum side yard shall be 20 feet where the side yard abuts a street.

(c) The minimum rear yard shall be 20 feet.

(3) Building Height (See Chapter 18.145 MCMC for Exceptions). In residential districts, no main building shall exceed a height of 35 feet and no accessory building shall exceed a height of one story or 20 feet. [Ord. 508 § 3.03.4, 1982].


18.35.060 Density.

The residential density shall be a maximum of 10 units per gross acre but in no case less than 3,000 square feet per unit. [Ord. 508 § 3.03.5, 1982].


18.35.070 Development standards and review criteria.

Notwithstanding the conditional use provisions of MCMC 18.35.040, any project involving the erection of a new building or structure, the enlargement in height or ground coverage, or the intensification of use of any building or structure shall:

(1) Be reviewed in accordance with the site review criteria contained in Chapter 18.150 MCMC. The planning department shall conduct the site review for permitted uses that meet all ordinance requirements, whereas the planning commission or city administrator or the city administrator’s designee shall conduct the site review for conditional uses, variances and other similar procedures as stipulated in the applicable regulations; and

(2) Provide improvements and comply with the design standards applicable to the type of development proposed as set forth in Chapter 18.150 MCMC; and

(3) Provide off-street parking as set forth in Chapter 18.90 MCMC. [Ord. 508 § 3.03.6, 1982].


Chapter 18.40 R-3 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL

Sections:

18.40.010    Purpose.

18.40.020    Intent.

18.40.030    Permitted uses and structures.

18.40.040    Conditional uses and structures.

18.40.050    Dimensional standards.

18.40.060    Density.

18.40.070    Development standards and review criteria.


18.40.010 Purpose.

To serve as a high density, general residential district allowing a large variety of housing types together with certain nonresidential uses that are without conflict. [Ord. 508 § 3.04.0, 1982].


18.40.020 Intent.

The intent of the R-3 district is to provide adequate amounts of high density residential development within appropriate areas of the presently developed city and to provide for the location of professional service activities which, in accordance with the comprehensive plan, are considered compatible with high density residential areas. [Ord. 508 § 3.04.1, 1982].


18.40.030 Permitted uses and structures.

The following uses and structures are permitted outright:

(1) Apartments (as a secondary use as defined in Chapter 18.10 MCMC).

(2) Boarding, lodging, rooming house.

(3) Child care and other home occupations (see MCMC 18.75.040).

(4) Child day care facilities (see MCMC 18.75.050).

(5) Duplex.

(6) Dwelling, multiple-family.

(7) Dwelling, single-family.

(8) Nursing home/rest home/convalescent home.

(9) Preschool/nursery school/kindergarten.

(10) Religious quarters.

(11) Residential home.

(12) Retirement home.

(13) All uses and structures customarily accessory to permitted uses subject to the “limitations and exceptions” as set forth in Chapter 18.75 MCMC. [Ord. 508 § 3.04.2, 1982].


18.40.040 Conditional uses and structures.

The following uses and structures and similar uses and structures are permitted as a conditional use subject to the procedures of Chapter 18.170 MCMC, whereupon, (1) a conditional use permit may be granted when the criteria for approval are met or can be met by observance of conditions; or (2) a conditional use permit may be denied if the findings of fact conclude that the permit criteria cannot be met:

(1) Audiovisual or recording studio.

(2) Beauty or barber shop.

(3) Bed and breakfast.

(4) Bicycle sales and repair shop.

(5) Church.

(6) Community building.

(7) Locksmith.

(8) Mailing/addressing service without fleet vehicle storage.

(9) Mobile home park subject to the approval criteria set forth in Chapter 18.120 MCMC.

(10) Philanthropic or eleemosynary institution.

(11) Planned development/professional office subject to the approval criteria set forth in Chapter 18.130 MCMC.

(12) Planned development/residential subject to the approval criteria set forth in Chapter 18.130 MCMC.

(13) Professional offices.

(14) Schools, business and trade (which are similar to uses permitted outright or conditionally, and which are conducted wholly within an enclosed building).

(15) Stenographic service/notary public.

(16) Studio (including music, dancing, art, crafts, health or photography).

(17) Telephone answering service.

(18) Other similar uses and structures. [Ord. 508 § 3.04.3, 1982].


18.40.050 Dimensional standards.

(1) Lot Requirements.

(a) The minimum lot size shall be 6,000 square feet.

(b) The width of the lot at the building line shall be not less than 60 feet.

(c) The depth of the lot shall be not less than 90 feet.

(d) The maximum lot coverage shall be 50 percent.

(2) Yard Requirements (See Chapter 18.145 MCMC for Exceptions).

(a) The minimum front yard shall be 20 feet.

(b) The minimum side yard shall be 10 feet for one-story buildings and 15 feet for two-story buildings, except the minimum side yard shall be 20 feet where the side yard abuts a street.

(c) The minimum rear yard shall be 25 feet. The planning commission, in conducting the site review, may specify lesser rear yards for nonresidential uses.

(3) Building Height (See Chapter 18.145 MCMC for Exceptions). In residential districts, no main building shall exceed a height of 35 feet and no accessory building shall exceed a height of one story or 20 feet; provided, however, that accessory structures approved through the conditional use permit provisions may be built to a height of 24 feet. [Ord. 508 § 3.04.4, 1982].


18.40.060 Density.

The residential density shall be a maximum of 25 units per gross acre but in no case less than 1,300 square feet per unit (net). [Ord. 508 § 3.04.5, 1982].


18.40.070 Development standards and review criteria.

Notwithstanding the conditional use provisions of MCMC 18.40.040, any project involving the erection of a new building or structure, the enlargement in height or ground coverage, or the intensification of use of any building or structure shall:

(1) Be reviewed in accordance with the site review criteria contained in Chapter 18.150 MCMC. The planning department shall conduct the site review for permitted uses that meet all ordinance requirements, whereas the planning commission or city administrator or the city administrator’s designee shall conduct the site review for conditional uses, variances and other similar procedures as stipulated in the applicable regulations; and

(2) Provide improvements and comply with the design standards applicable to the type of development proposed as set forth in Chapter 18.150 MCMC; and

(3) Provide off-street parking as set forth in Chapter 18.90 MCMC. [Ord. 508 § 3.04.6, 1982].


Chapter 18.45 C-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT

Sections:

18.45.010    Purpose.

18.45.020    Intent.

18.45.030    Permitted uses and structures.

18.45.040    Conditional uses and structures.

18.45.050    Dimensional standards.

18.45.060    Development standards and review criteria.


18.45.010 Purpose.

To serve as the primary retail and service center for residents of the city and adjacent areas by providing for the location of the greatest variety of retail stores or businesses. [Ord. 508 § 3.10.0, 1982].


18.45.020 Intent.

To maintain the central business district as the principal retail area within the city by protecting the location from conflicting land uses; to promote increased retail sales activity by encouraging revitalization through rehabilitation; and to encourage the development of additional parking and the formation of special parking districts. [Ord. 508 § 3.10.1, 1982]. 


18.45.030 Permitted uses and structures.

The following uses and structures and similar uses and structures are permitted outright, provided the use is conducted wholly within an enclosed building (other than parking areas) and there is no noise, odors, smoke, vibration or other deleterious influences detectable beyond the property line:

(1) Retail Sales.

(a) Agricultural supply store.

(b) Appliance sales and service (household and small appliance).

(c) Automobile supply and parts store.

(d) Bakery, provided the principal operation is for retail sales on the premises.

(e) Bicycle sales and repair shop.

(f) Book, stationery and business supply store.

(g) Clothing store.

(h) Contractors’ sales and repair shop (such as plumbing, heating, electrical and glass).

(i) Convenience store or market.

(j) Department, variety, dry goods or notions store.

(k) Florist.

(l) Food and drug store, meat market (retail).

(m) Furniture store.

(n) Garden supply, nursery or greenhouse, provided the principal operation is for retail sales on the premises (no outside storage or display permitted).

(o) Hardware and building supply (no outside storage or display permitted).

(p) Interior decorating shop (such as floor covering, wallpaper and drapery sales).

(q) Jewelry or gift store.

(r) Musical instrument, record or tape sales.

(s) Pet store, including supplies and grooming.

(t) Secondhand goods store/pawn shop (no outside storage or display permitted).

(u) Shoe store or shoe repair.

(v) Sign shop (painting and sales).

(w) Sporting equipment sales.

(x) Toy or hobby sales.

(y) Wholesale office and showroom with merchandise on the premises limited to small parts and samples.

(z) Marijuana-related land uses as defined within MCMC 18.10.030 and as regulated within MCMC 18.75.130.

(2) Services and Trades.

(a) Audio-visual or recording studio.

(b) Bank or savings and loan.

(c) Beauty or barber shop.

(d) Bonding company, detective agency.

(e) Dressmaking, millinery or tailor shop.

(f) Dry cleaning establishment (retail) containing less than 3,000 square feet of processing area and excluding those using highly volatile or combustible material or using high pressure steam tanks or boilers.

(g) Laundromat or dry cleaning (self-service).

(h) Locksmith.

(i) Mailing or addressing service (without fleet vehicle storage).

(j) Photocopy or blueprinting service.

(k) Professional offices.

(l) Stenographic service, notary public.

(m) Taxi dispatch center.

(n) Telephone answering service.

(3) Institutional and Instructional.

(a) Child day care facilities (see MCMC 18.75.050).

(b) Church, subject to the dimensional standards of the R-2 district.

(c) Museum.

(d) Preschool/kindergarten/nursery school.

(e) Residential care facility.

(f) Schools, business or trade (which are similar to permitted uses).

(g) Studio (including music, dance, art, crafts, health or photography).

(4) Amusement and Recreation.

(a) Indoor amusement enterprise (including arcade, pool hall, bowling alley, skating rink, etc.).

(b) Recreation club/health spa.

(c) Restaurant, cafe, delicatessen and other sit-down eating establishments as defined in Chapter 18.10 MCMC.

(d) Tavern, cocktail lounge.

(e) Theater, indoor.

(5) Miscellaneous and Accessory Uses.

(a) All accessory uses and structures meeting the “limitations and exceptions” as set forth in Chapter 18.75 MCMC.

(b) Apartments (as a secondary use; defined in Chapter 18.10 MCMC).

(c) Bed and breakfast.

(d) Bus or similar public transportation facility.

(e) Laboratory (medical, dental, experiment, research or testing).

(f) Parking structure or public parking lot.

(g) Printing (including newspaper), publishing or engraving service.

(h) Rubber or metal stamp manufacture, provided the principal operation is for retail sales on the premises.

(i) Single-family dwelling, limited to homes currently listed on the Myrtle Creek historic resources register.

(j) Veterinary office or animal hospital, provided there are no outside runs or pens. [Ord. 807 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 800 § 2, 2015; Ord. 508 § 3.10.2, 1982]. 


18.45.040 Conditional uses and structures.

The following uses and structures and similar uses and structures are permitted as a conditional use subject to the procedures of Chapter 18.170 MCMC, whereupon (1) a conditional use permit may be granted when the criteria for approval are met or can be met by observance of conditions; or (2) a conditional use permit may be denied if the findings of fact conclude that the permit criteria cannot be met. All uses shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building (other than parking, vehicle sales or patron service areas) and there shall be no noise, odor, smoke, vibration or other deleterious influences detectable beyond the property line.

(1) Ambulance/emergency service (and similar uses requiring audible warning devices).

(2) Auditorium, exhibition hall or community building.

(3) Automobile repair garage (wholly enclosed) provided there is no heavy duty truck or heavy equipment repair.

(4) Automobile sales lot (includes sales or rental of boats, recreational vehicles, travel trailers, light duty trucks and similar vehicles, new or used).

(5) Automobile service station (excluding major repair).

(6) Boarding, lodging, rooming house.

(7) Club, lodge or fraternal organization facility.

(8) Drive-up windows and stalls for existing uses (i.e., banks).

(9) Film exchange and other drive-in/drive-up/drive-through drop boxes.

(10) Hotel, motel or motor court.

(11) Mortuary, undertaking and funeral parlor (excluding crematorium).

(12) Philanthropic or eleemosynary institution.

(13) Planned development/commercial or professional office subject to the approval criteria set forth in Chapter 18.130 MCMC.

(14) Restaurant, fast food (as defined in Chapter 18.10 MCMC).

(15) Schools, business or trade, which are similar to uses permitted conditionally.

(16) Taxidermy shop (no outside storage or display permitted).

(17) Upholstery shop/furniture repair (no outside storage permitted).

(18) Other similar uses and structures. [Ord. 508 § 3.10.3, 1982].


18.45.050 Dimensional standards.

(1) Yard Requirements (See Chapter 18.145 MCMC for Exceptions).

(a) The minimum side yard shall be 15 feet where adjoining any residential district.

(b) The minimum rear yard shall be 25 feet where adjoining any residential district.

(c) Buffer yards shall consist of landscaping and improvements in accordance with the standards for commercial and industrial uses contained in Chapter 18.110 MCMC.

(2) Building Height (See Chapter 18.145 MCMC for Exceptions). The height of a building in the C-1 district shall not exceed 50 feet. [Ord. 508 § 3.10.4, 1982]. 


18.45.060 Development standards and review criteria.

Notwithstanding the conditional use provisions of MCMC 18.45.040, any project involving the erection of a new building or structure, the enlargement in height or ground coverage, or the intensification of use of any building or structure shall:

(1) Be reviewed in accordance with the site review criteria contained in Chapter 18.150 MCMC. The planning department shall conduct the site review for permitted uses that meet all ordinance requirements, whereas the planning commission or city administrator or the city administrator’s designee shall conduct the site review for conditional uses, variances and other similar procedures as stipulated in the applicable regulations; and

(2) Provide improvements and comply with the design standards applicable to the type of development proposed as set forth in Chapter 18.150 MCMC; and

(3) Provide off-street parking as set forth in Chapter 18.90 MCMC. [Ord. 508 § 3.10.5, 1982].


Chapter 18.50 C-2 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL

Sections:

18.50.010    Purpose.

18.50.020    Intent.

18.50.030    Permitted uses and structures.

18.50.040    Conditional uses and structures.

18.50.050    Dimensional standards.

18.50.060    Development standards and review criteria.


18.50.010 Purpose.

The neighborhood commercial classification provides for the orderly and attractive development of commercial land uses in close proximity to adjacent residential districts. The zone is also intended to serve local neighborhood needs rather than provide a full commercial area for the entire community and to provide for a desirable mixing of high density residential uses with the limited commercial land uses. The commercial uses allowed in this district are selected for their compatibility with residential uses and ability to meet the frequently recurring needs of the neighborhood. [Ord. 508 § 3.12.0, 1982]. 


18.50.020 Intent.

To provide for the location of appropriate commercial development along arterials which traverse primarily residential neighborhoods and to act as a buffer district by providing for design curtailments intended to minimize potential adverse effects on surrounding residential districts. To preserve this intent and to alleviate existing, and prevent future, inefficient or hazardous situations, adjacent uses will be encouraged to combine accesses and off-street parking areas while uses located at intersections will be encouraged to utilize secondary streets for the location of access drives wherever possible. New development will be encouraged to group in “neighborhood convenience centers.” [Ord. 508 § 3.12.1, 1982].


18.50.030 Permitted uses and structures.

The following uses and structures and similar uses and structures are permitted outright, provided the use is conducted wholly within an enclosed building (other than parking areas) and there is no noise, odors, smoke, vibration or other deleterious influences detectable beyond the property line:

(1) Retail Sales.

(a) Automobile supply and parts store.

(b) Bakery, provided the principal operation is for retail sales on the premises.

(c) Bicycle sales and repair shop.

(d) Book, stationery and business supply store.

(e) Convenience store or market.

(f) Florist.

(g) Food and drug store, meat market (retail).

(h) Interior decorating shop (such as floor covering, wallpaper and drapery sales).

(i) Jewelry or gift store.

(j) Musical instrument, record or tape sales.

(k) Pet store, including supplies and grooming.

(l) Shoe store or shoe repair.

(m) Sporting equipment sales.

(n) Toy or hobby sales.

(o) Wholesale office and showroom with merchandise on the premises limited to small parts and samples.

(p) Marijuana-related land uses as defined within MCMC 18.10.030 and as regulated within MCMC 18.75.130.

(2) Services and Trades.

(a) Audio-visual or recording studio.

(b) Bank or savings and loan.

(c) Beauty or barber shop.

(d) Bonding company, detective agency.

(e) Dressmaking, millinery or tailor shop.

(f) Dry cleaning establishment (retail) containing less than 3,000 square feet of processing area and excluding those using highly volatile or combustible material or using high pressure steam tanks or boilers.

(g) Laundromat or dry cleaning (self-service).

(h) Locksmith.

(i) Mailing or addressing service (without fleet vehicle storage).

(j) Photocopy or blueprinting service.

(k) Professional offices.

(l) Stenographic service, notary public.

(m) Taxi dispatch center.

(n) Telephone answering service.

(3) Institutional and Instructional.

(a) Child day care facilities (see MCMC 18.75.050).

(b) Church, subject to the dimensional standards of the R-2 district.

(c) Preschool/kindergarten/nursery school.

(d) Residential care facility.

(e) Schools, business or trade (which are similar to permitted uses).

(f) Studio (including music, dance, art, crafts, health or photography).

(4) Amusement and Recreation.

(a) Recreation club/health spa.

(b) Restaurant, cafe, delicatessen, and other sit-down eating establishments as defined in Chapter 18.10 MCMC.

(c) Theater, indoor.

(5) Miscellaneous and Accessory Uses.

(a) All accessory uses and structures meeting the “limitations and exceptions” as set forth in Chapter 18.75 MCMC.

(b) Adult care home.

(c) Apartments (as a secondary use; defined in Chapter 18.10 MCMC).

(d) Bed and breakfast.

(e) Laboratory (medical, dental, experiment, research or testing).

(f) Parking structure or public parking lot.

(g) Single-family dwelling, limited to homes currently listed on the Myrtle Creek historic resources register.

(h) Veterinary office or animal hospital, provided there are no outside runs or pens. [Ord. 807 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 800 § 2, 2015; Ord. 508 § 3.12.2, 1982]. 


18.50.040 Conditional uses and structures.

The following uses and structures and similar uses and structures are permitted as a conditional use subject to the procedures of Chapter 18.170 MCMC, whereupon (1) a conditional use permit may be granted when the criteria for approval are met or can be met by observance of conditions; or (2) a conditional use permit may be denied if the findings of fact conclude that the permit criteria cannot be met. All uses shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building, unless excepted (i.e., parking and service areas are excepted) and there shall be no noise, odor, smoke, vibration or other deleterious influences detectable beyond the property line.

(1) Ambulance/emergency service (and similar uses requiring audible warning devices).

(2) Auditorium, exhibition hall or community building.

(3) Automobile repair garage (wholly enclosed), provided there is no heavy duty truck or heavy equipment repair.

(4) Automobile service station (excluding major repair).

(5) Boarding, lodging, rooming house, subject to the dimensional standards of the R-3 district.

(6) Car wash.

(7) Club, lodge or fraternal organization facility.

(8) Drive-up windows and stalls for existing uses (i.e., banks).

(9) Dwelling, multiple-family, or duplex, subject to the dimensional standards of the R-3 district.

(10) Film exchange and other drive-in/drive-up/drive-through drop boxes.

(11) Garden supply/retail nursery (exterior display permitted, provided area is enclosed by fence or screening a minimum of four feet in height).

(12) Golf course or driving range.

(13) Golf, miniature.

(14) Hotel, motel or motor court.

(15) Indoor amusement enterprise (includes arcade, pool hall, bowling alley, skating rink, etc.).

(16) Museum.

(17) Nursing home, rest home or convalescent home.

(18) Philanthropic or eleemosynary institution.

(19) Planned development/commercial or professional office, subject to the approval criteria set forth in Chapter 18.130 MCMC.

(20) Religious quarters, subject to the dimensional standards of the R-3 district.

(21) Restaurant, fast food (as defined in Chapter 18.10 MCMC).

(22) Retirement home, subject to the dimensional standards of the R-3 district.

(23) Schools, business or trade, which are similar to uses permitted conditionally.

(24) Sign shop (painting and sales).

(25) Tavern or cocktail lounge.

(26) Taxidermy shop (no outside storage or display permitted).

(27) Upholstery shop/furniture repair (no outside storage permitted).

(28) Other similar uses and structures. [Ord. 508 § 3.12.3, 1982].


18.50.050 Dimensional standards.

(1) Yard Requirements (See Chapter 18.145 MCMC for Exceptions).

(a) The minimum front yard shall be 10 feet.

(b) Side yards shall have a combined width which totals a minimum of 10 feet, except that a buffer yard with a minimum width of 15 feet shall be required where the side yard adjoins a residential district.

(c) A buffer yard with a minimum depth of 25 feet shall be required where the rear yard adjoins a residential district.

(d) Buffer yards shall consist of landscaping and improvements in accordance with the standards for commercial and industrial uses contained in Chapter 18.110 MCMC.

(2) Building Height (See Chapter 18.145 MCMC for Exceptions). The height of a building in the C-2 district shall not exceed 50 feet.

(3) Minimum Zone Size. Areas proposed for zone change to C-2 shall be contiguous to an existing C-2 district or shall consist of a minimum of three acres. [Ord. 508 § 3.12.4, 1982]. 


18.50.060 Development standards and review criteria.

Notwithstanding the conditional use provisions of MCMC 18.50.040, any project involving the erection of a new building or structure, the enlargement in height or ground coverage, or the intensification of use of any building or structure shall:

(1) Be reviewed in accordance with the site review criteria contained in Chapter 18.150 MCMC. The planning department shall conduct the site review for permitted uses that meet all ordinance requirements, whereas the planning commission or city administrator or the city administrator’s designee shall conduct the site review for conditional uses, variances and other similar procedures as stipulated in the applicable regulations; and

(2) Provide improvements and comply with the design standards applicable to the type of development proposed as set forth in Chapter 18.150 MCMC; and

(3) Provide off-street parking as set forth in Chapter 18.90 MCMC. [Ord. 508 § 3.12.5, 1982].


Chapter 18.55 C-3 GENERAL COMMERCIAL

Sections:

18.55.010    Purpose.

18.55.020    Intent.

18.55.030    Permitted uses and structures.

18.55.040    Conditional uses and structures.

18.55.050    Dimensional standards.

18.55.060    Development standards and review criteria.


18.55.010 Purpose.

To serve as a general commercial zone and to provide for the location of commercial development of a more intense character (heavy commercial). [Ord. 508 § 3.14.0, 1982].


18.55.020 Intent.

To encourage the more extensive commercial development to locate along appropriate sections of South Main Avenue while protecting the overall visual character and appearance of the area. To preserve this intent, manufacturing of products other than that which is clearly incidental to the business conducted on the premises will not be permitted. Outdoor storage areas which are inherent to the operation are permitted; provided, that all storage areas are concealed (screened) from view of neighboring properties and abutting streets (use of plant materials for screening is encouraged). Storage areas considered potentially hazardous shall be enclosed. [Ord. 508 § 3.14.1, 1982]. 


18.55.030 Permitted uses and structures.

The following uses and structures and similar uses and structures are permitted outright, provided there is no noise, odors, smoke, vibration or other deleterious influences detectable beyond the property line.

(1) Retail Sales.

(a) Agricultural supply store.

(b) Appliance (household and small appliance). Appliance sales and service, provided outside storage areas are fenced and screened.

(c) Auction house (excluding livestock and vehicles), provided outside storage areas are fenced and screened (exterior display areas are prohibited).

(d) Automobile sales lots (including sales or rental of boats, recreational vehicles, travel trailers, light duty trucks and similar vehicles, whether new or used).

(e) Automobile supply and parts store.

(f) Bakery, provided the principal operation is for retail sales on the premises.

(g) Bicycle sales and repair shop.

(h) Book, stationery and business supply store.

(i) Clothing store.

(j) Contractors’ sales and repair shop (such as plumbing, heating, electrical and glass, provided outside storage areas are fenced and screened).

(k) Convenience store or market.

(l) Department, variety, dry goods or notions store.

(m) Florist.

(n) Food and drug store, meat market (retail).

(o) Furniture store.

(p) Garden supply, nursery or greenhouse, provided the principal operation is for retail sales on the premises and provided outside storage areas are screened.

(q) Hardware and building supply, provided outside storage areas are fenced and screened.

(r) Interior decorating shop (such as floor covering, wallpaper and drapery sales).

(s) Jewelry or gift store.

(t) Musical instrument, record or tape sales.

(u) Pet store, including supplies and grooming.

(v) Secondhand goods store/pawn shop, provided outside storage areas are fenced and screened (exterior display areas are prohibited).

(w) Shoe store or shoe repair.

(x) Sign shop (painting and sales), provided outside storage areas are fenced and screened.

(y) Sporting equipment sales.

(z) Toy or hobby sales.

(aa) Wholesale office and showroom with merchandise on the premises limited to small parts and samples.

(bb) Marijuana-related land uses as defined within MCMC 18.10.030 and as regulated within MCMC 18.75.130.

(2) Services and Trades.

(a) Ambulance/emergency service.

(b) Audio-visual or recording studio.

(c) Automobile repair garage (provided there is no heavy duty truck or equipment repair and all storage areas are screened).

(d) Automobile service station (excluding major repair).

(e) Bank or savings and loan.

(f) Beauty or barber shop.

(g) Bonding company, detective agency.

(h) Car wash.

(i) Dressmaking, millinery or tailor shop.

(j) Dry cleaning establishment (retail) containing less than 3,000 square feet of processing area and excluding those using highly volatile or combustible material or using high pressure steam tanks or boilers.

(k) Laundromat or dry cleaning (self-service).

(l) Locksmith.

(m) Mailing or addressing service, provided fleet vehicle storage areas are screened.

(n) Parcel delivery service, provided fleet vehicle storage areas are screened.

(o) Photocopy/blueprinting service.

(p) Professional offices.

(q) Stenographic service, notary public.

(r) Taxidermy shop conducted wholly within an enclosed building (no outside storage or display permitted).

(s) Taxi dispatch center.

(t) Telephone answering service.

(u) Upholstery shop or furniture repair, provided outside storage areas are fenced and screened.

(3) Institutional and Instructional. 

(a) Child day care facilities (see MCMC 18.75.050).

(b) Mortuary, undertaking and funeral parlor conducted wholly within an enclosed building (except crematorium).

(c) Museum.

(d) Philanthropic or eleemosynary institution.

(e) Preschool/kindergarten/nursery school.

(f) Residential care facility.

(g) Schools, business or trade (which are similar to permitted uses).

(h) Studio (including music, dance, art, crafts, health or photography).

(4) Amusement and Recreation.

(a) Auditorium, exhibition hall or community building.

(b) Club, lodge or fraternal organization facility.

(c) Golf, miniature.

(d) Indoor amusement enterprise (including arcade, pool hall, bowling alley, skating rink, etc.).

(e) Recreation club/health spa.

(f) Restaurant, cafe, delicatessen, including fast-food restaurant.

(g) Tavern, cocktail lounge.

(h) Theater, indoor.

(5) Miscellaneous and Accessory Uses.

(a) All accessory uses and structures meeting the “limitations and exceptions” as set forth in Chapter 18.75 MCMC.

(b) Apartments (as a secondary use; defined in Chapter 18.10 MCMC).

(c) Bed and breakfast.

(d) Bus or similar public transportation facility.

(e) Hotel, motel or motor court.

(f) Laboratory (medical, dental, experiment, research or testing), provided all outside storage areas are fenced and screened.

(g) Parking structure or public parking lot.

(h) Printing (including newspaper), publishing or engraving service containing less than 5,000 square feet of processing area and conducted wholly within an enclosed building.

(i) Rubber or metal stamp manufacture, provided the principal operation is for retail sales on the premises.

(j) Single-family dwelling, limited to homes currently listed on the Myrtle Creek historic resources register.

(k) Veterinary office or animal hospital, provided there are no outside runs or pens. [Ord. 807 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 800 § 2, 2015; Ord. 508 § 3.14.2, 1982].


18.55.040 Conditional uses and structures.

The following uses and structures and similar uses and structures are permitted as a conditional use subject to the procedures of Chapter 18.170 MCMC, whereupon (1) a conditional use permit may be granted when the criteria for approval are met or can be met by observance of conditions; or (2) a conditional use permit may be denied if the findings of fact conclude that the permit criteria cannot be met.

(1) Automobile tire sales (including tire recapping), provided outside storage areas are fenced and screened. 

(2) Cabinet shop and similar wood products manufacturing, provided the principal operation is for retail sales on the premises and any outside storage is fenced and screened.

(3) Drive-up windows and stalls for existing uses (i.e., banks).

(4) Film exchange and other drive-in/drive-up/drive-through drop boxes.

(5) Horticultural nursery/greenhouse (commercial distributor).

(6) Ice manufacture, warehouse storage and dispensing facility conducted wholly within an enclosed building; and provided, that fleet vehicle storage is screened.

(7) Mobile home sales lot.

(8) Planned development/commercial or professional office subject to the approval criteria set forth in Chapter 18.130 MCMC.

(9) Schools, business or trade, which are similar to uses permitted conditionally.

(10) Theater, outdoor (drive-in).

(11) Storage yard for freight trucks and trailers, provided storage areas are fenced and screened as required by Chapter 18.110 MCMC.

(12) Heavy truck and trailer repair limited to routine maintenance, provided storage of materials is completely enclosed within a structure and truck parking areas are fenced and screened as required by Chapter 18.110 MCMC.

(13) Other similar uses and structures.

(14) Marijuana-related land uses as defined within MCMC 18.10.030 and as regulated within MCMC 18.75.130. [Ord. 807 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 508 § 3.14.3, 1982].


18.55.050 Dimensional standards.

(1) Yard Requirements (See Chapter 18.145 MCMC for Exceptions).

(a) The minimum side yard shall be 15 feet where adjoining any residential district.

(b) The minimum rear yard shall be 25 feet where adjoining any residential district.

(c) Buffer yards shall consist of landscaping and improvements in accordance with the standards for commercial and industrial uses contained in Chapter 18.110 MCMC.

(2) Building Height (See Chapter 18.145 MCMC for Exceptions). The height of a building in the C-3 district shall not exceed 50 feet.

(3) Minimum Zone Size. Areas proposed for zone change to C-3 shall be contiguous to an existing C-3 district or shall consist of a minimum of three acres. [Ord. 508 § 3.14.4, 1982].


18.55.060 Development standards and review criteria.

Notwithstanding the conditional use provisions of MCMC 18.55.040, any project involving the erection of a new building or structure, the enlargement in height or ground coverage, or the intensification of use of any building or structure shall:

(1) Be reviewed in accordance with the site review criteria contained in Chapter 18.150 MCMC. The planning department shall conduct the site review for permitted uses that meet all ordinance requirements, whereas the planning commission or city administrator or the city administrator’s designee shall conduct the site review for conditional uses, variances and other similar procedures as stipulated in the applicable regulations; and

(2) Provide improvements and comply with the design standards applicable to the type of development proposed as set forth in Chapter 18.150 MCMC; and

(3) Provide off-street parking as set forth in Chapter 18.90 MCMC. [Ord. 508 § 3.14.5, 1982].


Chapter 18.60 GM GENERAL MANUFACTURING

Sections:

18.60.010    Purpose.

18.60.020    Intent.

18.60.030    Permitted uses and structures.

18.60.040    Conditional uses and structures.

18.60.050    Dimensional standards.

18.60.060    Development standards and review criteria.


18.60.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the general manufacturing district is to protect land with industrial potential from conflicting land uses and to provide use and design standards intended to preserve the environmental quality. [Ord. 508 § 3.20.0, 1982].


18.60.020 Intent.

To serve as a general manufacturing district intended for the location of nonnoxious industry. Provides for the location of those commercial uses that operate in conjunction with industrial uses and provides for the conditional location of the more intensive industrial uses. To protect the overall visual character of the area, outdoor operations and/or storage areas shall be concealed (screened) from view of abutting arterials or neighboring nonindustrial districts (the use of plant materials for screening shall be encouraged). [Ord. 508 § 3.20.1, 1982].


18.60.030 Permitted uses and structures.

The following uses and structures and similar uses and structures are permitted outright upon site review approval:

(1) Manufacturing.

(a) Assembly, manufacture or repair of small electronic parts and supplies and other similar precision assembly including optical goods, scientific and photographic instruments, medical and dental equipment, small business machines, watches and timing devices.

(b) Assembly, manufacture, repair or storage of articles from the following listed, previously prepared, materials: bone, cellophane, cloth, cord, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastic, precious or semi-precious stone or metal, shell, textiles, wax, wire or yarn.

(c) Compounding, packaging or storing of cosmetics, drugs, perfumes, pharmaceuticals, soap or toiletries, excluding all processing involving refining or rendering of fats or oils.

(d) Dry cleaning processing plant, dyeing or commercial laundry.

(e) Ice manufacture, warehouse storage and dispensing facility.

(f) Mobile home manufacture and repair facility (may include sales lot).

(g) Musical instrument manufacture and assembly plant.

(h) Printing (including newspaper), publishing or engraving, blueprinting and other reproduction processing plant.

(i) Processing, packaging or storing of food or beverage (excluding those involving distillation, fermentation, rendering of fats or oils, or slaughtering).

(j) Rubber or metal stamp manufacture.

(k) Sign manufacturing, painting or repair, including sales.

(l) Tire recapping; auto, truck and heavy equipment.

(m) Wood products manufacture and assembly (including cabinet making, carpentry and furniture manufacturing).

(2) Other Uses.

(a) Ambulance/emergency service.

(b) Auction house.

(c) Automobile service station.

(d) Caretaker’s residence and other accessory uses and structures meeting the “limitations and exceptions” set forth in Chapter 18.75 MCMC.

(e) Contractors’ sales and repair shop such as plumbing, heating, electrical and glass wholesale and retail sales.

(f) Freight depot.

(g) Hardware and building supply (including lumber yard).

(h) Horticultural nursery/greenhouse (commercial distributor).

(i) Laboratory (medical, dental, experiment, research, testing).

(j) Monument sales and manufacture.

(k) Parcel delivery service.

(l) Repair, rental, sales or servicing of machinery, implements and heavy equipment.

(m) Retail sales office or showroom for items manufactured, processed, or compounded on the premises.

(n) Schools, business or trade, involving manufacturing, processing or testing or use of heavy equipment or machinery.

(o) Storage yard for trucks, machinery, implements and equipment.

(p) Taxidermy shop.

(q) Truck or car wash.

(r) Upholstery shop/furniture repair.

(s) Vehicle and heavy equipment repair garage (including diesel truck service facility and automobile/truck painting garage).

(t) Veterinary hospital or kennel; provided, that open runs or pens are located more than 200 feet from nonindustrially zoned property.

(u) Warehouse, including distribution and sales on the premises.

(v) Automobile, truck and heavy equipment parts supply. [Ord. 508 § 3.20.2, 1982].


18.60.040 Conditional uses and structures.

The following uses are permitted as a conditional use subject to the procedures of Chapter 18.170 MCMC, whereupon (1) a conditional use permit may be granted when the criteria for approval are met or can be met by observance of conditions; or (2) a conditional use permit may be denied if the findings of fact conclude that the permit criteria cannot be met:

(1) Bulk storage of flammable or other dangerous materials including fuel distribution facility.

(2) Bus or similar public transportation facility.

(3) Lumber or paper processing plant.

(4) Planned development/industrial park subject to the approval criteria set forth in Chapter 18.130 MCMC.

(5) Production of items sold in agricultural supply stores such as feed and fertilizer.

(6) Rail yards and rail depots.

(7) Sheet metal fabrication.

(8) Other uses and structures which are within the purpose and intent of the general manufacturing district.

(9) Marijuana-related land uses as defined within MCMC 18.10.030 and as regulated within MCMC 18.75.130. [Ord. 807 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 508 § 3.20.3, 1982].


18.60.050 Dimensional standards.

(1) Minimum Zone Size. Areas proposed for zone change to general manufacturing shall be contiguous to an existing general manufacturing district or shall consist of a minimum of 10 acres.

(2) Yard Requirements (See Chapter 18.145 MCMC for Exceptions).

(a) The minimum side yard shall be 25 feet where adjoining any nonindustrial district.

(b) The minimum rear yard shall be 45 feet where adjoining any nonindustrial district.

(c) Buffer yards shall consist of landscaping and improvements in accordance with the standards for commercial and industrial uses contained in Chapter 18.110 MCMC.

(3) Building Height (See Chapter 18.145 MCMC for Exceptions). The height of a building in the general manufacturing district shall not exceed 50 feet. [Ord. 508 § 3.20.4, 1982].


18.60.060 Development standards and review criteria.

Notwithstanding the conditional use provisions of MCMC 18.60.040, any project involving the erection of a new building or structure, the enlargement in height or ground coverage, or the intensification of use of any building or structure shall:

(1) Be reviewed in accordance with the site review criteria contained in Chapter 18.150 MCMC. The planning department shall conduct the site review for permitted uses that meet all ordinance requirements, whereas the planning commission or city administrator or the city administrator’s designee shall conduct the site review for conditional uses, variances and other similar procedures as stipulated in the applicable regulations; and

(2) Provide improvements and comply with the design standards applicable to the type of development proposed as set forth in Chapter 18.150 MCMC; and

(3) Provide off-street parking as set forth in Chapter 18.90 MCMC. [Ord. 508 § 3.20.5, 1982].


Chapter 18.65 SD/CS SPECIAL DISTRICT – COMMUNITY SERVICES

Sections:

18.65.010    Purpose.

18.65.020    Intent.

18.65.030    Permitted uses and structures.

18.65.040    Dimensional standards.

18.65.050    Development standards and review criteria.


18.65.010 Purpose.

To serve as an overlay district for the location of public use land uses and certain other uses which, by reason of their necessity, convenience, character, or effect, may be appropriate in any district when compatibility with surrounding land uses is assured. [Ord. 508 § 3.30.0, 1982].


18.65.020 Intent.

To provide for the location of public uses and facilities; to provide for governing body review prior to the location of uses which may be a significant impact on the community as a whole; and to provide a means for preservation of historic resources. [Ord. 508 § 3.30.1, 1982].


18.65.030 Permitted uses and structures.

Application for the special district/community services zoning classification (zone change) shall be approved prior to the location or development of any of the following uses or structures in accordance with the procedures of Chapter 18.180 MCMC. Recognizing that each of the following is a unique type of development, the planning commission and/or city council may impose conditions on the approval of an application for development as set forth in MCMC 18.150.030 in order to protect the best interests of the surrounding properties or the community as a whole.

(1) Aircraft landing field and associated facilities.

(2) Burial grounds, cemetery or crematorium.

(3) Campgrounds.

(4) Caretaker’s residence and other accessory uses and structures meeting the “limitations and exceptions” set forth in Chapter 18.75 MCMC.

(5) College or university.

(6) Government buildings.

(7) Historic sites of recognized significance to be preserved as open space or for public use.

(8) Hospitals, medical.

(9) Libraries, public.

(10) Parks and playgrounds, public.

(11) Race tracks, arenas, and other outdoor sporting arenas or facilities not otherwise specifically listed in the general district regulations.

(12) Recreational vehicle parks.

(13) Residential home.

(14) Schools; elementary, junior high and senior high; public and parochial.

(15) Swimming pools (public) and other municipally operated recreational facilities.

(16) Utility (public) facility, including generator, substation and power plant, providing no equipment is stored.

(17) Other public service and similar uses which are determined by the planning commission to be in accordance with the purpose and intent of the special district/community services classification. [Ord. 508 § 3.30.2, 1982].


18.65.040 Dimensional standards.

(1) Yard Requirements. The minimum yard requirements and/or buffer yard requirements shall be determined by the planning commission or city administrator during the site review process based on the intent and purpose of the SD/CS district regulations and utilizing the dimensional standards of the underlying district as a guide.

(2) Minimum Zone Size. Areas proposed for zone change to special district/community services shall consist of a minimum of one-half acre.

(3) Lot Requirements.

(a) The minimum lot size shall be 7,500 square feet.

(b) The minimum lot frontage shall be 75 feet.

(c) The maximum lot coverage shall be in accordance with the underlying district regulations.

(4) Building Height. The height of a building shall not exceed 50 feet. [Ord. 508 § 3.30.3, 1982].


18.65.050 Development standards and review criteria.

The designing and planning of any project involving the erection of a new building or structure, the enlargement in height or ground coverage, or the intensification of use of any existing building or structure shall:

(1) Be subject to planning commission or city administrator approval of the site plan in accordance with the site review criteria contained in Chapter 18.150 MCMC and the specific standards for historic site protection contained in MCMC 18.95.010; and

(2) Provide improvements and comply with the design standards applicable to the type of development proposed as set forth in Chapter 18.150 MCMC; and

(3) Provide off-street parking as set forth in Chapter 18.90 MCMC. [Ord. 508 § 3.30.4, 1982].


Chapter 18.70 SD/FHA SPECIAL DISTRICT – FLOOD HAZARD AREA

Sections:

18.70.010    Intent.

18.70.020    Statement of purpose.

18.70.030    Permitted uses and dimensional standards.

18.70.040    Methods of reducing flood losses.

18.70.050    Designation of flood hazard area.

18.70.060    Penalties for noncompliance.

18.70.070    Abrogation and greater restrictions.

18.70.080    Interpretation.

18.70.090    Warning and disclaimer of liability.

18.70.100    Development permit and site review required.

18.70.110    Application for development permit.

18.70.120    Designation of the local administrator.

18.70.130    Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator.

18.70.140    Variance procedure for flood hazard area.

18.70.150    Conditions for variances – Flood hazard area.

18.70.160    Provisions for flood hazards.

18.70.170    General standards.

18.70.180    Specific standards.

18.70.190    Floodways.

18.70.200    Critical facility.


18.70.010 Intent.

To serve as an overlay district intended to provide notification to property owners that they should have their property elevations surveyed for compliance with flood criteria based on the following findings of fact:

(1) The flood hazard areas of the city of Myrtle Creek are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

(2) These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards, which increase flood heights and velocities, and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. [Ord. 508 § 3.40.1, 1982].


18.70.020 Statement of purpose.

To promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:

(1) To protect human life and health;

(2) To minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control projects;

(3) To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

(4) To minimize prolonged business interruptions;

(5) To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

(6) To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;

(7) To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

(8) To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. [Ord. 508 § 3.40.2, 1982].


18.70.030 Permitted uses and dimensional standards.

All uses and structures within the special district/flood hazard area shall conform to the regulations of both the special (overlay) district and the underlying general district. In the event of a conflict in regulations, the more restrictive shall govern. [Ord. 508 § 3.40.3, 1982].


18.70.040 Methods of reducing flood losses.

In order to accomplish its purposes, this district provides methods and provisions for:

(1) Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;

(2) Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

(3) Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protection barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;

(4) Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;

(5) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or may increase flood hazards in other areas; and

(6) Coordinating and supplementing the provisions of the state building code with local land use and development ordinances. [Ord. 508 § 3.40.4, 1982].


18.70.050 Designation of flood hazard area.

This overlay district shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city of Myrtle Creek, as follows:

The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for the County of Douglas,” dated February 17, 2010, with accompanying Flood Insurance Maps, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this title. The Flood Insurance Study is on file at Myrtle Creek City Hall, 207 NW Pleasant Street, Myrtle Creek, Oregon. The best available information for flood hazard area identification as outlined in MCMC 18.70.130(2) shall be the basis for regulation until a new FIRM is issued which incorporates the data utilized under MCMC 18.70.130(2). [Ord. 508 § 3.40.5, 1982].


18.70.060 Penalties for noncompliance.

No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this title and other applicable regulations. [Ord. 508 § 3.40.6, 1982].


18.70.070 Abrogation and greater restrictions.

This title is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this title and another ordinance, state building code, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. [Ord. 508 § 3.40.7, 1982].


18.70.080 Interpretation.

In the interpretation and application of this title, all provisions shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and shall not be deemed to limit or repeal any other powers granted under state statutes and rules including the state building code. [Ord. 508 § 3.40.9, 1982].


18.70.090 Warning and disclaimer of liability.

The degree of flood protection required by this district is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This title does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This title shall not create liability on the part of the city of Myrtle Creek, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this title or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. [Ord. 508 § 3.40.10, 1982].


18.70.100 Development permit and site review required.

A development permit (plan check certificate, building permit or placement permit) shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in MCMC 18.70.050. The permit shall be for all structures, including manufactured homes, and for all development including fill, removal of vegetation along streambanks and other activities as set forth in Chapter 18.10 MCMC (Definitions) under “Development.” A site review in accordance with the procedures pertaining to the underlying general district shall be conducted before construction or development begins. The planned development concept is encouraged within the flood hazard area and may be required as a condition of approval where the imposition of supplemental standards is authorized by this title or MCMC Title 17. [Ord. 508 § 3.41.1, 1982].


18.70.110 Application for development permit.

Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:

(1) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;

(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of floodproofing in any structure;

(3) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in MCMC 18.70.180(2);

(4) Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; and

(5) Description of the extent to which any streambank vegetation is proposed to be removed and steps to be taken to mitigate the impact of any such removal. [Ord. 508 § 3.41.2, 1982].


18.70.120 Designation of the local administrator.

The city administrator of the city of Myrtle Creek is hereby appointed to administer and implement this title by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. [Ord. 508 § 3.41.3, 1982].


18.70.130 Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator.

Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to:

(1) Permit Review.

(a) Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements and conditions of this title have been satisfied;

(b) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required; and

(c) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of MCMC 18.70.190(1) are met.

(2) Use of Other Base Flood Data (In A Zones). When base flood elevation data has not been provided (A Zones) in accordance with MCMC 18.70.050, Designation of flood hazard area, the local administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer MCMC 18.70.180, Specific standards, and MCMC 18.70.190, Floodways.

(3) Information to Be Obtained and Maintained.

(a) Where base flood elevation data is provided through the Flood Insurance Study, FIRM, or required as in subsection (2) of this section, obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basements and below-grade crawlspaces) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement.

(b) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures where base flood elevation data is provided through the Flood Insurance Study, FIRM, or as required in subsection (2) of this section:

(i) Verify and record the actual elevation to which the structure has been floodproofed (in relation to mean sea level); and

(ii) The city shall obtain and maintain the FEMA floodproofing certifications required in MCMC 18.70.110(3).

(c) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this district.

(4) Alteration of Watercourses.

(a) Notify adjacent communities, the Department of Land Conservation and Development and other appropriate state and federal agencies prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.

(b) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.

(5) Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations, where needed, as to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in MCMC 18.70.140. [Ord. 508 § 3.41.5, 1982].


18.70.140 Variance procedure for flood hazard area.

(1) The planning commission shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this title.

(2) The planning commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the city in the enforcement or administration of this title.

(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the city, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision as provided in Chapter 18.190 MCMC.

(4) In passing upon such applications, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this title, and:

(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and

(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and bridges.

(5) Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (4) of this section and the purposes of this title, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this title.

(6) The local floodplain administrator shall maintain the records and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. [Ord. 508 § 3.41.6, 1982]. 


18.70.150 Conditions for variances – Flood hazard area.

(1) Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing MCMC 18.70.140(4)(a) through (k) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

(2) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Statewide Inventory of Historic Properties, without regard to the procedures set forth in this section.

(3) Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:

(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;

(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and

(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

(6) Variances as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program are based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, or economic or financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such, variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare.

(7) Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of floodproofing than watertight or dry floodproofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low damage potential, complies with all other variance criteria except subsection (1) of this section and otherwise complies with MCMC 18.70.170(1) and (2).

(8) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. [Ord. 508 § 3.41.7, 1982].


18.70.160 Provisions for flood hazards.

In areas of flood hazard, the provisions of MCMC 18.70.170 through 18.70.190 shall apply. [Ord. 508 § 3.42.0, 1982].


18.70.170 General standards.

In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:

(1) Anchoring.

(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.

(b) All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (reference FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for additional techniques).

(2) Construction Materials and Methods.

(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

(b) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

(c) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

(3) Utilities.

(a) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;

(b) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and

(c) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding consistent with the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.

(4) Subdivision Proposals.

(a) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;

(b) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;

(c) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and

(d) Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).

(5) Streambank Vegetation Removal. Streambank vegetation within the flood hazard area shall, as much as feasible, be retained to protect the stability of the streambank. Such vegetation may be removed only if it is found that it will have no adverse impact on streambank stability or will be replaced to mitigate the adverse impact.

(6) Review of Building Permits. Where elevation data is not available either through the Flood Insurance Study or from another authoritative source (MCMC 18.70.130(2)), applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate the lowest floor at least two feet above grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates. [Ord. 508 § 3.42.1, 1982]. 


18.70.180 Specific standards.

In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided (Zones A-1-30, AH, AE) as set forth in MCMC 18.70.050, Designation of flood hazard area, or MCMC 18.70.130(2), Use of Other Base Flood Data (in A Zones), the following provisions are required:

(1) Residential Construction.

(a) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation.

(b) Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

(i) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;

(ii) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and

(iii) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters.

(2) Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at or above the level of the base flood elevation, or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:

(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;

(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications, and plans. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in MCMC 18.70.130(3);

(d) Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in subsection (1)(b) of this section; and

(e) Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building constructed to the base flood level will be rated as one foot below that level).

(3) Manufactured Homes.

(a) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the bottom of the longitudinal chassis frame beam shall be at or above the base flood elevation. Electrical crossover connections shall be a minimum of 12 inches above the base flood elevation. Crossover ducts are allowed below BFE, but shall be constructed to prevent flood waters from entering or accumulating within system components.

(b) The manufactured dwelling shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.

(c) Electrical crossover connections shall be a minimum of 12 inches above base flood elevation.

(d) Crossover ducts may be installed below BFE, but must be constructed to prevent flood waters from entering or accumulating within system components.

(4) Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within the floodplain are required to either: 

(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;

(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, be on their wheels or jacking system, be attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or

(c) Meet the requirements of MCMC 18.70.100 (Development permit and site review required) and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes found in subsection (3) of this section.

(5) Below-Grade Crawlspaces. Note: Floodplain insurance premiums are higher for a structure built with a below-grade crawlspace, even if the crawlspace meets the FEMA specifications (see FEMA Technical Bulletin 11-01), than for the same structure built with a crawlspace that has the inside grade of the crawlspace at the same level as the outside grade.

Below-grade crawlspaces are allowed subject to the following standards as found in FEMA Technical Bulletin 11-01, Crawlspace Construction for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas:

(a) The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Hydrostatic loads and the effects of buoyancy can usually be addressed through the required openings stated in subsection (5)(b) of this section. Because of hydrodynamic loads, crawlspace construction is not allowed in areas with flood velocities greater than five feet per second unless the design is reviewed by a qualified design professional, such as a registered architect or professional engineer. Other types of foundations are recommended for these areas.

(b) The crawlspace is an enclosed area below the base flood elevation (BFE) and, as such, must have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry and exit of flood waters. The bottom of each flood vent opening can be no more than one foot above the lowest adjacent exterior grade.

(c) Portions of the building below the BFE must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. This includes not only the foundation walls of the crawlspace used to elevate the building, but also any joists, insulation, or other materials that extend below the BFE. The recommended construction practice is to elevate the bottom of joists and all insulation above the BFE.

(d) Any building utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the BFE or designed so that flood waters cannot enter or accumulate within the system components during flood conditions. Ductwork, in particular, must either be placed above the BFE or sealed from flood waters.

(e) The interior grade of a crawlspace below the BFE must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade.

(f) The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall, must not exceed four feet at any point. The height limitation is the maximum allowable unsupported wall height according to the engineering analyses and building code requirements for flood hazard areas.

(g) There must be an adequate drainage system that removes flood waters from the interior area of the crawlspace. The enclosed area should be drained within a reasonable time after a flood event. The type of drainage system will vary because of the site gradient and other drainage characteristics, such as soil types. Possible options include natural drainage through porous, well-drained soils and drainage systems such as perforated pipes, drainage tiles, or gravel or crushed stone drainage by gravity or mechanical means.

(h) The velocity of flood waters at the site should not exceed five feet per second for any crawlspace. For velocities in excess of five feet per second, other foundation types should be used.

For more detailed information refer to FEMA Technical Bulletin 11-01.

(6) In areas where a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zone AE, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. [Ord. 798 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 508 § 3.42.2, 1982]. 


18.70.190 Floodways.

Located within areas of special flood hazard established in MCMC 18.70.050 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

(1) Except as provided in subsection (3) of this section, prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

(2) If subsection (1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of MCMC 18.70.160, Provisions for flood hazards.

(3) Projects for stream habitat restoration may be permitted in the floodway, provided:

(a) The project qualifies for a Department of the Army, Portland District Regional General Permit for Stream Habitat Restoration (NWP-2007-1023); and

(b) A qualified professional (a registered professional engineer; or staff of NRCS; the county; or fisheries, natural resources, or water resources agencies) has provided a feasibility analysis and certification that the project was designed to keep any rise in 100-year flood levels as close to zero as practically possible given the goals of the project; and

(c) No structures would be impacted by a potential rise in flood elevation; and

(d) An agreement to monitor the project, correct problems, and ensure that flood carrying capacity remains unchanged is included as part of the local approval. [Ord. 798 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 508 § 3.42.3, 1982].


18.70.200 Critical facility.

Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) (100-year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet above the BFE or to the height of the 500-year flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the critical facility should also be protected to the height utilized above. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into flood waters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible. [Ord. 798 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 508 § 3.42.4, 1982]. 


Chapter 18.75 SUPPLEMENTAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS

Sections:

18.75.010    Application of regulations.

18.75.020    Authorization of similar uses.

18.75.030    Accessory uses and structures.

18.75.040    Home occupations.

18.75.050    Day care facilities.

18.75.060    Home instruction classes.

18.75.070    Structures accessory to residential uses.

18.75.080    Agricultural uses.

18.75.090    Manufacturing for retail sale on the premises.

18.75.100    Caretaker’s residence.

18.75.110    Land uses declared to be nuisance.

18.75.120    Garage/yard sales.

18.75.130    Marijuana land uses.


18.75.010 Application of regulations.

The regulations set by this title within Chapters 18.25 through 18.70 MCMC (related to use, yard size, lot area, etc.) apply to specific districts, whereas, the regulations of Chapters 18.75 through 18.90 MCMC apply to all districts, unless otherwise specified. These supplemental regulations specify the standards applicable to authorization of similar uses, accessory uses, fences, signs, off-street parking and loading. [Ord. 508 § 4.01.0, 1982].


18.75.020 Authorization of similar uses.

A use not specifically listed within the district regulations may be permitted in a particular zone if the use is similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than uses authorized in the same zone or district. In determining whether or not a use is similar, it shall be judged that the use is in keeping with the purpose, intent and objective of the particular district; however, in no case shall these regulations be construed to permit a use in a district which is specifically listed in another zone or which is of the same general type as, and is similar to, a use specifically listed in another zone. [Ord. 508 § 4.02.0, 1982].


18.75.030 Accessory uses and structures.

Uses and structures customarily accessory to those uses permitted within the various districts shall be permitted and shall comply with all requirements for the principal use except as modified by the “limitations and exceptions” set forth herein. [Ord. 508 § 4.03.0, 1982].


18.75.040 Home occupations.

A home occupation, as defined in Chapter 18.10 MCMC, shall be a permitted accessory use in all residential districts, provided the conditions of the following subsections are satisfied:

(1) No sign is used other than a residential nameplate not over two square feet in area.

(2) There is no display that will indicate from the exterior that the building is used in whole or in part for any purpose other than a dwelling.

(3) The building retains the characteristics of a residence.

(4) There is no outside storage of materials.

(5) No nonfamily paid employees shall perform work or render services to clients upon the premises.

(6) No dwelling shall be used as a headquarters for the assembly of employees for instruction, for assembly of employees to dispatch for work at other locations, or assembly of employees for other purposes.

(7) All aspects of a home occupation shall be contained and conducted within a completely enclosed building which shall be the same structure as the principal residence or appropriate accessory building.

(8) The aggregate of all space within any building devoted to one or more home occupations shall not exceed 500 square feet in floor area, except such space within or on a lot occupied by a multiple-family dwelling containing three or more units shall not exceed 100 square feet in floor area for any one dwelling unit.

(9) Products made or sold shall be disposed of primarily by delivery from the premises to the homes or places of business of customers.

(10) Customer and client contact shall be primarily by telephone, by mail, or in their homes and places of business, except for those home occupations which, by their very nature, cannot otherwise be conducted except by occasional contact upon the premises.

(11) Child care, as a home occupation, shall be limited to not more than five children under the age of 15 years on the premises at one time. Care provided to six or more children shall be considered a “day care group home” (see MCMC 18.75.050). [Ord. 508 § 4.03.1, 1982]. 


18.75.050 Day care facilities.

“Day care facility,” as defined in Chapter 18.10 MCMC, includes a family day care home and may be considered home occupation when the requirements of MCMC 18.75.040 are met. However, for the purposes of this title, a family day care home exceeds the limitations for a home occupation when care is provided for six or more children at one time and, in such case, shall be referred to as a “day care group home.” “Day care center” refers to a nonresidential facility licensed by the state of Oregon for day care purposes. “Day care group homes” and “day care centers” may be permitted (1) in all residential districts upon issuance of a conditional use permit, and (2) in other districts where specifically listed; provided, that:

(1) A valid state certificate of approval issued by children’s services division is obtained for any day care facility where six or more children who are unrelated to the care giver are in care at any one time.

(2) As a condition of approval, it may be stipulated that a conditional use permit for a day care group home be reviewed annually as follows: prior to the expiration date, the information regarding the requested use will be updated and reviewed by the city administrator. If any substantial changes have occurred resulting in an increased impact on the neighborhood, or if the city has received any justifiable complaints regarding the use, the applicant will be directed to the planning commission for redetermination after an advertised public hearing. Otherwise, the city administrator shall renew the conditional use permit.

(3) An off-street location for temporary parking while transferring children to and from the vehicle is provided along with the off-street parking spaces that may be required.

(4) Outdoor play areas are to be enclosed by a barrier that is a minimum of three feet in height. [Ord. 508 § 4.03.2, 1982].


18.75.060 Home instruction classes.

Home instruction classes which are not permitted outright through the provisions for a home occupation may be permitted conditionally where specified within the district regulations; provided, that:

(1) Instruction in music is limited to no more than two students on the premises at one time.

(2) Instruction in crafts is limited to no more than six students on the premises at one time.

(3) The conditions set forth in MCMC 18.75.040(1) through (9) are satisfied in addition to the permit criteria set forth in Chapter 18.170 MCMC. [Ord. 508 § 4.03.3, 1982].


18.75.070 Structures accessory to residential uses.

Permitted accessory structures to residential uses shall include garages and carports, accessory dwellings, noncommercial workshops, tool, garbage and wood sheds, private tennis courts, noncommercial greenhouses or hothouses, private swimming pools, and other similar accessory structures subject to the following limitations and exceptions:

(1) Setback Exception. An accessory structure separated from the main building by more than 10 feet may be located in the rear and/or side yard, provided the structure, including any architectural projection, is no closer than four feet to a property line except when regulated by MCMC 18.75.080 for pens, cages, stables and barns.

(2) Maximum Size Structure. An accessory structure shall not exceed one story in height (20 feet) and shall not contain more than 1,000 square feet of floor space or cover more than 25 percent of the lot area, whichever is smaller.

(a) Applications for recreational vehicle storage garages and similar accessory uses which exceed the square foot limit shall be processed as a conditional use.

(b) In accordance with the Uniform Building Code, detached accessory structures with a projected roof area of less than 200 square feet are exempt from building permit requirements but remain subject to setback requirements and other provisions of this section.

(c) A “pre-manufactured” structure larger than 250 square feet shall not be permitted as an accessory structure in residential zones unless it has been certified as meeting the same building code standards as a site built structure. A vehicle, including a travel trailer or mobile home, shall not be used as a storage shed, guest house or other accessory structure.

(3) Suburban Lot Exception. One accessory building separated from the main building by more than 10 feet may be located in the front portion of a lot that is one acre or greater in size, provided the structure:

(a) Is constructed within or perpendicularly contiguous to the side yard; however, in no case shall the structure, including architectural projections, be closer than four feet to the property line; and

(b) Be located in the rear and/or side yard of a proposed future lot or parcel as shown in an approved redevelopment plan; and

(c) Will demonstrate, through an approved site plan, that the location of the structure will maintain the characteristics of a residence, and will not substantially obstruct the view of the house to and/or from the street.

(4) Pools to Be Enclosed. Swimming pools over three feet in depth (whether in ground or above ground) shall be securely enclosed by a fence, wall or solid hedge which is a minimum of four and one-half feet in height. All exterior gates shall be provided with self-closing hardware.

(5) Required Yard Area. Pools and courts (including but not limited to aprons, walls, and equipment rooms) shall not protrude into any required side or front yard.

(6) Business Prohibited. Private pools, tennis courts, and similar accessory recreational structures located in residential districts shall not be operated as a business or a private club. Such clubs or facilities are generally a primary use and are specifically regulated. [Ord. 830 § 1 (Exh. A), 2020; Ord. 12-001 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012; Ord. 508 § 4.03.4, 1982].


18.75.080 Agricultural uses.

Notwithstanding provisions provided by the general laws and ordinances of the city of Myrtle Creek in regards to livestock or public nuisance, the following practices are permitted accessory uses, except for those uses associated with “marijuana producers,” as defined within Chapter 18.10 MCMC:

(1) Crops. Gardens, orchards, and crop cultivation, provided no sales area or retail business is operated on the premises in connection therewith except where such commercial use is specifically permitted in accordance with the district regulations.

(2) Livestock. The raising and maintenance of poultry or livestock (excluding swine), provided no sales area or retail business is operated on the premises in connection therewith; and provided further, that all livestock shall be contained by appropriate fencing, and any pens, cages, stables, or barns for maintenance of livestock or poultry or piles of manure, feed and bedding shall be located 25 feet from any street or residential lot line in order to minimize odor and nuisance problems. [Ord. 807 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 508 § 4.03.5, 1982].


18.75.090 Manufacturing for retail sale on the premises.

The custom manufacturing or production of items sold on the premises is permitted as an accessory use in all commercial districts, provided the following conditions are satisfied:

(1) The manufacturing, processing or compounding of products is clearly incidental and secondary to the retail business conducted on the premises.

(2) The manufacturing, processing or compounding of products does not occupy more than 50 percent of the floor area of the building.

(3) The manufacturing, processing or compounding of products is not objectionable to neighboring property due to noise, dust, odor, smoke, vibration or other similar uses.

(4) No outside storage or on-site disposal of equipment, materials or industrial waste is involved. [Ord. 508 § 4.03.6, 1982].


18.75.100 Caretaker’s residence.

One single-family residence for a caretaker, owner, operator, manager or watchman and their immediate family is permitted as an attached or detached dwelling for any commercial or industrial use, kennel, or veterinary clinic, for purposes of security and protection of the principal use. The dimensional standards of the R-1 district shall be applicable to a caretaker’s residence. Other applicable standards shall not differ from those imposed by this title on any other housing unit of the same type. [Ord. 508 § 4.03.7, 1982].


18.75.110 Land uses declared to be nuisance.

The keeping of livestock and other uses permitted by this title shall be subject to the regulations adopted by the city relating to public nuisances, such as those uses creating unnecessary noise or affecting the public health. Upon determination that a nuisance exists, it shall be removed in accordance with the procedures for abatement contained in the Myrtle Creek “nuisance ordinance” or as may otherwise be provided. The following land uses are specifically declared to be a nuisance and potential hazard to the public health and safety:

(1) Junk Vehicles. Pursuant to Chapter 8.10 MCMC, it shall be unlawful to park, store or leave any licensed or unlicensed motor vehicles of any kind for a period of time in excess of 72 hours which are in a rusted, wrecked, junked or partially dismantled or inoperative or abandoned condition, whether attended or not, upon any public or private property unless said vehicle is enclosed within a building or unless it is in connection with a business property operated in the appropriate zoning district.

(2) Vehicles Over Eight Feet in Width. It shall be unlawful to park, store or leave any vehicle, including a mobile home, that is more than eight feet in width (not including mirrors, bunks or clearance lights) on a residential street or lot for more than 24 consecutive hours unless the storage of said vehicle is essential and directly associated with a permit authorized for the transport and placement of said vehicle.

(3) Living in Vehicles. Pursuant to Chapter 18.125 MCMC, it shall be unlawful to use a travel trailer, camper, recreational vehicle or similar vehicle for living or sleeping purposes while parked on public or private property (including public streets) without a “permit for sleeping purposes only,” unless said vehicle is legally parked in a park designed for such purpose. [Ord. 508 § 4.03.8, 1982].


18.75.120 Garage/yard sales.

Garage sales are generally permitted as an accessory use; however, there are times when this privilege is abused by sales that are long-lasting and potentially permanent businesses that should properly locate in a commercial district. Therefore, garage sales as a permitted accessory use shall be regulated as follows:

(1) Definition. “Garage sale” is defined as a temporary sale of recycled household goods conducted in a garage, yard, patio or other accessory area of a residence.

(2) Residential Zones. Garage sales conducted for more than eight consecutive days or more than eight days in one calendar month or more than 60 days in one calendar year at the same address shall be defined as a commercial operation and shall not be permitted in residential zones.

(3) Commercial Zones. Garage sales defined as a commercial operation may be located in commercial zones subject to the district regulations and development standards set forth in this title for the applicable zoning district (such as customer parking and outside storage limitations).

(4) Business License. Garage sales defined as a commercial operation shall be required to pay the city occupational tax (“business license”). [Ord. 508 § 4.03.9, 1982].


18.75.130 Marijuana land uses.

Marijuana land uses, as defined within Chapter 18.10 MCMC, shall be permitted and conditionally permitted in commercial and manufacturing zones and only when specified as follows:

(1) Uses identified with a “P” are permitted within the respective zoning districts, subject to all other applicable standards within this title.

(2) Uses identified with a “CP” are conditionally permitted within the respective zoning districts. These requests shall be subject to the provisions contained within Chapter 18.170 MCMC.

(3) Uses identified with a “NP” are explicitly prohibited within the respective zoning districts.

	Zoning District	C-1	C-2	C-3	GM

	Specific Use	 	 	 	 

	Marijuana Processor	NP	NP	NP	CP[3]

	Marijuana Producer	NP	NP	CP[2]	CP[2]

	Marijuana Retailer	P[1]	P[1]	P[1]	NP

	Marijuana Wholesaler	NP	NP	CP[3]	CP[3]

	Medical Marijuana Dispensary	P[1]	P[1]	P[1]	NP

**Marijuana land uses regulated by this title are not allowed within residential zoning districts

[1] Location shall not be within 1,000 feet of the property of another marijuana dispensary or marijuana retail sale store, school or preschool, 500 feet from any community service zone or 200 feet from any property zoned residential. In addition, any and all medical marijuana dispensaries must be registered with the Oregon Health Authority under ORS 475.314 and comply with all OHA rules. In addition, any and all marijuana retailers must be licensed by OLCC and comply with all OLCC rules.

[2] Location shall not be within 1,000 feet of the property of a school or preschool. If a “greenhouse” style structure is used for the purpose of marijuana production, the structure shall be screened from adjacent properties and public right-of-way in accordance with MCMC 18.110.040(3).

[3] Location shall not be within 1,000 feet of the property of a school or preschool.

All aspects of the operation, with the exception of transporting products, are performed within an enclosed structure.

[Ord. 807 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016].


Chapter 18.80 FENCES, WALLS AND HEDGES

Sections:

18.80.010    Fences, walls and hedges.

18.80.020    Fence height limitation.

18.80.030    Hazardous materials prohibited.


18.80.010 Fences, walls and hedges.

To verify compliance with this title and other ordinances, a “certificate of plan check” is required on fences and walls of a height between 30 and 72 inches, inclusively. Application for such shall be submitted to the city planning and engineering department. There is no fee for a “certificate of plan check.” [Ord. 508 § 4.04.0, 1982].


18.80.020 Fence height limitation.

Notwithstanding the provision for “clear vision areas” set forth in MCMC 18.100.030, the height limitation for fences, walls and hedges shall be as follows:

(1) Front Yard and Exterior Side Yard. A fence, wall, railing, or mature hedge erected, placed, or planted in or along the required front yard or the required exterior side yard shall:

(a) Not exceed a height of 30 inches above the ground level when of solid design. Solid design shall be defined as less than 50 percent open space (such as a solid board fence or brick/stone wall);

(b) Not exceed a height of 48 inches above the ground level when more than 50 percent open space is maintained (such as chain link, decorative iron or picket fences). A picket fence shall be considered of open design when pickets are no more than four inches in width and are separated by a space equal to the width of each picket. Adequate open areas for clear vision shall be maintained for fences allowed under this subsection when the fence is located within eight feet of any adjacent driveway; and

(c) Be allowed exception as set forth in subsection (4) of this section.

(2) Behind Front Yard. A fence, wall, railing, or mature hedge located 20 feet from the front property line or behind the required front yard, whichever is less, shall not exceed a height of six feet or 72 inches above the ground level except as allowed by subsection (4) of this section.

(3) Interior Side Yard or Rear Yard. A fence, wall, railing, or mature hedge erected, placed, or planted in or along the required interior side yard or rear yard shall not exceed a height of six feet or 72 inches above the ground level, except the portion of such fence, wall, railing or mature hedge located 20 feet from the front property line or exterior side property line complies with the height and open space requirements allowed by subsection (1) of this section.

(4) Exceptions.

(a) The height limitations of this section do not apply to fences required by state law to surround and enclose school grounds, public grounds or other public reserve lands; and

(b) The city administrator may authorize, where appropriate, the erection of fences, walls or hedges exceeding the applicable height limitations set forth in subsections (1), (2) and (3) of this section, but not within the “vision clearance area,” to enclose a patio, swimming pool, garden supply, tool compound, or similar living, recreational or storage area or facility, and the fences and hedges enclosing it shall be considered as comprising an accessory use. The erection of fences exceeding 72 inches in height and certain walls are regulated by the building code and may require a building permit. [Ord. 508 § 4.04.1, 1982].


18.80.030 Hazardous materials prohibited.

No fence, wall or hedge shall contain barbed wire, electrical current or charge of electricity, broken glass or similar hazardous materials or devices except where allowed under the following conditions:

(1) Electrically Charged Wire. Livestock may be contained by electrically charged wire, provided the electrically charged fence shall be set back one foot from, and enclosed by, a nonhazardous primary fence or barrier; and provided further, that fences containing electrical current shall be approved amperage and clearly identified by a warning sign. The property owner shall be responsible for observing safe fire protection practices by keeping the area around such electrically charged wire free of weeds and other flammable materials.

(2) Barbed Wire. Livestock may be contained by barbed wire. Fences enclosing industrial storage areas may use barbed wire as long as such wire is located not less than six feet above grade. [Ord. 508 § 4.04.2, 1982].


Chapter 18.85 SIGNS

Sections:

18.85.010    Signs.

18.85.020    Sign content.

18.85.030    District requirements (signs).

18.85.040    Temporary off-premises promotional business signs.

18.85.050    Sign variances.


18.85.010 Signs.

The purpose of the following sections is to add sign requirements to the several zoning districts for the preservation of the character of the area; for the preservation of residential, commercial and industrial potential; for the preservation of the need for healthful, safe and convenient use of all lands; and for the conservation and promulgation of values and resources. [Ord. 795, 2014; Ord. 508 § 4.05.0, 1982].


18.85.020 Sign content.

Signs advertising a business which is not conducted on the premises, or a commodity or service which is not the primary product, sale, or service on the premises, shall not be allowed except as follows:

For the purpose of erecting temporary off-premises business signs as described in MCMC 18.85.040 including, but not limited to, endorsing candidates or ballot measures, or advertising events of public interest (such as fairs, rodeos, or similar temporary activities), signs may be erected on a property, provided such signs will be removed by the property owner within 15 days following cessation of the activity for which the sign was erected. [Ord. 804 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016]. 


18.85.030 District requirements (signs).

All signs, together with all of their supports, braces, guys, and anchors, shall be built, constructed or placed so as to not impede pedestrian, bicycle, or automobile traffic, shall be kept in good repair and maintained in a safe, neat, clean and attractive condition. The sign area permitted by the following subsections shall be measured as defined in Chapter 18.10 MCMC:

(1) Residential Districts.

(a) Signs advertising for home occupations are not permitted.

(b) RH and R-1 Districts. One nonilluminated stationary sign of not more than two square feet pertaining to an activity on a property may be erected at a distance of 10 feet or more inside a lot line except as allowed by subsection (1)(d) of this section.

(c) R-2 and R-3 Districts. One nonilluminated stationary sign of not more than eight square feet pertaining to each activity on a property may be erected at a distance of 10 feet or more inside a lot line except as allowed by subsection (1)(d) of this section.

(d) Exception. Each use or structure permitted in a residential district through the conditional use provisions of this title or through the application of the special district/community services overlay zone may erect one nonilluminated stationary sign of not more than 16 square feet to identify the facility on the premises, provided the sign is a maximum height of three and one-half feet above grade, is erected at a distance of 10 feet or more inside a lot line, and is constructed of natural materials (i.e., wood, rock, etc.).

(2) Commercial and Industrial Districts. Signs shall not create a traffic impediment nor be located in such manner as to conflict with traffic control devices, and illumination shall be restricted to the property on which the sign is located.

(3) Electronically Lighted Signs.

(a) “Paging,” meaning character elements or other information presented for a period of time and then disappearing all at once before the same or new elements are presented, is permitted if the display time of each message is at least three seconds.

(b) “Streaming,” meaning character elements or other information moving smoothly and continuously across the display, is not permitted. [Ord. 795, 2014; Ord. 508 § 4.05.2, 1982].


18.85.040 Temporary off-premises promotional business signs.

Temporary off-premises business signs may be used under the following conditions:

(1) Temporary off-premises sign permits are available for businesses with a physical location within the Myrtle Creek city limits and outside the central business district.

(2) A business is allowed to place no more than three temporary off-premises signs.

(3) A business may apply for a one-time temporary permit, and the maximum total number of days per sign shall not exceed six months in one calendar year.

(4) No property shall be permitted to post more than three temporary signs at any one time.

(5) Off-premises temporary signs shall be allowed only in commercial and industrial districts with owner consent.

(6) The face size of an off-site sign shall not exceed three feet tall or six feet in horizontal length.

(7) Any temporary A-frame, sandwich board or similar sign may be no larger than six square feet for one face or 12 square feet for two or more faces and if placed within a city sidewalk shall be placed in a manner so as not to obstruct pedestrian traffic or impair access to business entrances.

(8) If the sign is not attached to a building, the maximum height of the sign may not exceed four feet.

(9) All temporary signs must be anchored or attached to a permanent structure, in compliance with district setback requirements; may not be placed within any vision clearance area; and shall be maintained in a safe, neat, clean and attractive condition.

(10) Any permit issued under this section is nontransferable, and the sign may only be used for the purpose for which the permit is granted. [Ord. 804 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 508 § 4.05.3, 1982]. 


18.85.050 Sign variances.

Under MCMC 18.165.050, Criteria for granting a sign variance, signs not otherwise permitted shall be processed under MCMC 18.170.010 as a conditional use. [Ord. 804 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016].


Chapter 18.90 OFF-STREET PARKING

Sections:

18.90.010    Parking, storage or use of major recreational equipment.

18.90.020    Off-street parking and loading.

18.90.030    Automobile parking space requirements.

18.90.040    Bicycle and pedestrian circulation.

18.90.050    Exceptions from parking space requirements.

18.90.060    Off-street loading facilities.

18.90.070    Off-street parking design standards.


18.90.010 Parking, storage or use of major recreational equipment.

(1) Permit for Sleeping Purposes. No travel trailer or other recreational vehicle may be used as a place of habitation on public or private property except for temporary purposes when a “permit for sleeping purposes only” has been issued by the city recorder as provided by the general ordinances of the city or when the recreational vehicle is located within a park legally established for such purposes.

(2) Parking. No major recreational equipment shall be parked on any city street for a period exceeding 24 hours during loading or unloading except with a “permit for sleeping purposes only.”

(3) Definition. For purposes of this section, “major recreational equipment” is defined as including boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, pick-up campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles), motorized dwellings, tent trailers and similar equipment, whether occupied or not. [Ord. 508 § 4.06.0, 1982].


18.90.020 Off-street parking and loading.

At the time of the erection of any new building or other structure, or at the time of the enlargement in height or ground coverage or the intensification of the use of any existing building or other structure, the builder, owner, or other person at whose request the building, structure or improvement is made shall provide parking, off-street vehicular parking spaces on or adjacent to the building premises to be used in connection with such building or other structure as set forth in MCMC 18.90.030 through 18.90.060. [Ord. 508 § 4.08.0, 1982].


18.90.030 Automobile parking space requirements.

(1) Dwelling and Other Living Facilities.

(a) Apartments as a secondary use: one space per bedroom.

(b) Dwelling, single-family: two spaces per dwelling unit.

(c) Dwelling, multifamily: two spaces per dwelling unit.

(d) Rooming and boarding house: four spaces per five guest accommodations.

(e) Nursing home, convalescent home, and sanitarium: one space per two beds for patients.

(2) Clubs and Institutions.

(a) Clubs and associations: one space per three persons to the maximum capacity of each public meeting and/or banquet room plus 50 percent of the spaces otherwise required for accessory uses (e.g., restaurants, lounges, etc.).

(b) Hospital: one space per two beds plus one space per staff doctor.

(c) Rehabilitation and correctional institution: one space per 10 beds for patients or inmates.

(d) Community centers: one space per 250 square feet of gross floor area or one space per four patrons to the maximum capacity, whichever is greater.

(3) Commerce and Industry.

(a) Retail stores except as in subsection (3)(b) of this section: one space per 125 square feet of patron service area.

(b) Service or repair shops and retail stores handling exclusively bulky merchandise such as automobiles or furniture: one space per 500 square feet of gross floor area.

(c) Banks and business offices except medical and dental: one space per 400 square feet of gross floor area plus one space per employee on the largest work shift.

(d) Medical and dental offices and clinics: one space per 150 square feet of gross floor area.

(e) Grocery or supermarket and convenience stores: one space per 100 square feet of patron area plus one space per 200 square feet of gross floor area of storage.

(f) Restaurants (standard sit-down), taverns, night clubs and lounges: one space per 100 square feet of gross floor area or one space per three patron seats, whichever is greater.

(g) Restaurant (fast-food): one space per 50 square feet of gross floor area plus one space per employee on the largest work shift.

(h) Motels, hotels and tourist courts: one space per guest room or suite, plus one space per every three employees on the largest work shift.

(i) Automobile service station: one space per every 2,000 square feet of lot area, but in any case not less than four spaces.

(j) Mortuary or funeral home: one space per four seats or eight feet of bench length in the chapel, whichever is greater.

(k) Storage warehouse, wholesale; manufacturing; and freight terminals (air, rail and truck): one space per employee plus one space per 700 square feet of patron area.

(l) Business with fleet vehicles: one space per company vehicle normally left on the premises plus spaces otherwise required.

(4) Commercial Amusement.

(a) Stadiums and race tracks: one space per four seats or eight feet of bench length for spectators, whichever is greater.

(b) Indoor arenas and theaters: one space per four seats or eight feet of bench length for spectators, whichever is greater.

(c) Bowling alley: five spaces per lane plus one space per employee on the largest work shift.

(d) Dance halls and skating rinks: one space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.

(e) Golf driving range: one space per tee plus one space per employee on the largest work shift.

(f) Amusement park: one space per 1,000 square feet of patron area.

(5) Churches, Schools and Other Places of Public Assembly.

(a) Library: one space per 400 square feet of reading room plus one space for every two employees.

(b) Church: one space per four seats or eight feet of bench length in the main auditorium or sanctuary, whichever is greater.

(c) College and commercial or trade school for adults: one space per five seats in the classroom.

(d) Day care facility or nursery schools: one space per teacher/employee on the largest shift plus one off-street loading space per six students.

(e) High schools: one space per classroom plus one space per administrative employee plus one space for every six students or one space per four seats or eight feet of bench length in the main auditorium, whichever is greater; provided, that if the requirements for the auditorium exceed the spaces otherwise required, the excess space may be provided in areas having other uses during regular school hours.

(f) Junior high, elementary and other children’s schools: one space per each classroom plus one space per each administrative employee or one space per four seats or eight feet of bench length in the auditorium or assembly room, whichever is greater; provided, that if the requirements for the auditorium exceed the spaces otherwise required, the excess may be provided in areas having other uses during regular school hours.

(6) Unspecified Uses. Any use not specifically listed in this section shall have a parking space requirement determined by the planning commission. Such requirements shall be based on the parking space requirement for comparable uses listed in this section. [Amended during 2012 recodification; Ord. 508 § 4.08.1, 1982].


18.90.040 Bicycle and pedestrian circulation.

(1) On-site facilities shall be provided that accommodate safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle access from within new subdivisions, multifamily developments, planned developments, shopping centers, and commercial districts to adjacent residential areas and transit stops, and to neighborhood activity centers within one-half mile of the development.

(a) Single-family residential developments shall generally include streets and accessways. Pedestrian circulation through parking lots should generally be provided in the form of accessways.

(b) Internal pedestrian circulation within new office parks and commercial developments shall be provided through clustering of buildings, construction of accessways and walkways and similar techniques.

(2) Bicycle parking facilities shall be provided as part of new multifamily residential developments of four units or more and new retail, office, and institutional development within Area 1 of the Urban Growth Boundary. The installation of bicycle parking facilities shall occur as follows:

	USE	STANDARD

	Multifamily Residential – 4+ units	1 space per dwelling unit

	Retail	1 space per 10 motor vehicle spaces, or 3,000± sq. ft.

	Office	1 space per 10 motor vehicle spaces, or 3,000± sq. ft.

	Institutional

	Elementary or Middle School	1 space per 10 students/employees

	High School	1 space per 5 students/employees

(3) Bikeways shall be required along routes designated in the bicycle plan map in the comprehensive plan. Refer to MCMC Table 17.50.030 for the affected street types.

(4) Where off-site road improvements are otherwise required as a condition of development approval, they shall include facilities accommodating convenient pedestrian and bicycle travel. [Ord. 508 § 4.08.2, 1982].


18.90.050 Exceptions from parking space requirements.

(1) Joint Use. Owners of two or more uses, structures or parcels of land may utilize jointly the same parking area when the hours of operation do not overlap, providing satisfactory evidence is presented in the form of deeds, leases or contracts or other instruments securing full access to such parking area of all parties jointly using them.

(2) Downtown Core Area Exemption. For the purpose of this title, the city of Myrtle Creek shall have a “downtown core area” defined on the official zoning map in which all uses except grocery and convenience stores shall be exempt from the off-street parking requirements of MCMC 18.90.020 and 18.90.030; provided, that all off-street parking spaces existing at the passage of the ordinance codified in this title are retained. The “downtown core area” shall be bounded on the west by Millsite Park and shall include all properties and buildings having frontage on streets within the following described area:

Both sides of Third Avenue from Millsite Park to Pleasant Street, the south side of Fourth Avenue to Third Avenue between the east side of N. Main Street and the west side of Pleasant Street, the west side of Pleasant Street between Third Avenue and First Avenue, both sides of First Avenue from Pleasant Street to Millsite Park and the east side of South Main Street from First Avenue south for a distance of 200 feet.

(3) C-1 Parking Consideration. Conversion to commercial usage of a residential structure existing on September 1, 1981, in the C-1 zone (central business district) to certain retail, service or business usage shall be exempt from the specified parking space requirement of MCMC 18.90.030; provided, that all of the following conditions exist:

(a) The proposed use of the existing structure is of a type specified in MCMC 18.90.030(3)(a), (b), (c) or (d) only.

(b) Structural changes shall not consist of an enlargement in height or ground coverage and shall be limited to reconditioning, rehabilitation and redecoration or alterations that may be required for compliance with the change of occupancy provisions of the building code.

(c) One off-street parking space per employee and the necessary maneuvering room shall be provided on the premises in lieu of the applicable requirement of MCMC 18.90.030(3)(a), (b), (c) or (d). [Ord. 508 § 4.08.3, 1982].


18.90.060 Off-street loading facilities.

Sufficient off-street loading facilities will be provided at the time of construction or structural alteration of any business so as not to utilize any public right-of-way for loading or unloading purposes, as follows:

(1) Loading Space Dimensions. Every retail establishment, industrial, manufacturing, or public assembly use which requires deliveries or shipments shall provide an off-street loading space of not less than 10 feet in width by 25 feet in length and shall have an unobstructed height of 14 feet.

(2) Maneuvering Room. All parking areas which will jointly serve off-street parking and off-street loading shall provide curves and corner of sufficient radius to permit the safe maneuvering of oversized vehicles through the parking area.

(3) Loading and Unloading. At no time shall any part of a truck or van be allowed to extend into the right-of-way of a public street while the truck or van is being loaded or unloaded. [Ord. 508 § 4.08.4, 1982].


18.90.070 Off-street parking design standards.

All parking and loading areas shall be developed and maintained as follows:

(1) Location or Site. Except for residential parking for four spaces or less, the required yard areas adjacent to a street shall not be used for parking or loading areas. All parking lots shall be physically separated from public streets or adjoining property by landscaped required yards, bumper rails or other effective and suitable barrier against unchanneled motor vehicle access or egress.

(2) Parking Space Dimensions. Each required parking space shall be of usable shape and accessible from a public street. The minimum stall and aisle dimensions shall be as set forth in Table 18.90.070, “Typical Parking Layout.”

(3) Access and Driveway Standards.

Driveway Widths*  

	Principal Use**	Minimum Width	Maximum Width

	Single-family and two-family dwellings on a single lot	12 feet	20 feet

	All other uses with less than 10 parking spaces	 	 

	 	(one-way driveway)	12 feet	16 feet

	 	(two-way driveway)	16 feet	28 feet

	All other uses with 10 or more parking spaces	 	 

	 	(one-way driveway)	12 feet	16 feet

	 	(two-way driveway)	20 feet	32 feet

*As measured at the street right-of-way line.

** Width and design standards for approach roads providing access to large-scale commercial and multifamily residential developments shall be determined during the site plan review process.

Groups of three or more parking spaces, except those in conjunction with single-family or two-family dwellings on a single lot, shall be served by a service drive or maneuvering aisle so that no backward movement or other maneuvering of a vehicle within a street, other than an alley, will be required. In addition to the specific requirements of this section, service drives and maneuvering aisles shall be designed and constructed to facilitate the flow of traffic and provide maximum safety in traffic access and egress and maximum safety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic on the site.

Driveways shall be aligned with maneuvering aisles so as to facilitate safe and convenient ingress and egress.

Access grades shall not exceed 15 percent and shall be graded to allow clearance to pass a standard American automobile 18 feet in length.

Access driveways to loading and service areas, and to parking areas having 10 or more spaces, shall be located such that the near edge of the driveway is not less than 25 feet from the intersection of a side street right-of-way line or the curb return, whichever is nearer.

Access driveways shall not be located closer than five feet to an interior side lot line as measured at the street right-of-way line, except that common access driveways to two adjacent properties may be provided at the common lot line when a common driveway agreement is executed.

Access driveways and approach roads to parking areas having 10 or more spaces shall be clearly marked to indicate one-way or two-way access. Two-way driveways shall have a painted centerline which is at least two and one-half inches in width and at least 10 feet in length beginning at the interior edge of the sidewalk along the intersecting street; or, where sidewalks are not present, at a point five feet from the intersecting curb line; or, where neither sidewalks nor curbs are present, at a point five feet from the edge of the intersecting paved street surface.

One-way driveways to parking areas having 10 or more spaces shall not be closer than 20 feet to any other one-way driveway, nor closer than 35 feet to any two-way driveway. Two-way driveways to parking areas having 10 or more spaces shall not be closer than 50 feet to any other two-way driveway, nor closer than 35 feet to a one-way driveway.

(4) Maneuvering Room. All parking areas, except residential parking for four spaces or less, shall provide for the turning and maneuvering of the required number of vehicles on the lot. Notwithstanding the provisions of MCMC 18.90.050(2), all curves and corners shall be of a minimum turning radius of 15 feet or of sufficient radius to permit the safe operation of the standard size automobile.

(5) Surfacing. All areas used for standing and maneuvering of vehicles shall be paved with concrete or asphalt, or such other hard surface, approved by the planning commission, which is durable, dustless, and can be maintained adequately for all weather use. All paved surfaces shall be so drained as to avoid flow of water across sidewalks or other public rights-of-way or private property. Storm and ground water shall not be drained into any sanitary sewer.

(6) Bumper Guards/Wheel Barriers. Bumper guards or wheel barriers shall be so installed that no portion of a vehicle will project onto public right-of-way or over adjoining property and will be required when parking heads into a building. The area behind the wheel barriers or bumper guards shall either be paved or covered with evergreen ground cover.

(7) Landscaping. All sites, regardless of other landscaping requirements, shall provide a minimum of five percent of the total parking area in landscaping. The undeveloped portion of rights-of-way shall either be landscaped or paved, preferably landscaped. The landscaping shall include at least one five-gallon tree for every 10 parking spaces. The remainder of the landscaping may be composed of other plant and landscaping materials, provided rock or other nonplanted landscaping material is used only in conjunction with planted materials. All landscaping shall be provided with adequate underground irrigation and shall be maintained and kept free of trash and debris.

(8) Screening, Signs and Lighting.

(a) Parking areas adjacent to or within residential zones or adjacent to residential uses shall be designed to minimize disturbance of residents by screening, controlling signs, lighting, and other similar disturbances.

(b) Commercial or industrial parking areas shall be screened from adjacent residential districts by means of sight-obscuring screens or fences as described in MCMC 18.110.040, Screening.

MINIMUM STALL AND AISLE DIMENSIONS 

	A	B	C	D	D	E	F	F	F	F

	 	 	 	 	 	 	Noninterlocking	Interlocking

	 	 	 	One-Way	Two-Way	 	One-Way	Two-Way	One-Way	Two-Way

	90°	9'	20'	25'	25'	9'	65'	65'	 	 

	60°	9'	21'10"	18'4"	22' min	10'5"	62'	65'8"	57'5"	61'1"

	45°	9'	20'6"	12'8"	22' min	12'8"	53'8"	63'	47'3"	56'7"

Table 18.90.070 Typical Parking Layout 

	Minimum turning radius 15 feet	
[IMAGE]


	Ten-foot stall width required adjacent to fence, wall or property line.

	Parking spaces shall be designed in such manner as to permit and encourage vehicles to enter and exit the site driving in a forward direction. Spaces requiring backing into the roadway will not be permitted except for residential parking for four spaces or less.

	All parking spaces shall provide access drives, maneuvering room, surfacing, drainage, wheel barriers, landscaping, lighting and screening in accordance with the design standards of this chapter.


[IMAGE]


[Ord. 508 § 4.08.5, 1982].


Chapter 18.95 CULTURAL, HISTORIC AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES

Sections:

18.95.010    Cultural, historic and archaeological resources.

18.95.020    Historic resource review committee.

18.95.030    Historic resources register.

18.95.040    Review procedure.

18.95.050    Rehabilitation of a historic landmark.

18.95.060    Alterations or exterior remodeling of a landmark.

18.95.070    New construction on historic sites.

18.95.080    Demolition of historic structures.

18.95.090    Archaeological sites.

18.95.100    Historical markers.


18.95.010 Cultural, historic and archaeological resources.

(1) Purpose. Buildings and sites in the city of Myrtle Creek having special historic associations or significance or of special merit or significance should be preserved as a part of the city’s heritage and for the education, enjoyment, and pride of the citizens, as well as the beautification of the city and enhancement of property values. To that end, regulatory controls and administrative procedures are necessary.

(2) Planning Clearance Required. No building, site or object designated as a historic landmark shall be altered, restored, painted or otherwise have the exterior appearance altered; no structure shall be moved or demolished; and no building or other structure, including walls and fences, shall be erected and no grading shall be undertaken on any previously undisturbed historic site listed in the historic resources register unless planning clearance has been approved in accordance with this chapter. Issuance of a “plan check certificate” shall be evidence that requirements of this chapter have been met.

Alterations made to a historic landmark which change the appearance or otherwise affect the historic integrity of the site or structure, without obtaining planning clearance, may result in deletion of that structure from the historic resources register and subsequent withdrawal of special protection benefits provided herein.

(3) Restoration Not Mandatory. Nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to require any affirmative action on the part of any person or property owner with respect to improving existing buildings or uses, nor require an owner to maintain, restore, or preserve a historic site or structure listed in the historic resources register. In addition, the review process shall in no case be exercised so as to impose upon any property owner any peculiar or undue hardship by preventing the removal or demolition of any structure which cannot be economically maintained or restored, giving due consideration to all potential uses to which the same might reasonably be put upon restoration by a private property owner. [Ord. 508 § 5.05.0, 1982].


18.95.020 Historic resource review committee.

The Myrtle Creek planning commission is hereby designated as the historic resource review committee and, as such, shall review those requests for building and demolition permits having an impact on resources of cultural or historic significance afforded protection through the provisions of this chapter. All decisions of the review committee may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 18.190 MCMC. The duties of the review committee shall include the following:

(1) To adopt such rules and regulations as it finds necessary or appropriate to carry out the intent of this chapter;

(2) To receive requests by any citizen, or on its own motion, make recommendations concerning the designation of particular buildings, sites and objects as historic landmarks;

(3) To compile and maintain a current list of all historical landmarks with a brief description of each building or site and the special reasons for its inclusion on such list;

(4) To recommend removal from any list of designated historic landmarks such property as it finds no longer worthy of such designation and, if the landmark is demolished or destroyed, to retain a historic record of the resource;

(5) To inspect and investigate any building or site in the city which it has reason to believe is an architectural or historical landmark;

(6) To review all information which it has and hold hearings as prescribed in this chapter and forward the results to the city council;

(7) To coordinate historical preservation programs of the city, county, state and federal governments as they relate to property within the city; and

(8) To make available to the public information concerning its activities and information concerning the various historical landmarks so designated pursuant to this chapter. [Ord. 508 § 5.05.1, 1982].


18.95.030 Historic resources register.

(1) Creation of City Historic Register. The “city of Myrtle Creek register of cultural, historic and archaeological resources” (hereinafter called the city register) is hereby created for the purpose of being the official depository of information about the city’s historic resources, to be used as a reference for educational and recreational pursuits and to recognize resources for tax assistance and other incentives. The city register shall contain all available information concerning the resources in the city’s jurisdiction which are listed in the “National Register of Historic Places” in addition to information concerning resources potentially eligible for the National Register. The city register may also contain general information concerning application requirements for state and federal historic designation and related tax advantages.

(2) Changes to the City Historic Register. Initially, all buildings in the city over 50 years of age and other potential landmarks shall be inventoried and evaluated for significance by the review committee. Those possessing qualities worthy of preservation shall be placed in the city register. All additions, deletions, or other changes to the content of the city register shall be made by resolution of the city council upon the recommendation of the review committee, who shall establish findings based on the criteria set forth in subsection (5) of this section.

(3) Applications for Additions/Deletions. Upon petition to the review committee, or upon its own motion, to designate a particular area, site or object as a historic landmark or to remove a resource from the city register, a hearing shall be scheduled for the next regular planning commission meeting. Notice shall be given pursuant to MCMC 18.185.170 in a manner similar to a major zoning reclassification, including notice to the petitioner.

If, following the hearing, the review committee establishes that the subject area, site or object is of cultural or historic significance, a recommendation shall be forwarded to the city council to place the subject property in the city register. If the review committee determines that there is no historic significance or that the historic significance has been altered and is not recoverable, the review committee shall recommend the subject property to be deleted from the historic register.

Upon the initiation of action to designate a site or structure as a historic landmark (for which a building permit application is pending) the review committee may direct that planning clearance be delayed up to 60 days from the date of application to allow sufficient time to consider the designation request, conduct a hearing and determine whether the proposed construction affects the appearance or historical significance.

(4) Classification of Sites. Landmarks listed in the city register shall be classified as having either “primary” or “secondary” significance. Resources classified as “primary” are either currently listed on the National Register of Historic Places or considered potentially eligible for the National Register. Resources classified as “secondary” possess qualities of special historic interest and may be considered significant when other factors are considered (such as the historic character of the surrounding area). When reviewing applications for alteration or demolition of a landmark or other proposal impacting a resource, the review committee shall consider the “primary” or “secondary” classification and shall weigh their decision based on the relative significance of the resource.

(5) Criteria for Landmark Designation. The following criteria shall be utilized in evaluating all additions, deletions or other changes to the content of the Myrtle Creek historic resources register. As part of the evaluation process, the review committee shall assign points in the various categories, as appropriate, for a maximum total of 99 points. Points shall be considered by the review committee as a relative measure to establish significance. Additional review for placement on the city register shall not be required for structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

(a) Architecture.

(i) Style. Significance as an example of a particular architectural style, building type or convention. (zero to 10 points)

(ii) Design/Artistic Quality. Significance because of quality of composition, detailing and craftsmanship. (one to four points)

(iii) Materials/Construction. Significance as an example of a particular material or method of construction. (zero to four points)

(iv) Integrity. Significance because it retains its original design features, materials and character. (zero to 10 points)

(v) Rarity. Significance as the only remaining, or one of the few remaining, properties of a particular style, building type, design, material or method of construction. (zero to 10 points)

(b) Environment.

(i) Landmark. Significance as a visual landmark. (zero to 10 points)

(ii) Setting. Significance because the current land use surrounding the property contributes to the integrity of the pertinent historic period. (one to four points)

(iii) Continuity. Significance because the property contributes to the continuity or character of the street, neighborhood or community. (zero to seven points)

(c) History.

(i) Person. Associated with the life and activities of a person, group, organization or institution that has made a significant contribution to the community, state or nation. (zero to 10 points)

(ii) Event. Associated with an event that has made a significant contribution to the community, state or nation. (zero to 10 points)

(iii) Patterns. Associated with, and illustrative of, broad patterns of cultural, social, political, economic or industrial history in the community, state or nation. (zero to 10 points)

(iv) Information. Resource has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history. (zero to 10 points) [Amended during 2012 recodification; Ord. 508 § 5.05.2, 1982].


18.95.040 Review procedure.

Prior to approval of a building permit, demolition permit or other land use action, the following measures shall be utilized:

(1) Preapplication. Administratively determine the following:

(a) Whether the application for a building, land use or demolition permit pertains to property identified as a historic or archaeological site or an existing historic structure; and

(b) Whether the construction plans or a land use action could alter the exterior appearance or other significant elements of the landmark.

(2) No Exterior Changes. Upon determination that an application pertains to an existing landmark listed in the city register but that no exterior alterations are proposed, the planning department shall issue planning clearance by submitting to the building department a statement that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.

(3) Alteration Proposed/Hearing Scheduled. Upon determination that an application proposes to alter the appearance, condition or status of an existing landmark, a hearing shall be scheduled for the next regular planning commission meeting. Notice shall be given pursuant to MCMC 18.185.170 in a manner similar to a major zoning reclassification, including notice to the applicant (who shall be encouraged to be present). At the hearing, the applicant shall be entitled to be heard and to present evidence. The review committee may also hear testimony from other interested parties, including a representative of the building department.

(4) Decision Criteria. The review committee shall conduct the hearing, review the application, construct findings and render a decision in accordance with MCMC 18.95.060 (for alterations and exterior remodeling), 18.95.070 (for new construction on historical sites where no structure exists), 18.95.080 (for demolitions) and 18.95.090 (for archaeological sites). All plans, elevations, colors, materials, textures, landscaping and other such information deemed necessary to determine the appropriateness of the exterior features of the landmark in question shall be made available to the review committee by the applicant.

(5) Notice of Decision/Appeal. All decisions of the review committee shall be final unless written appeal (pursuant to Chapter 18.190 MCMC) is received within 10 days after the property owner has been notified, in writing, of the decision of the review committee. Other parties participating at the hearing may request a copy of the written notification.

(6) Ordinary Maintenance and Repair. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature which does not involve a change in design or outward appearance nor prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition because of an unsafe condition or for building code compliance. [Ord. 508 § 5.05.3, 1982].


18.95.050 Rehabilitation of a historic landmark.

Rehabilitation assumes that at least some repair or alteration of the historic structure will need to take place in order to provide for an efficient contemporary use; however, these repairs and alterations must not damage or destroy the materials and features, including their finishes, that are important in defining the building’s historic character. Affirmative findings shall be documented addressing the following standards based upon their relative importance:

(1) Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use for a property which requires minimal alteration of the building, structure, site and its environment, or to use a property for its originally intended purpose.

(2) The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building, structure, or site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive architectural features should be avoided when possible.

(3) All buildings, structures and sites shall be recognized as products of their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and which seek to create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged.

(4) Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are evidence of the history and development of a building, structure, or site and its environment. These changes may have acquired significance in their own right and this significance shall be recognized and respected.

(5) Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship which characterize a building, structure or site shall be treated with sensitivity.

(6) Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than replaced, wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new material should match the material being replaced in composition, design, color, texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing architectural features should be based on accurate duplications of features, substantiated by historic, physical or pictorial evidence rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural elements from other buildings or structures.

(7) The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will damage the historic building materials shall not be undertaken.

(8) Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve archaeological resources affected by, or adjacent to, any project.

(9) Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and additions do not destroy significant historical, architectural or cultural material, and such design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material, and character of the property, neighborhood or environment.

(10) Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to structures shall be done in such a manner that, if such additions or alterations were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the structure would be unimpaired.

(11) Signs, exterior lighting, and other appurtenances, such as walls, fences, awnings, and landscaping, should be visually compatible with the traditional character of the historic building. Alarms, emergency lighting and other necessary exterior appurtenances should be placed in an unobtrusive manner. [Ord. 508 § 5.05.4, 1982].


18.95.060 Alterations or exterior remodeling of a landmark.

(1) Hearing Scheduled. Upon receipt of a request for exterior alteration of a building listed on the city historic register, a hearing shall be scheduled before the review committee. The alteration or remodeling shall be approved and planning clearance issued if the treatment proposed is found to be harmonious and compatible with the character of the resource and/or is found to enhance the historical value of the resource.

The request shall be disapproved if the proposal will prove to be unsightly or grotesque or otherwise reduce the resource value or historic significance. No recommendations or requirements shall be made except for the purpose of preventing developments obviously out of character with the historic aspects of the landmark and its immediate surroundings.

(2) Decision Criteria. Preservation of a building and its historic character is based on the assumption that (a) the historic materials and features and their unique craftsmanship are of primary importance and that (b) they will be retained, protected and repaired in the process of rehabilitation to the greatest extent possible. It is often necessary, however, to make modifications to a historic building so that it can comply with current health, safety and code requirements and/or be retrofitted for energy conservation. Such work needs to be carefully planned and undertaken so that it does not obscure, radically change, damage or destroy character defining spaces, features and finishes.

To achieve these preservation goals, a two-part evaluation needs to be applied. First, a particular property’s materials and features which are important in defining its historic character should be identified, and, second, the potential impact of work necessary to make possible an efficient contemporary use should be assessed. The standards contained in MCMC 18.95.050 shall be followed by the review committee in their decision making. The “guidelines” published by the Secretary of the Interior may be utilized by the review committee in interpreting the “standards.” The “guidelines” may also be used as a model for owners and developers. A copy of the “guidelines” shall be included in the city register.

(3) Results of Noncompliance. If the review committee finds the proposed alterations to be in noncompliance, it may:

(a) Approve the application subject to compliance with conditions which will bring the application into conformance with the intent of MCMC 18.95.050; and/or

(b) Place up to a 60-day delay from the date of the hearing action on planning clearance for issuance of a building permit for the proposed alteration to provide additional time for gathering information, to further evaluate the proposal, to identify alternatives for the property owner(s), or to provide the applicant with information concerning local, state and federal preservation programs so that the applicant may gain a knowledge of alternatives available to him. [Amended during 2012 recodification; Ord. 508 § 5.05.5, 1982].


18.95.070 New construction on historic sites.

(1) Limitations. New structures on or adjacent to significant historic sites or near locations shall comply with the following:

(a) A 50-foot setback from the sign or monument designating the historic site shall be maintained unless the agency which placed the sign or monument indicates that the proposed structure will not obscure the sign or monument;

(b) Specifically identified historic sites shall be protected by a 50-foot setback from structural development unless it can be shown that the proposed structure will not obscure the landmark; and

(c) No specific provisions shall apply when a landmark has no defined area.

(2) Hearing Scheduled. Proposed plans for new construction on historic sites which do not conform with subsection (1) of this section shall be referred to the review committee. A hearing shall be scheduled and findings shall be prepared addressing the uniqueness of the resource (whether it’s of “primary” or “secondary” significance) and the economic, social, environmental and other consequences of approving or denying the application and shall determine whether the request shall be approved or denied. Conditions may be attached to the approval if they are deemed necessary based on the “standards for rehabilitation” contained in MCMC 18.95.050. Reasonable effort shall be made by the review committee to maintain a significant historic site by a public or private acquisition, protection or preservation project. [Ord. 508 § 5.05.6, 1982].


18.95.080 Demolition of historic structures.

(1) Hearing Scheduled. Upon receipt of a request for demolition of a structure listed in the city register or upon receipt of a development proposal on or adjacent to a historic site which encroaches upon or otherwise threatens the preservation of that site, a hearing shall be scheduled before the review committee. If the structure for which the demolition is requested has been damaged in excess of 70 percent of its assessed value due to fire, flood, wind, or other action of God, a demolition permit may be approved by the city administrator without processing the request through the review committee. Failure to initiate review within 30 working days shall be considered as approval of the application.

(2) Decision Criteria. At the hearing, the committee shall review the application and construct findings addressing the structure’s state of repair, the reasonableness of repair, restoration costs, the uniqueness of the resource (whether of “primary” or “secondary” significance) and the economic, social, environmental and other consequences of approving or denying the application and determine whether the request shall be approved or denied. The committee may delay clearance on issuance of the demolition permit for up to 60 days from the date of the hearing upon consideration and completion of the following factors:

(a) Reasonable effort shall be made by the review committee to provide the owner of the structure with possible alternatives for demolition, including information concerning local, state and federal preservation programs; and

(b) Reasonable effort shall be made by the review committee to maintain a significant historic structure or site by an acquisition, protection, stabilization, preservation, rehabilitation, restoration, or reconstruction project. A demonstrated lack of private and/or public funding for the above is sufficient cause to allow demolition of the site or structure.

(3) Extension of Time. Suspension of the permit may be extended if the review committee determines that there is a program or project underway which could result in public or private acquisition of the historic landmark and that there is reasonable grounds to believe that such program or project may be successful. Such extension period shall not delay issuance of planning clearance in excess of 180 days. Therefore, at the end of the 180-day period, if public and/or private funding has not been arranged to compensate the property owner for maintaining or preserving the historic landmark, planning clearance (for historic preservation purposes) shall no longer be withheld.

(4) Historic Record. If the demolition of a landmark is approved, the review committee shall request the Douglas County Museum and local historic preservation societies, in cooperation, to pictorially, graphically and in writing record the historic resource. To the extent that funds are available, artifacts shall be obtained from the resource or site which are worthy of preservation. These artifacts may, as an example, include carvings, cast iron work, or other materials of historic significance.

(5) Reconstruction. There is a recognized value to the community in preserving historic resources; however, when a historical structure is destroyed or damaged to the extent that demolition appears to be the only reasonable alternative, a replica of that structure may be built on the site. The historic designation may be retained when construction duplicates the style, design, size, scale, texture and materials utilized for the original structure. [Ord. 508 § 5.05.7, 1982].


18.95.090 Archaeological sites.

(1) Reporting of Find. Although no archaeological sites have been identified in the city of Myrtle Creek, it may happen that archaeological objects/deposits are discovered during development activities. For situations where archaeological objects/deposits are discovered during a development action, it is recommended that the discovery be reported to the city as soon as possible.

(a) No delaying or halting of the development will occur without the developer’s or landowner’s consent unless an Indian burial site is involved. At a minimum, it is desired that the developer or landowner will allow the recovery of archaeological objects and data for research and cultural heritage purposes; or

(b) If an Indian burial site is involved, notification shall be provided to the relevant Indian tribal governing body, the SHPO and other relevant interested persons.

(2) Alternative Courses of Action. Upon the planning commission’s receipt of a report that an archaeological site has been identified, the commission shall recommend compliance with the highest of the following priorities, as practicable, or, if identified in advance of development, shall make it a condition of approval for a proposed land use action:

(a) Avoid the site, unless demonstrated to be impracticable; or

(b) Bury or cover the site without disturbing it when necessary to protect the site from land disturbing activities, unless demonstrated to be impracticable; or

(c) If the site is to be disturbed, redesign the project to minimize impacts and excavate/recover data from the disturbed area, unless demonstrated to be impracticable; or

(d) Proceed with development without any additional consideration for the archaeological resource.

(3) Disposition of Artifacts. Ownership and disposition of any archaeological objects discovered on private lands must comply with applicable state laws. The relevant Indian tribal government may request to receive recovered nonsacred artifacts following research studies, subject to approval by the developer or land owner. [Ord. 508 § 5.05.8, 1982].


18.95.100 Historical markers.

(1) Signs, Monuments and Plaques. Significant historic sites and sites possessing qualities of special historic interest should be identified by sign or monument. The review committee should promote programs for identification plaques for those significant historic sites and sites of special historic interest not now signed or monumented. Signs and markers not placed or maintained by the state or other responsible agency shall be purchased and maintained by the city. Owners of a landmark who do not desire to have their property identified by a sign or monument may request that the sign or monument not be placed, or, if in place at the time of purchase, that it be removed.

(2) Placement. Signs and monuments identifying historic landmarks for the public shall be placed near the front entrance of a structure at the owner’s discretion or, subject to approval by the city administrator, on a city right-of-way adjacent to the resource. Approval of signs for sites adjacent to county rights-of-way shall be subject to approval by the Douglas County director of public works.

(3) Design of Signs. The design of signs and monuments on private lands shall be decided by the review committee after consultation with the Douglas County Museum and public works departments of Douglas County and the city of Myrtle Creek. Historical marker signs in the right-of-way shall be placed in accordance with “The Oregon Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.” [Ord. 508 § 5.05.9, 1982].


Chapter 18.100 ACCESS AND CLEAR VISION

Sections:

18.100.010    General standards for access and clear vision.

18.100.020    Access and street connectivity.

18.100.030    Clear vision areas.

18.100.040    Access for fire vehicles and apparatus.


18.100.010 General standards for access and clear vision.

MCMC 18.100.020 through 18.100.040 impose general standards addressing access and areas of unobstructed view at intersections. [Ord. 508 § 5.06.0, 1982].


18.100.020 Access and street connectivity.

Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or with access to an approved private street within a planned development or a mobile home park (see MCMC 18.120.100(1), 18.130.140(2) and 18.145.040). All structures shall be located on lots so as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required off-street parking and loading.

Access management, street connectivity, and driveway location will help manage access to land development while preserving the movement of people and goods in terms of safety, capacity, functional classification, and performance standards. This section shall apply to all arterials and major collectors within Myrtle Creek and to all properties that abut these roadways. These standards shall be applied to properties in Tri-City if and when annexed into the city.

(1) Joint Use Driveways and Cross Access.

(a) Adjacent commercial or office properties classified as major traffic generators (i.e., developments generating more than 400 ADT) shall provide a cross access drive and pedestrian access to allow circulation between sites.

(b) A system of joint use driveways and cross access easements shall be established wherever feasible. The property owner/developer shall provide a development plan to be reviewed and approved by the city. The development plan shall include the following:

(i) A continuous service drive or cross access corridor extending the entire length of each block served to provide for driveway separation;

(ii) A design speed of 10 mph and a maximum width of 22 feet to accommodate two-way travel aisles designed to accommodate automobiles, service vehicles, and loading vehicles;

(iii) Stub-outs and other design features to make it visually obvious that the abutting properties may be tied in to provide cross access via a service drive;

(iv) A unified access and circulation system plan for coordinated or shared parking areas;

(v) Shared parking areas shall be permitted a 20 percent reduction in required parking spaces if peak demands do not occur at the same time periods.

(c) Pursuant to this section, property owners shall:

(i) Record an easement with the deed for the property which allows cross access to and from other properties served by the joint use driveways and cross access or service drive.

(ii) Record a joint maintenance agreement with the deed defining maintenance responsibilities of property owners.

(iii) Myrtle Creek may modify or waive the requirements of this section where the characteristics or layout of abutting properties would make the development of a unified or shared access and circulation system impractical.

(2) Access Connection and Driveway Design. Driveways shall meet the following standards:

(a) Access driveways to parking areas having 10 or more parking spaces shall be clearly marked to indicate one-way or two-way access.

(b) One-way driveways (one-way in or one-way out) shall have a minimum width of 12 feet.

(c) For two-way access, each lane shall have a minimum width of 10 feet.

(d) Driveway approaches must be designed and located to provide an exiting vehicle with an unobstructed view, meeting the requirements for clear vision areas. Construction of driveways along acceleration or deceleration lanes and tapers shall be avoided due to the potential for vehicular weaving conflicts.

(e) The length of driveways shall be designed to prevent vehicles from backing into the flow of traffic on the public street or causing unsafe conflicts with on-site circulation.

(3) Nonconforming Access Features. Legal access that does not conform with the standards herein is considered a nonconforming feature and shall be brought into compliance with applicable standards under the following conditions:

(a) When new access connection permits are requested;

(b) Changes in use, enlargements or improvements that necessitate a new access permit.

(4) Reverse Frontage Lots. Lots that front on more than one street shall be required to locate motor vehicle accesses on the street with the lower functional classification. Direct access to arterials or major collector streets shall not be permitted for reverse frontage lots or parcels.

(5) Number and Location of Access Points.

(a) Number of Accesses Permitted. Access points to a public street shall be the minimum necessary to provide reasonable access while not inhibiting the safe traffic circulation and carrying capacity of the street.

(i) Excepting single-family dwellings and except as further restricted by this chapter, properties of less than 100 feet of frontage which may be separate or contiguous shall be limited to one access point.

(ii) Properties exceeding 100 feet of frontage shall be limited to one access point per each 100 feet of frontage, but not to exceed four access points.

(b) Driveway Location in Relation to Intersections. For access driveways to loading and service areas, and to parking areas having 10 or more spaces, the minimum distance between driveways and intersections shall be as provided below. Distances listed shall be measured from the stop bar at the intersection.

(i) At the intersection of a collector or arterial street, driveways shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from the intersection.

(ii) At the intersection of two local streets, driveways shall be located no closer than 30 feet from the intersection.

(iii) If the subject property is not of sufficient width to allow for separation between driveway and intersection as provided, the driveway shall be constructed as far from the intersection as possible, while maintaining the five-foot setback between the driveway and property line as required.

(c) Driveway Location in Relation to Intersections for Single-Family Dwellings. The minimum distance between driveways and intersections shall be 30 feet.

(i) If the subject property is not of sufficient width to allow for separation between driveway and intersection as provided, the driveway shall be constructed as far from the intersection as possible, while maintaining the five-foot setback between the driveway and property line as required.

(d) Driveway Location in Relation to Lot Lines. Access driveways shall not be located closer than five feet to an interior side lot line, except that common access driveways (not exceeding 40 feet in width) to two adjacent properties may be provided at the common lot line when a common driveway agreement is executed and recorded with the city.

(6) Driveway Location in Relation to Adjacent Driveways. One-way driveways to parking areas having 10 or more spaces shall not be located closer than 20 feet to any other one-way driveway, nor closer than 35 feet to any two-way driveway. Two-way driveways to parking areas having 10 or more spaces shall not be closer than 50 feet from any other two-way driveway, nor closer than 35 feet from any one-way driveway. [Ord. 508 § 5.06.1, 1982].


18.100.030 Clear vision areas.

In order to provide a clear view of intersecting streets to motorists, there shall be a triangular area of clear vision maintained at the intersection of two residential streets or a street and a railroad.

(1) Height Limit. On any portion of a lot that lies within the triangular area described in subsection (2) of this section and illustrated below, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such manner as to materially impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet and 10 feet above the grade of the street centerline.

(2) Measurement of CVA. The size of the triangular area is a function of traffic volume and speed and shall be measured as follows (see illustration below): From a point on each street centerline located 65 feet from the intersection of the street centerlines and a point on the intersecting street at a sight distance (LOS) of 90 feet from the intersection of the street centerlines and a third line connecting the two points. In a case where the street centerlines intersect at less than a 90 degree angle, then the sight distance shall be 90 feet plus one and one-half feet for every degree less than 90 degrees.


[IMAGE]


[Ord. 508 § 5.06.2, 1982].


18.100.040 Access for fire vehicles and apparatus.

(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to facilitate rapid and effective extinguishment of fires by ensuring that for all premises a fire department may be called upon to protect and, in case of a fire, shall be readily accessible for effective fire department operations.

(2) Nonresidential Uses. Every nonresidential use permitted by this title shall provide access for fire vehicles and emergency apparatus from a public street as follows:

(a) A dead-end access exceeding 300 feet in length shall be provided with a turnaround 90 feet in diameter at the closed end.

(b) A fire lane per subsection (4) of this section shall be required to provide access to any portion of any structure which is:

(i) More than 150 feet from the nearest street right-of-way when the structure is 35 feet or less in height; or

(ii) More than 50 feet from the nearest street right-of-way when the structure exceeds 35 feet in height.

(c) When fire vehicles and apparatus are provided access to a structure by means of either buffer yard area or adjoining property, the requirements of subsection (2)(b) of this section shall not apply.

(3) Other Considerations. In addition to the situations described in subsection (1) of this section, a fire lane to provide access to any part of a building may also be required:

(a) If it is determined that the distance of a structure from the nearest hydrant, the configuration of structures on a site, or other special characteristics of the site otherwise inhibit rapid, effective fire extinguishment.

(b) In addition to private fire protection facilities required by the building code for any structure classified by the building code as a high hazard use, any structure to be occupied by uses which involve extreme risks of fire, smoke, explosion, or toxic gas or structures to be used as places of assembly for large congregations of people susceptible to panic.

(4) Fire Lane Standards. A fire lane shall comply with the following standards:

(a) The fire lane shall provide clear, unobstructed access for vehicles and apparatus at all times.

(b) Signs prohibiting parking or standing of motor vehicles shall be required.

(c) Fire lanes shall be 18 feet in width.

(d) The fire lane surface shall be an all-weather roadway.

(e) Any alley may contribute all or part of a required fire lane if it meets all other requirements of this section.

(5) In lieu of meeting the standards specified above, a developer may substitute alternative means of ensuring the access necessary for effective fire department operations (including, but not limited to, fire resistant roofs, fire separation walls, space separation and automatic fire extinguishing systems). Such alternative means shall suffice to meet the requirements of this section; provided, that the chief officer empowered to provide fire service in the city concurs. [Ord. 508 § 5.06.3, 1982].


Chapter 18.105 BASIC CHARACTERISTICS OF A RESIDENTIAL SITE

Sections:

18.105.010    Basic characteristics of a residential site.

18.105.020    Limitation on buildings.

18.105.030    Design standards for hillside development.


18.105.010 Basic characteristics of a residential site.

A lot or parcel to be developed for residential use shall comply with the following:

(1) Lot Size and Shape. The residential lot or parcel area shall be not less than 6,000 square feet. The size, width, shape and orientation of the lot or parcel shall provide a building site that is appropriate in relation to adjacent land divisions, solar access, flood and other hazard conditions and the environmental protection requirements of this title.

(2) Side Lot Lines. As far as practical, the side property line of a lot or parcel shall run at right angles to the street upon which it faces, except that on a curved street the side property line shall be radial to the curve. Where solar orientation is a consideration, a side lot line may vary from the above requirement if the variation will improve solar access.

(3) Through Lots. Through lots or parcels shall have a rear setback area equal to the required front setback area within which no structure shall be erected. Access to through lots or parcels shall be via the street frontage on the front side of the lot or parcel; there shall be no right of access to a street via the rear frontage. [Ord. 508 § 5.07.0, 1982].


18.105.020 Limitation on buildings.

In residential zones there shall be permitted only one main building on a lot; however, multiple-family and single-family attached dwellings that are all part of a single development may be excepted. [Ord. 508 § 5.07.1, 1982].


18.105.030 Design standards for hillside development.

Building construction in the residential hillside district will be approved under conditions that do not adversely affect the visual and physical identity of the hills. The grading of land and the orientation and design of a building will avoid creating conditions that will cause erosion or modify drainage patterns. Where there is some risk of these conditions occurring, certification will be obtained in accordance with MCMC 18.150.030(15) or (16) to ensure that the design and control measure will comply with this provision. The design standards specified herein shall be utilized in conjunction with the residential hillside district regulations and the protection standards for natural features.

(1) Maximum retention of natural topographic features and qualities is encouraged to avoid modification of hill areas that create unnatural geologic conditions or visually unappealing hillside configurations.

(2) In the residential hillside district, buildings will be spaced and have roof types and exteriors to blend with the environment.

(3) Construction work shall be scheduled and conducted to avoid erosion and to permit any control measure involving vegetative plantings to take place during optimal revegetation periods and to avoid unprotected disturbance of the ground during the storm season. Temporary stabilization measures may be needed until permanent installations are accomplished.

(4) An access route within the residential hillside district will comply with the following:

(a) A road or pedestrian trail will be stabilized by planking, gravel or pavement.

(b) Vehicle access points to the development will be spaced the maximum distance that still permits reasonable access and will be located and designed to preserve the natural form and profile of the hillside affected by the access route.

(c) A roadway will be built without installation of fill or other forms of terracing unless certification is obtained assuring that such conditions will not be detrimental to the area or create unwarranted maintenance problems.

(d) The planning commission may authorize narrower pavement widths combined with parking bays, turning circles, and/or one-way traffic patterns to overcome a disadvantage of topography and to implement subsection (1) of this section.

(5) Access to known wildlife nesting and breeding habitats will be restricted. [Ord. 508 § 5.07.2, 1982].


Chapter 18.110 STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES

Sections:

18.110.010    Standards for commercial and industrial uses.

18.110.020    Traffic.

18.110.030    Buffer yards.

18.110.040    Screening.

18.110.050    Environmental quality.


18.110.010 Standards for commercial and industrial uses.

The criteria set forth in the following sections shall be utilized in considering an application for development of all commercial and industrial uses. The provisions of MCMC 18.110.020 through 18.110.050 specify standards for protection of the environment, including the landscaping requirements for nonresidential uses. [Ord. 508 § 5.08.0, 1982].


18.110.020 Traffic.

(1) The grouping of commercial uses into clusters or centers will be encouraged in order to avoid strip commercial development along arterials and highways, except in the downtown area where walkable “main streets” with pedestrian-oriented strip commercial development are appropriate.

(2) In no case shall an industrial site be located where truck and employee traffic would be channeled onto local streets in residential areas. [Ord. 508 § 5.08.1, 1982].


18.110.030 Buffer yards.

A buffer yard is a unit of land together with the planting required thereon. Buffer yards shall be required to separate different land uses from each other in order to eliminate or minimize potential nuisances such as dirt, litter, noise, glare of lights, signs, and unsightly buildings or parking areas, or to provide spacing to reduce adverse impacts of noise, odor, or dangers from fires or explosion.

(1) Location of Buffer Yards. Buffer yards shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel, extending to the lot or parcel boundary line. Buffer yards shall not be located on any portion of an existing or dedicated street or right-of-way and shall allow for adequate vision clearance at intersections and driveways.

(2) Requirements. Wherever the provisions of this title require a buffer yard to protect adjoining residential districts or other uses, the required yard shall be landscaped as follows:

(a) A minimum of one row of deciduous or evergreen trees or a mixture of each and/or one row of evergreen shrubs extending the full width of the buffer yard and placed not more than five feet apart which shall grow to form a continuous hedge at least five feet in height within three years of planting; and

(b) Lawn, low growing evergreen shrubs, evergreen ground cover, vegetables or bark mulch covering the balance of the required landscaped yard; and

(c) All landscaped areas shall be continuously maintained and kept free of trash and debris.

(3) Exception. In order to deal more fairly with the uncertainty and timing of development of vacant land, the plant material required in a buffer yard which abuts vacant land may have the time period allowed for maturity extended, although the quantity and placement shall remain the same. This allows time for the plant material to reach a size comparable to that which is otherwise required. [Ord. 508 § 5.08.2, 1982].


18.110.040 Screening.

(1) Industrial Sites. Development of an industrial site which has frontage on an arterial street shall provide a sight-obscuring fence or sight-obscuring hedge placed on the setback line or building line of the industrial lot. These shall also be provided where an industrial use is adjacent to a residential district. Exception: The planning commission shall have the authority to determine that the buffer yard requirements satisfy the screening requirements or that the landscaping and architectural treatment of the site as a whole meets the intent of the screening requirements where arterial frontage is concerned.

(2) Storage Areas. Where commercial and industrial uses have outside storage areas, including trash receptacles or compactors, the storage area shall be enclosed by a sight-obscuring fence or sight-obscuring hedge in order to screen storage from view, in the following instances:

(a) When the storage area abuts or faces a residential or other noncommercial, nonindustrial district;

(b) When the storage area abuts or faces a collector or arterial street;

(c) When the location of a storage area in a commercial district is neither of the above but is located as to be viewable by patrons of an adjacent commercial use, except that storage areas abutting storage areas of adjacent uses need not be screened from each other; and

(d) Outdoor sales/display areas of a vehicle sales lot which is permitted by this title shall not be considered a storage yard and are therefore exempt from screening requirements.

(3) Screening Requirements.

(a) Sight-obscuring screening shall not be less than five feet in height, except that screening within 20 feet of a street shall be a minimum of two and one-half feet in height but no more than three and one-half feet in height where necessary to allow for adequate vision clearance at intersections and driveway locations;

(b) Required screening shall be at least 80 percent opaque when viewed horizontally from between two and 10 feet above average grade;

(c) Screen plantings shall be of such size as to provide the required degree of screening within 12 months after installation and shall be provided with adequate underground irrigation;

(d) Required landscaping, screening and fences shall be continuously maintained and kept free of trash and debris;

(e) Where fences are used to provide screening adjacent to the streets or where otherwise necessary, the undeveloped areas between the screening and curb or sidewalk shall be provided with a ground cover composed of plant materials or a combination of plant materials and bark mulch, rock or other nonplanted landscaping material. [Ord. 508 § 5.08.3, 1982].


18.110.050 Environmental quality.

No land or structure shall be used or occupied within the city of Myrtle Creek unless there is continuing compliance with the standards set forth in rules adopted by the State Department of Environmental Quality or other appropriate agency. The following provisions shall apply to all industrial uses, and conditions may be imposed prior to authorizing development in order to assure compliance.

(1) Air and Water Pollution. The discharge into the air or a body of water of solids, liquids, or gases in such quantities as to be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare by causing injury to human, plant or animal life, or to property, is prohibited.

(2) Waste. Adequate provisions shall be provided for the disposal of sewage and waste materials. Such provisions shall meet the requirements of city ordinances and appropriate county and state agencies.

(3) Heat, Glare, Light. Except for exterior lighting, operations producing heat or glare shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building and the heat, glare or light shall not be discernible at or beyond the property line. Exterior lighting shall be directed away from and shall not reflect on adjacent properties.

(4) Noise and Vibration. Noise shall be muffled and shall not be objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency or shrillness. No noise or vibration shall be permitted which is discernible without instruments at or beyond the property line for the use concerned. Noise made by devices which are maintained and utilized solely to serve as warning devices and noise created by highway vehicles and trains are excluded from these regulations. [Ord. 508 § 5.08.4, 1982].


Chapter 18.115 MANUFACTURED HOMES

Sections:

18.115.010    Purpose.

18.115.020    Permitted locations.

18.115.030    Development standards – Special.


18.115.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this section is to ensure that the need for a variety of housing types in price ranges commensurate with the desires and economic means of the community’s residents is adequately provided for by allowing manufactured homes to be placed on individual lots within the city. Furthermore, it is the intent of this section to establish standards for permanent installation of manufactured homes in subdivisions as well as on individual lots; and to establish specific standards which will enable manufactured homes to blend with conventional housing. [Ord. 508 § 5.09.1, 1982].


18.115.020 Permitted locations.

Manufactured home subdivisions and manufactured homes on individual lots may be established in any residential district subject to the specific development standards of the district and MCMC 18.115.030.

In considering the annexation of property which contains an existing manufactured home that does not meet the minimum standards prescribed by this title, the manufactured home may be allowed to continue as a preexisting nonconforming use within the city if the mobile home substantially complies with the standards specified in MCMC 18.115.030. When it appears that such manufactured home cannot meet the intent of the standards set forth herein, the proposal for annexation may be denied. [Ord. 508 § 5.09.2, 1982].


18.115.030 Development standards – Special.

(1) Dwelling Standards. All manufactured homes placed on individual lots, including lots within a designated manufactured home subdivision, shall meet the following minimum standards:

(a) The manufactured home shall be multi-sectional and enclose a space of not less than 1,000 square feet. For the purpose of this section, the term multi-sectional does not include tip-out units or additions which were not manufactured as an integral part of the original design.

(b) The manufactured home shall be placed on an excavated and back-filled foundation and enclosed at the perimeter.

(c) The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which in color, material and appearance is comparable to the predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings as determined by the local permit approval authority.

(d) The manufactured home shall be equipped with skirting which is constructed with mortared concrete blocks on a poured footing, a poured stem wall on a poured footing or that utilizes other masonry products applied in such a manner that conforms to the adopted state Uniform Building Code.

(e) The manufactured home shall have a minimum roof pitch of at least a three-inch rise for each 12 inches of run.

(f) The manufactured home shall have a garage or carport of not less than a 12-foot by 20-foot minimum (240 square feet) of unobstructed parking area and which is constructed with exterior siding and roofing materials consistent to those applied to the exterior of the manufactured home. [Ord. 508 § 5.09.3, 1982].


Chapter 18.120 MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS

Sections:

18.120.010    Manufactured home parks.

18.120.020    Application and plan check fee.

18.120.030    Approval procedure.

18.120.040    Outline development plan (optional).

18.120.050    Phased development.

18.120.060    Limitation on resubmission.

18.120.070    Financial responsibility.

18.120.080    Adherence to approved plan.

18.120.090    General conditions and limitations.

18.120.100    Park design standards.

18.120.110    Manufactured home construction standards.

18.120.120    Accessory structures.


18.120.010 Manufactured home parks.

A manufactured home park may only be located within a zoning district which specifically allows manufactured home parks as a permitted use or conditional use. All manufactured home parks permitted under the provisions of this title shall comply with rules and regulations of the State of Oregon, Department of Commerce, Manufactured Home Division, in addition to the review procedures and standards of development set forth in MCMC 18.120.020 through 18.120.120. After the final plan is reviewed and formally approved as specified herein, it shall be designated as the “approved plan.” In the case of conflict in regulations within this title, the provisions of this section shall govern. [Ord. 832 § 1 (Exh. A), 2020; Ord. 508 § 5.10.0, 1982].


18.120.020 Application and plan check fee.

Applications for a manufactured home park shall be made by the owner of the affected property or his authorized agent and shall be filed on forms as described in MCMC 18.185.130 at least 30 days prior to the planning commission meeting at which consideration is desired. The application shall be accompanied by the following:

(1) Plan Check Fee. In addition to any other fees or charges that may be applicable to a manufactured home park, a plan check fee established by the city of Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges shall be submitted with the preliminary plan.

(2) Written Statement. A written statement shall be filed with the preliminary plan containing an explanation of:

(a) Number of housing units proposed (density);

(b) The method proposed to maintain common open areas, private streets, buildings and other facilities, proposed operation and management agreements, etc.;

(c) The proposed time schedule of the development; and

(d) Any other supporting data describing the character and/or operation of the proposed manufactured/mobile home park.

(3) Site Plan. Submit two sets of plans and accompanying documents. All plot plans shall be appropriately identified as a preliminary plan or final plan and shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet or, for areas over 100 acres, one inch equals 100 feet, or as otherwise approved by the city engineer. The site plan shall contain any applicable information as described in MCMC 18.185.140 and shall clearly identify the location of each of the following:

(a) Property lines, boundary setbacks and both existing and proposed layout. (When the construction involves an addition to or remodeling of an existing manufactured home park, the plot plan need only show the facilities related to the addition and the facilities to be remodeled.);

(b) Boundaries of each proposed manufactured home space, with each space identified by a number, letter or name;

(c) Location of all utility connections serving each manufactured home space or park facility;

(d) Location and size of all water and sewer lines, location of power lines and other underground utilities;

(e) Location of all internal access roads and the relationship with outside streets. Indicate road widths and location of sidewalks;

(f) Location of fixtures for lighting streets and walkways;

(g) Location of fire and irrigation hydrants;

(h) Location of all park buildings, storage areas, play areas, recreation areas and common open space. Indicate dimensions in square feet of all required facilities;

(i) Location of mailboxes (if applicable), location of public telephone (for park residents) and location of “directory”;

(j) Location of patio and manufactured home: Standards at each manufactured home space, indicating size and materials; and

(k) Indicate the location and total number of parking spaces provided, including spaces located in storage yards for recreational equipment. Dimensions of a typical parking space shall be shown for each parking area location.

(4) Landscaping Plan. The preliminary plan shall include a conceptual layout indicating the location of all required landscaping. The final plan shall provide a detailed landscaping plan indicating location and type of plant materials, location of irrigation system and maintenance provisions.

(5) Approved Plan. Upon final approval of the manufactured home park, one print and one three-mil mylar of the approved final plan shall be submitted to the city along with one copy each of recorded deed restrictions, management agreements and other finalized legal documents. [Ord. 832 § 1 (Exh. A), 2020; Ord. 508 § 5.10.1, 1982].


18.120.030 Approval procedure.

No construction, grading or filling shall begin and no building permit shall be issued for construction, enlargement, or alteration of any manufactured home park until final approval is granted as stated herein. There shall be a two-stage review process for each manufactured home park development proposal, as follows:

(1) Stage 1 – Preliminary Approval.

(a) In conjunction with any other related land use actions, including zone change, variance or conditional use permit approval, the planning commission shall conduct a public hearing to review the manufactured home park preliminary plans. The planning commission shall then forward a report containing their recommendations on the preliminary plan, together with their recommendations on any related land use actions, to the city council for public hearing.

(b) Upon expiration of the appeal period (providing no appeal has been filed) and upon receipt of the report from the planning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing (as set forth in MCMC 18.185.210) on the manufactured home park preliminary plan. After such hearing, the council may require changes in the preliminary plan or impose any of the supplemental conditions set forth in MCMC 18.150.030 which it finds necessary to ensure conformity to the standards contained in this chapter. Following council approval of the preliminary plan, the applicant will be directed to prepare the final plans and documents for submission to the planning commission. The commission shall be authorized to grant final approval in accordance with subsection (2) of this section.

(c) In the case of an appeal of a planning commission decision to the city council, the council may refer the preliminary plan back to the planning commission for re-review prior to conducting the procedures set forth in subsection (2) of this section.

(2) Stage 2 – Final Approval. Within one year after approval of the preliminary plan, the applicant shall file a final plan for the entire development. If submission in phases has been authorized, the final plan will be approved in phases. The final plan shall be sufficiently detailed to indicate fully the ultimate appearance of the manufactured home park. Copies of legal documents required for dedication or reservation of public facilities or for deed restrictions, management agreements, etc., shall also be submitted. Upon receipt of the final plan, the planning commission shall examine such plans and documents to determine whether they conform in all substantial respects to the previously approved preliminary plan and the stipulations of any other related land use actions. If the planning commission should require any changes, the commission shall permit the applicant to revise the plan and/or documents and resubmit the final plan within 60 days. The decision of the planning commission shall be final. Final approval, either for a phase or for the entire plan, shall be valid for a 12-month period; however, the planning commission, in its discretion, may extend approval for additional six-month periods, provided written request from the applicant is submitted prior to the expiration date. [Ord. 832 § 1 (Exh. A), 2020; Ord. 508 § 5.10.2, 1982].


18.120.040 Outline development plan (optional).

The manufactured home park application may be filed on the basis of an outline plan or the developer may omit this step and file his application based on the detailed preliminary plan. The purpose of an outline plan is to demonstrate the intent of the developer at an early stage of the plan with a minimum of design costs. [Ord. 832 § 1 (Exh. A), 2020; Ord. 508 § 5.10.3, 1982].


18.120.050 Phased development.

When an applicant desires to develop an approved preliminary plan in phases, the council may authorize a time schedule for submitting the various phases for final approval in periods of time in excess of one year, but in no case shall the total time period for submitting all phases be greater than five years without resubmission of the preliminary plan. Phases submitted for final approval after the passage of one year may be required to have modifications to avoid conflict with a change in the comprehensive plan or implementing regulations. [Ord. 832 § 1 (Exh. A), 2020; Ord. 508 § 5.10.4, 1982].


18.120.060 Limitation on resubmission.

Whenever an application for a manufactured home park has been denied, no application for the same plan or any portion thereof shall be heard by the planning commission within one year after the date of denial. [Ord. 832 § 1 (Exh. A), 2020; Ord. 508 § 5.10.5, 1982].


18.120.070 Financial responsibility.

As a condition to granting final approval, the submission of satisfactory evidence that all improvements within the manufactured home park will be placed may be required. For the purpose of this section, the criteria for satisfactory evidence set forth in MCMC Title 17 shall apply. [Ord. 832 § 1 (Exh. A), 2020; Ord. 508 § 5.10.6, 1982].


18.120.080 Adherence to approved plan.

The applicant shall agree in writing to be bound, for himself and his successors in interest, by the conditions prescribed for final approval. The approved final plan and phased development schedule shall control the issuance of all building permits and shall restrict the nature, location, and design of all uses. Minor changes in an approved plan may be authorized by the city administrator if such changes are consistent with the purpose and general character of the approved plan. All other modifications, including extension or revisions of the phased development schedule, shall be processed in the same manner as the original application and shall be subject to the same procedure requirements. [Ord. 832 § 1 (Exh. A), 2020; Ord. 508 § 5.10.7, 1982].


18.120.090 General conditions and limitations.

(1) Area. A manufactured home park shall embrace an area of not less than five acres of land. Projects with less acreage may be considered where the applicant can demonstrate that a smaller parcel can meet the criteria for approval.

(2) Density. In no event shall the density exceed 10 manufactured homes per gross acre.

(3) Yard Regulations. Each manufactured home park shall contain yard areas (setbacks) which shall be measured parallel to and at right angles from the front, side and rear property lines. The front and rear building setback lines shall extend the full width of the property. No building, structure or manufactured home shall be located so that any part extends into the area between the building setback line and the property line. Fences and signs may be placed within the yard area as an exception to this subsection. Yards shall be established as follows:

(a) Manufactured home parks shall have a setback of at least 25 feet from any interior property line abutting residentially zoned property;

(b) Manufactured home parks shall have a setback of at least 15 feet from any interior property line abutting commercially or industrially zoned property; and

(c) Manufactured home parks shall have a setback of at least 20 feet from any abutting street right-of-way.

(4) Development of Boundaries. An ornamental, sight-obscuring fence or wall of not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height and/or evergreen planting of not less than five feet in height at planting shall surround the manufactured home park. If the option of plant materials is chosen in lieu of a fence or wall, such planting shall meet the screening standards of MCMC 18.110.040. The fence, wall or planting may be placed up to the property line if adequate vision clearance for entrances and exits is maintained.

(5) Regulating Standards. Rules establishing minimum safety standards for the design, construction, sanitation, operating, licensing, and maintenance of manufactured home parks are contained in Chapter 446 ORS. The Department of Commerce shall review plans and inspect construction of manufactured home parks to ensure compliance.

(6) Buildings and Structures. All buildings and structures within the manufactured home park boundaries shall comply with the building code, when regulated, by the Manufactured Home Code, NFPA 501 Oregon Manufactured Dwelling Installation Specialty Code or Title 24 Subtitle B Chapter 20 Part 3280, Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards. [Ord. 832 § 1 (Exh. A), 2020; Ord. 508 § 5.10.8, 1982].


18.120.100 Park design standards.

Design plans for all utilities, access roads and paved areas shall be submitted to the city engineer following preliminary approval. Streets, sidewalks, curbs and drainage shall be designed and constructed in accordance with city standards. The city engineer may specify additional design standards where applicable. Upon completion of manufactured home park construction, one set of “as-builts” suitable for reproduction (15-inch by 18-inch three-mil mylar) shall remain on file with the city. Improvement standards for a manufactured home park are as follows:

(1) Internal Roads and Access. Vehicular access to the manufactured home park from abutting major or collector streets is permitted; however, vehicular access from minor streets is prohibited. No manufactured home park entrance shall be located closer than 100 feet from any intersection of any public street. Stop signs shall be provided at all intersections with public streets. Pedestrian access into the manufactured home park shall be provided by connecting the interior pedestrian pathway network with sidewalks located in the right-of-way of perimeter streets.

(a) Internal access roads shall provide direct access to each manufactured home space. Each manufactured home space shall be served directly by a walkway not less than five feet in width and shall be separated from the vehicular roadways by at least a curb. Roadways and sidewalks shall be paved with a crushed rock and asphaltic or concrete surfacing according to specifications established by the city engineer. The minimum surfaced width of the roadway within an accessway shall be 21 feet, if there is no parking allowed, and 31 feet, if parking is allowed. The first 50 feet of the accessway measured from the street shall be surfaced to a width of 30 feet and shall be connected to an existing street according to plans approved by the city engineer. Road cul-de-sacs shall have a minimum outside turning radius of 40 feet. All corners shall have a minimum radius of 15 feet.

(b) All accessways and walkways within the park shall be lighted at night to provide a minimum of one and one-half foot candles of illumination. Wires for service to light poles and manufactured home spaces shall be underground.

(c) If the park provides spaces for 50 or more manufactured home units, each vehicular way in the park shall be named and marked with signs which are similar in appearance to those used to identify public streets. A map of the names of vehicular ways shall be provided to the fire department. Stop signs shall be provided at all intersections with public streets.

(2) Directory. For emergency response purposes, a permanent weatherproof sign board shall be located at, or near, the park entrance indicating the location of each manufactured home space, the space number or address, and the occupant’s name. The design and legibility of the directory shall be subject to review and approval by the city fire marshal and/or police chief.

(3) Fire Protection. If a manufactured home space or permanent structure in the park is more than 500 feet from a public fire hydrant, the park shall have water supply mains designed to serve fire hydrants and hydrants shall be provided within 500 feet of such space or structure or as designated and approved by the city engineer. Each hydrant within the park shall be located on a vehicular way and shall conform in design and capacity to the public hydrants in the city of Myrtle Creek.

(4) Utilities. Each manufactured home space shall be provided with a connection to a city sewer and water line and shall be individually metered. All utility services within the park shall be underground.

(5) Storage Yard. Each manufactured home park shall provide storage yards for trailers, boats, campers and recreational equipment. The storage yard shall contain one parking space per manufactured home space for the parking/storage of campers, trailers, boats, etc. The storage yard shall be constructed of a dust-free, all weather surface and shall be enclosed by a six-foot-high, sight-obscuring fence and gate. Wash racks, if provided, shall be located in the storage yard and shall have adequate drainage. Except for temporary storage of 30 days or less, no manufactured home shall be stored in a manufactured home park unless it is properly installed in a manufactured home space. There shall be no outdoor storage of furniture, tools, equipment, building materials or supplies belonging to the occupants or management of the park except in the storage yard.

(6) Off-Street Parking. In addition to the parking spaces contained in the storage yard, two vehicle parking spaces (meeting the dimensional standards of Chapter 18.90 MCMC) shall be provided for each manufactured home space. One of the required spaces may be located within the manufactured home space with the remaining spaces in common parking areas. At least one-third of the total required parking spaces shall be distributed throughout the park and made available for guest parking.

(7) Landscaping. In the design of the manufactured home park, every effort shall be made to retain existing trees. In addition:

(a) Each manufactured home space shall be landscaped.

(b) An underground irrigation system shall be included with all landscaped areas and written assurance shall be given prior to final approval that all landscaping shall be adequately maintained.

(8) Recreation/Open Space.

(a) Each manufactured home park shall provide common open space consisting of 200 square feet per manufactured home space for recreational purposes. Such recreation space may be broken up into separate areas providing each measures no less than 50 feet by 50 feet;

(b) Each manufactured home park common open space shall provide a general play area restricted to that use if the manufactured home park accommodates children under 14 years of age. The play area shall be no less than 25 percent of the total square footage of open space. A separate play area is not required if the manufactured home park accommodates children who are under 14 years of age and is constructed so as to provide each space with a minimum of 4,500 square feet; and

(c) Recreation areas shall be suitably improved and maintained for recreational purposes and for the type of residents for whom the manufactured home park is intended.

(9) Management Office. Each manufactured home park shall contain and maintain a management office. It shall have access to a lavatory and water closet. It shall provide suitable enclosed facilities for mail distribution and public telephone service.

(10) Laundry Room. Adequate and properly equipped laundry room facilities shall be made available to the residents of the manufactured home park.

(11) Manufactured Home Space Requirements. It shall be the discretion of the developer to design each manufactured home space for single-wide or larger manufactured homes. Each space must contain adequate area to allow for patio, tenant storage, parking, landscaping, setback and separation requirements; and provided further, that the following minimum space requirements are met:

(a) The minimum size for a manufactured home space in a manufactured home park shall be 4,500 square feet. Each space shall have a minimum width of 50 feet and a minimum depth of 90 feet;

(b) Each manufactured home space shall have a pad which is a minimum of 10 feet in width and 40 feet in length. Manufactured home pads shall be paved with asphaltic or concrete surfacing or with crushed rock contained within concrete curbing or pressure treated wooden screens; and

(c) Manufactured homes shall be parked on stands provided, shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the edge of accessways and shall observe the setbacks as established in MCMC 18.120.090(3).

(12) Patio. Each manufactured home space shall be provided with a patio having a minimum area of 200 square feet. The patio shall have a minimum width of 10 feet and a minimum length of 20 feet and shall be constructed adjacent and parallel to each manufactured home. Patios shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, or suitable hard-surfaced material.

(13) Tenant Storage. One permanent storage building containing a minimum of 32 square feet of floor area may be provided for each manufactured home space. The building height shall be a minimum of seven feet and a maximum of eight feet. A storage building with a minimum of 75 cubic feet may be provided for each lot or in locker compounds within close proximity to the lot being served.

(14) Separation Requirements. The minimum space between any manufactured home and any adjacent manufactured home or permanent building, other than one permitted in a manufactured home space, shall be 20 feet. Permanent structures situated in one manufactured home space shall be separated by at least 10 feet from permanent structures in an adjoining space. All accessory buildings within each manufactured home space shall be separated in accordance with the building code or the Department of Commerce Manufactured Home Code, whichever is greater. [Ord. 832 § 1 (Exh. A), 2020; amended during 2012 recodification; Ord. 508 § 5.10.9, 1982].


18.120.110 Manufactured home construction standards.

(1) Placement Standards. No manufactured home may be placed or relocated within the manufactured home park without first obtaining a manufactured home placement permit, and each manufactured home permitted shall meet the following standards as determined by the building official:

(a) All manufactured homes shall bear an Oregon insignia of compliance with a date not previous to two years from the date of placement or otherwise conform to the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) manufactured home construction and safety standards in effect at that time. No reconstruction or equipment installation shall have been made to the manufactured home unless it has been state approved as evidenced by an appropriate insignia;

(b) A manufactured home shall contain not less than 500 square feet of space as determined by measurement of the exterior of the unit exclusive of any trailer hitch device; and

(c) A manufactured home shall contain at least one bathroom with a shower or tub and a sink, one bedroom, one kitchen and one living area.

(2) Skirting. A manufactured home permitted in a manufactured home park shall be provided with continuous skirting or the perimeter of the foundation may be masonry units.

(3) Axles Removed. Wheels, hubs and axles must be removed from manufactured homes. The manufactured home pad may be developed by grading so that 50 percent of the perimeter of the manufactured home abuts an earthen berm no more than six inches below the finished grade of the floor of the manufactured home upon installation, with the remainder of the perimeter to be skirted with material compatible with the manufactured home. [Ord. 832 § 1 (Exh. A), 2020; Ord. 508 § 5.10.10, 1982].


18.120.120 Accessory structures.

(1) Structures Permitted. Permitted accessory structures include, but are not limited to, carports, storage lockers, laundry facilities, swimming pools, and recreation, management and community buildings.

(a) All accessory structures shall be of a consistent design and shall be constructed in accordance with the building code; and

(b) No structural additions shall be built onto or become part of any manufactured/mobile home and no manufactured home shall support any building in any manner. The words “structural additions” shall not be construed to exclude the construction of any awning or patio cover adjacent to a manufactured home. Cabanas, ramadas and similar structures shall not be permitted.

(2) Inclusion in Approved Plan. Subsequent to manufactured home park approval, any building permit applied for at a later date for accessory structures which were not included in, or approved as part of, the overall plan shall be referred to the planning commission with a request for inclusion in the plan as a “plan amendment.” [Ord. 832 § 1 (Exh. A), 2020; Ord. 508 § 5.10.11, 1982].


Chapter 18.125 TRAILER HOUSES AND TRAILER COACHES

Sections:

18.125.010    Definitions.

18.125.020    Regulations.

18.125.030    Reestablishment prohibited.

18.125.040    Occupational tax.

18.125.050    Parking – Regulations.

18.125.060    Parking – Time limit.

18.125.070    Violations – Penalties.

    Legislative history: Ord. 708.


18.125.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the words “trailer coach camp” shall be defined to mean a lot or parcel of land used for the accommodation of two or more trailer coaches occupied as living or sleeping quarters. As used in this chapter, the words “trailer coach” shall be defined to mean any camp car, trailer home or any structure converted from a trailer into a living unit. A “lot” shall be defined to mean a parcel of land either fronting on or having access to a public street with a minimum area of 5,000 square feet or a parcel of land with an area of less than 5,000 square feet if it existed as a recorded lot prior to the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter. “Person” shall be defined to mean any individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or corporation. [Ord. 216 § 1, 1953].


18.125.020 Regulations.

It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate within the limits of the city of Myrtle Creek any trailer coach camp, except that a trailer camp existing prior to the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter may continue to operate; provided, that:

(1) It meets all the requirements of the laws of the state of Oregon governing tourist camps and the rules and regulations of the Oregon State Board of Health pertaining thereto.

(2) The number of trailer parking units shall not exceed the present provided utility facilities. Present utilities shall not be increased except to comply with the Oregon State Board of Health regulations. [Ord. 216 § 2, 1953].


18.125.030 Reestablishment prohibited.

If an existing trailer camp is discontinued and not in operation for a period of more than six months, it shall not thereafter be reestablished and operated. [Ord. 216 § 3, 1953].


18.125.040 Occupational tax.

An existing trailer camp shall pay an annual occupational tax as established by city council resolution in the adoption of the city of Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges. [Ord. 216 § 4, 1953].


18.125.050 Parking – Regulations.

It shall be unlawful to park or place any trailer coach used for sleeping or living purposes within the city for any period of time exceeding three hours, except in a trailer camp, and no cooking shall be done in a trailer coach outside a trailer camp. It is to be understood that the parking of trailer coaches in the city that are not used for sleeping or living purposes is not regulated by this chapter, but is regulated by the general ordinances of the city regulating vehicular parking when parked on the city streets or alleys; provided, however, that a trailer coach used for sleeping or living purposes may be parked in the city outside of a trailer camp for a period of not to exceed 15 days, with no cooking permitted outside of a trailer camp, after the owner or occupant thereof has secured from the city recorder a permit therefor and has paid a permit fee set by resolution in the handbook of fees and charges. This permit shall be temporary only; and when a permit shall have been issued for a particular trailer coach once in a calendar year, another temporary permit shall not be issued for that particular coach in the same calendar year.

The removal of the wheels or the setting of a trailer coach on posts or footings shall not be considered as removing said trailer coach from the regulations affecting trailer coaches, unless such trailer is made to conform with the building code and other ordinances of the city of Myrtle Creek regulating dwellings and land uses. [Ord. 216 § 5, 1953].


18.125.060 Parking – Time limit.

No trailer shall be parked on any street within the corporate limits for over 24 consecutive hours. [Ord. 216 § 6, 1953].


18.125.070 Violations – Penalties.

Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or failing to comply therewith, shall upon conviction in the municipal court be subject to a fine of not to exceed $100.00 and to imprisonment in the city jail for one day for each $2.00 of the fine unpaid. [Ord. 216 § 7, 1953].


Chapter 18.130 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT

Sections:

18.130.010    Planned development.

18.130.020    Objective.

18.130.030    Application and plan check fee.

18.130.040    Approval procedure.

18.130.050    Outline development plan (optional).

18.130.060    Phased development.

18.130.070    Limitation on resubmission.

18.130.080    Financial responsibility.

18.130.090    Adherence to approved plan.

18.130.100    Minimum area of development.

18.130.110    General requirements.

18.130.120    Density.

18.130.130    Common property.

18.130.140    Improvement standards.

18.130.150    Control of development after completion.


18.130.010 Planned development.

The purpose of a planned development is to permit the application of new technology by allowing a greater freedom of design in land development than may be possible under a strict interpretation of the provisions of the general district regulations. The use of these provisions is dependent upon the submission of an acceptable plan and satisfactory assurance it will be carried out. A planned development, as defined in Chapter 18.10 MCMC, may either be residential or commercial in nature or may contain a combination of compatible uses. A planned development may be located within any zoning district as a conditional use, provided such plans accomplish substantially the same general objectives as the comprehensive plan of the city of Myrtle Creek. After the final plan is reviewed and formally approved as specified herein, it shall be designated as the approved plan. In the case of a conflict in regulations, the provisions of MCMC 18.130.020 through 18.130.150 shall govern. [Ord. 508 § 5.11.0, 1982].


18.130.020 Objective.

A planned development endeavors to provide:

(1) A choice in the types of environment, occupancy, tenure (e.g., cooperatives, individual ownership, condominiums, leasing, etc.), housing and accessory community facilities.

(2) Useable open space and recreation areas.

(3) Convenience in location of accessory commercial and service areas.

(4) Preservation of natural topographical and geological features with emphasis on preservation of soil erosion, conservation of existing surface and subsurface water and preservation of major trees or other environmentally enhancing features. [Ord. 508 § 5.11.1, 1982].


18.130.030 Application and plan check fee.

Applications for a planned development shall be made by the owner of the affected property or his authorized agent and shall be filed on forms as described in MCMC 18.185.130 at least 30 days prior to the planning commission meeting at which consideration is desired. The application shall be accompanied by the following:

(1) Plan Check Fee. In addition to any other fees or charges that may be applicable to a planned development, a plan check fee established by the city of Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges shall be submitted with the preliminary plan.

(2) Written Statement. A written statement shall be filed with the preliminary plan containing an explanation of:

(a) The character of the proposed development and the manner in which it has been designed to take advantage of the concept and how and why the development conforms to the comprehensive plan;

(b) Number of housing units proposed (density);

(c) If commercial or industrial activities are to be included in a zone in which they are not permitted under the general district regulations, a detailed statement of the economics of such development and supporting data shall be submitted;

(d) The present ownership of all of the land included within the planned development;

(e) The method proposed to maintain common open areas, buildings and other facilities, private streets or jointly held properties (i.e., corporations, homeowners associations, etc.); and

(f) The proposed time schedule for development.

(3) Site Plan. Submit two sets of plans and accompanying documents containing the information described in MCMC 18.185.140. All plot plans shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet or, for areas over 100 acres, one inch equals 100 feet, or as otherwise approved by the city engineer. The developer shall obtain a trained and experienced registered architect, landscape architect, surveyor and/or engineer to prepare plans for all planned developments to enable the most expeditious processing for such developments.

(4) Landscaping Plan. The preliminary plan shall include a conceptual layout indicating the location of all required landscaping. The final plan shall provide a detailed landscaping plan indicating location and type of plant materials, location of irrigation system, and maintenance provisions.

(5) Approved Plan. Upon final approval of the planned development, one print and one three-mil mylar of the approved plan or recorded plat, if applicable, shall be submitted to the city along with one copy of each of recorded deed restrictions, management agreements and other finalized documents. [Ord. 508 § 5.11.2, 1982].


18.130.040 Approval procedure.

No construction, grading or filling shall begin and no building permit shall be issued for construction, enlargement or alteration of a planned development until final approval is granted as stated herein. A planned development shall also be subject to the laws and ordinances relating to condominiums and subdivisions, when applicable, and the city shall have received a copy of the properly recorded plat before a building permit will be processed. There shall be a three-stage process for each planned development proposal, as follows:

(1) Stage 1 – Use Permit. An application for a conditional use permit shall be filed in accordance with the procedures of Chapter 18.170 MCMC. Approval of the conditional use permit shall give tentative approval of the use of the proposed location for planned development purposes contingent upon submission of acceptable plans and final approval of the proposed development. The decision of the planning commission to approve or deny a conditional use permit is subject to appeal as set forth in Chapter 18.190 MCMC.

(2) Stage 2 – Preliminary Approval.

(a) Following, or in conjunction with, conditional use permit approval, the planning commission shall conduct a site review of the preliminary plan. The planning commission shall then forward a report containing their recommendations on the planned development to the city council for public hearing.

(b) Upon expiration of the appeal period (providing no appeal has been filed) and upon receipt of the report from the planning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing (as set forth in MCMC 18.185.210) on the preliminary plan. After such hearing, the council may require changes or impose conditions of approval as are in its judgment necessary to ensure conformity to the criteria and standards contained in this chapter and to the subdivision regulations of the city, if applicable. Following council approval of the preliminary plan, the applicant will be directed to prepare the final plans and documents for submission to the planning commission. The commission shall be authorized to grant final approval in accordance with subsection (3) of this section.

(c) In the case of an appeal, but where the decision of the planning commission to approve the conditional use permit is upheld, the council may refer the preliminary plan back to the planning commission for re-review prior to conducting the procedures set forth in subsection (2)(b) of this section.

(3) Stage 3 – Final Approval. Within one year after approval of the preliminary plan, the applicant shall file a final plan for the entire development. If submission in phases has been authorized, the final plan will be approved in phases. The final plan shall be sufficiently detailed to indicate fully the ultimate appearance of the planned development. Copies of legal documents required for dedication or reservation of public facilities or for deed restrictions, management agreements, etc., shall also be submitted. Upon receipt of the final plan, the city administrator or the city administrator’s designee shall examine such plans and documents to determine whether they substantially conform to the previously approved preliminary plan and the stipulations of the conditional use permit. If the city administrator or the city administrator’s designee should require any changes, the administrator shall permit the applicant to revise the plan and/or documents and resubmit the final plan within 60 days. The decision of the city administrator shall be final subject to the procedures of subsection (4) of this section. Final approval, either for a phase or for the entire plan, shall be valid for a 12-month period. The city administrator or the city administrator’s designee may extend approval for an additional one-year period, provided a written request from the applicant is submitted prior to the expiration date, stating the reason why an extension should be granted.

(4) Filing of Plats. In the case of a planned development which involves a subdivision or condominium plat and upon the city administrator’s or the city administrator’s designee’s determination that the final plan and supplementary documents conform to all requirements:

(a) When compliance with conditions has been assured, the plat shall be signed by the city administrator. The subdivider shall, without delay, submit the plat for all other signatures required by law. Approval of the plat shall be null and void if the plat is not recorded within 90 days after the date of the last required signature.

(b) Condominium plats shall conform to Oregon law and are not reviewed by the planning commission. [Ord. 508 § 5.11.3, 1982].


18.130.050 Outline development plan (optional).

The planned development conditional use permit application may be filed on the basis of an outline plan, or the developer may omit this step and file his application based on the detailed preliminary plan. The purpose of an outline plan is to demonstrate the intent of the developer at an early stage of the plan with a minimum of design costs. [Ord. 508 § 5.11.4, 1982].


18.130.060 Phased development.

When an applicant desires to develop an approved preliminary plan in phases, the council may authorize a time schedule for submitting the various phases for final approval in periods of time in excess of one year, but in no case shall the total time period for submitting all phases be greater than five years without resubmission of the preliminary plan. Phases submitted for final approval after the passage of one year may be required to have modifications to avoid conflict with a change in the comprehensive plan or implementing regulations. [Ord. 508 § 5.11.5, 1982].


18.130.070 Limitation on resubmission.

Whenever a conditional use permit for a planned development has been denied, no application for the same plan or any portion thereof shall be filed by the same applicant within one year after the date of denial. [Ord. 508 § 5.11.6, 1982].


18.130.080 Financial responsibility.

As a condition to granting final approval, the submission of satisfactory evidence that the streets, utilities, parking areas and sidewalk improvements will be placed shall be required. The submission of satisfactory evidence for improvements in the common area may also be required. For the purpose of this section, the criteria for satisfactory evidence set forth in MCMC Title 17 shall apply. [Ord. 508 § 5.11.7, 1982].


18.130.090 Adherence to approved plan.

The applicant shall agree in writing to be bound, for himself and his successors in interest, by the conditions prescribed for approval of a development. The approved final plan and phased development schedule shall control the issuance of all building permits and shall restrict the nature, location, and design of all uses. Minor changes in an approved plan may be authorized by the city administrator if such changes are consistent with the purpose and general character of the approved plan. All other modifications, including extension or revisions of the phased development schedule, shall be processed in the same manner as the original application and shall be subject to the same procedure requirements. [Ord. 508 § 5.11.8, 1982].


18.130.100 Minimum area of development.

(1) The minimum area for a planned development shall be 22 contiguous acres of land except as allowed by subsection (2) of this section.

(2) A planned development may be for a tract of land that will accommodate six or more units if the planning commission finds, upon a showing by the landowner, that a planned development is in the public interest because one or more of the following conditions exist:

(a) An unusual physical or topographic feature of importance to the people of the area, or the community as a whole, exists on the site or in the neighborhood which can be conserved and still leave the landowner equivalent use of the land by the use of a planned development; or

(b) The property or its neighborhood has a historical character of importance to the community that will be protected by the use of a planned development; or

(c) The property is adjacent to property which has been developed or redeveloped under a planned development, and a planned development will contribute to the maintenance of the amenities and values of the neighboring planned development. [Ord. 508 § 5.11.9, 1982].


18.130.110 General requirements.

A planned development is designed as a single entity in order to promote flexibility and innovation in design and preservation of special features of the site. The design shall, however, be consistent with the general use provisions of the district regulations. A planned development may be designed as a related group of dwelling units (single-family, duplex, dwelling, zero side yard dwellings, multifamily or condominiums) or for a number of uses according to a plan which is susceptible to development and regulations as one complex land unit, rather than an aggregation of individual buildings located on separate lots.

(1) Setbacks. Minimum lot size, front, side and rear yards and lot width shall not be regulated specifically by the zoning district, but will be determined during the planned development process. Dimensional standards will be based on density, fire and life safety, access to sunlight, the relationship of buildings to each other, the street system and open space land.

(2) Building Height. The maximum building height shall, in no event, exceed those building heights prescribed in the zone in which the planned development is proposed, except that a greater height may be approved if surrounding open space within the planned development, building setbacks, and other design features are used to avoid any adverse impact due to the greater height.

(3) Accessory Uses. In addition to the accessory uses typical of the primary uses authorized, accessory uses approved as part of a planned development may include the following uses:

(a) Golf course.

(b) Private park, lake or waterway.

(c) Recreation area.

(d) Recreation building, club house or social hall.

(e) Other accessory structures which the planning commission finds are designed to serve primarily the residents of the planned development and which are compatible to the design of the planned development. [Ord. 508 § 5.11.10, 1982].


18.130.120 Density.

The residential density of a planned development shall not exceed the density of the district in which it is located. Except for the site capacity calculation of the R-H district, the gross area shall be used when calculating density. Areas of public or semi-public uses within the planned development will be included in calculating gross density. However, the applicant may choose to utilize, as an alternative option to the gross density calculation, the site capacity calculation contained in the R-H district regulations (MCMC 18.25.090) for a planned development located in any of the other districts when the site capacity calculation is found to provide superior standards for protection of the land or the development in general. [Ord. 508 § 5.11.11, 1982].


18.130.130 Common property.

Common property in a planned development is a parcel or parcels of land, together with the improvements thereon, the use and enjoyment of which are shared by the owners and occupants. When common property exists, the ownership of such common property may be either public or private. Satisfactory arrangements shall be made for the improvement, operation and maintenance of such common property and facilities, including private streets, drives, service and parking areas and recreational and open space areas.

(1) Creation of Common Property. No area may be accepted as common property within a planned development unless it meets the following requirements:

(a) The location, shape, size and character of the open space is suitable for the planned development;

(b) The common property is for amenity or recreational purposes, and the uses authorized are appropriate to the scale and character of the planned development, considering its size, density, expected population, topography and the number and type of dwellings provided;

(c) Common property will be suitably improved for its intended use, except that common areas containing natural features worthy of preservation may be left unimproved. The buildings, structures, and improvements to be permitted in the common property shall be appropriate accessory uses or amenities;

(d) The development schedule which is part of the development plan coordinates the improvement of the common property (including the construction of buildings and other structures) with the construction of residential dwellings in the planned development; and

(e) If buildings, structures or other improvements are to be made in the common property, the developer provides a bond or other adequate assurance that the buildings, structures and improvements will be completed. The city shall release the bond or other assurances when the buildings, structures or other improvements have been completed according to the development plan.

(2) Conveyance of Common Property. Land shown on the final plan as common property shall be conveyed under one of the following options:

(a) To either a public agency or to the city of Myrtle Creek. The public agency or the city shall agree to maintain the common open space and any buildings, structures or other improvements which have been placed on it; or

(b) To an association of owners or tenants, created as a nonprofit corporation under the laws of the state, which shall adopt and impose articles of incorporation and bylaws and adopt and impose a declaration of covenants and restrictions on the common property that is acceptable to the planning commission and city council as providing for the continuing care of the space. Such an association shall be formed and continued for the purpose of maintaining the common property.

(3) Permitted Uses. No common property may be put to a use not specified in the approved plan unless the approved plan is first amended to permit the use. However, no change of use may be considered as a waiver of any of the covenants limiting the use of common property and all rights to enforce these covenants against any use permitted are expressly reserved.

(4) Enforcement of Provisions. If the common property is not conveyed to a public agency, the covenants governing the use, improvement and maintenance of the common property shall authorize the city to enforce their provisions. [Amended during 2012 recodification; Ord. 508 § 5.11.12, 1982].


18.130.140 Improvement standards.

The same improvements shall be installed to serve each building site in a planned development as is required of a subdivision. Design plans for all utilities, access roads and paved areas shall be submitted to the city engineer following preliminary approval. Streets, sidewalks, curbs and drainage shall be designed and constructed in accordance with city standards. The city engineer may specify additional design standards where applicable. Upon completion of construction, one set of “as-builts” suitable for reproduction (15-inch by 18-inch three-mil mylar) shall be submitted to the city. The following standards shall apply in conjunction with those set forth in MCMC Title 17.

(1) Utilities. All utilities, including wires for service to light poles, shall be underground.

(2) Private Streets. A private street may be permitted in a planned development if provisions are made to assure responsibility for future maintenance. Unless otherwise specifically authorized as part of a street plan, a private street shall comply with the same standards as a public street.

(3) Street Signs. Each vehicular way in the planned development shall be named and marked with signs which have been approved by the city engineer. A map of the named vehicular ways shall be provided to the fire department.

(4) Fire Protection. If a permanent structure in the planned development is more than 500 feet from a public fire hydrant, the planned development shall have water supply mains designed to serve fire hydrants, and hydrants shall be provided within 500 feet of each structure or as designated and approved by the city engineer. Each hydrant within the planned development shall be located in a vehicular way and shall conform in design and capacity to the public hydrants in the city of Myrtle Creek. [Ord. 508 § 5.11.13, 1982].


18.130.150 Control of development after completion.

The approved plan shall continue to control the planned development after it is finished and the following shall apply:

(1) Certificate of Completion. The building official, in issuing a certificate of completion of the planned development, shall note the issuance on the approved plan.

(2) Amendments/Redevelopment. After the certificate of completion has been issued, the use of the land and the construction or alteration of a building or a structure in the planned development shall be governed by the approved plan as follows:

(a) An amendment to a completed planned development may be approved in accordance with MCMC 18.130.090 if it is appropriate because of changes that have occurred since the final plan was approved or because there have been changes in the development policy of the community as reflected by the comprehensive plan or related land use regulations; and

(b) A building or structure that is totally or substantially destroyed may be reconstructed if it is in compliance with the approved plan. [Ord. 508 § 5.11.14, 1982].


Chapter 18.135 ACCESS PERMITS AND TRAFFIC STUDIES

Sections:

18.135.010    Access permits.

18.135.020    Traffic impact studies.


18.135.010 Access permits.

(1) Access Permits Required. Access to a public street requires an access permit in accordance with the following procedures:

(a) Permits for access to city streets shall be subject to review and approval by the city’s public works department. An access permit may be in the form of a letter to the applicant, or it may be attached to a land use decision notice as a condition of approval.

(b) Permits for access to state highways shall be subject to review and approval by the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT).

(c) Permits for access to county highways shall be subject to review and approval by Douglas County, except where the county has delegated this responsibility to the city, in which case the city shall determine whether access is granted based on adopted city standards. [Ord. 508 § 5.12.1, 1982].


18.135.020 Traffic impact studies.

(1) An applicant shall submit a traffic impact study when a proposed land use action affects a transportation facility. The following vehicle trip generation thresholds shall determine the level and scope of transportation analysis required for a new or expanded development:

(a) Transportation Impact Study. If a proposed land division or development will generate 400 or more daily trip ends*, then a Transportation Impact Study (TIS) shall be required. The requirements of a TIS shall be established by ODOT and the county public works department.

(b) Projects that generate less than 400 daily trip ends may also be required to provide a TIS or traffic analysis when, in the opinion of ODOT and the county public works department, a capacity problem and/or safety concern is caused and/or is adversely impacted by the proposed development. [Ord. 508 § 5.12.2, 1982].

*    Trip ends as defined by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), Trip Generation Manual, 6th Edition (or subsequent document updates), or trip generation studies of comparable uses prepared by an engineer.


Chapter 18.140 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES

Sections:

18.140.010    Nonconformities – Definition.

18.140.020    Continuance of a nonconforming use or structure.

18.140.030    Termination of a nonconforming use or structure.

18.140.040    Expansion or alteration of a nonconforming building or use.

18.140.050    Restoration of nonconforming building or structure.

18.140.060    Completion of a nonconforming structure.

18.140.070    Nonconforming lots of record.


18.140.010 Nonconformities – Definition.

It is the purpose of the following sections to provide for the regulation of legally nonconforming uses and structures, lots of record, uses and signs and to specify those circumstances and conditions under which such nonconformities shall be permitted to continue. It is necessary and consistent with the regulations prescribed by this title that those nonconformities which adversely affect orderly development and the value of nearby property not be permitted to continue without restriction. Nonconformities are distinguished as follows:

(1) A “nonconforming use” is an activity using land, buildings, signs and/or structures for purposes which were legally established prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, or subsequent amendments to it, and which would not be permitted to be established as a new use in the zone in which it is located by the regulations of this title.

(2) A “nonconforming structure” is a building or structure, other than a sign, legally established prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, or subsequent amendments to it, which does not fully comply with the district regulations, supplemental district regulations, buffer yard requirements, parking and roadway access or similar ordinance provisions. “Nonconforming structure” does not include within its meaning the term “noncomplying structure” (which refers to a structure which is not in full compliance with provisions of the building code).

(3) A “nonconforming lot of record” is any validly recorded lot which, at the time it was recorded, fully complied with all applicable laws and ordinances but which does not fully comply with the requirements of this title concerning lot dimensions, such as minimum lot size or width. [Ord. 508 § 6.01.0, 1982].


18.140.020 Continuance of a nonconforming use or structure.

The lawful use of a building, structure or land existing or active at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, or amendments thereto, may continue although such use or structure does not conform to the regulations contained herein; provided, that if such nonconforming use or activity is terminated as set forth in MCMC 18.140.030, any future use or activity in or on a structure, building or land shall conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. [Ord. 508 § 6.01.1, 1982].


18.140.030 Termination of a nonconforming use or structure.

Except as provided in MCMC 18.140.040 and 18.140.050, a nonconforming use of land, building or structure shall terminate when the nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of 12 months, and the structure or property shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the zone in which it is located. [Amended during 2012 recodification; Ord. 508 § 6.01.2, 1982].


18.140.040 Expansion or alteration of a nonconforming building or use.

A nonconforming building cannot be enlarged or reconstructed or the use expanded unless it is made to conform to the regulations of this title and of the building code as adopted by the city, except as allowed by the following:

(1) Maintenance and repair of an existing nonconforming building and its equipment or fixtures are permitted; provided, that the value of the repair does not exceed 25 percent of the assessed value of the building as determined by the county assessor for the year in which the work is done.

(2) An existing structure conforming as to use, but nonconforming as to height, setback and other dimensional standards, may be altered or extended, provided the alteration or extension does not result in an increased violation of this title.

(3) Where a fraction of a building or lot contains a nonconforming use, such use shall not be expanded. [Ord. 508 § 6.01.3, 1982].


18.140.050 Restoration of nonconforming building or structure.

(1) A nonconforming building or structure which is damaged by fire, flood, wind, earthquake or other calamity or act of God or the public enemy may be restored, and the occupancy or use of such building or structure or part thereof which existed at the time of such partial destruction may be resumed; provided, that the restoration is commenced within 12 months of the occurrence, and is diligently prosecuted to completion within 18 months of the occurrence.

(2) The restoration or reconstruction of a nonconforming building or structure may not increase the floor area or create a greater nonconformance than existed at the time of damage or destruction. [Ord. 508 § 6.01.4, 1982].


18.140.060 Completion of a nonconforming structure.

Nothing contained in this title shall require any change in the plans, construction, alteration or designated use of a structure for which a building permit has been issued and work has commenced prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, provided the building, in nonconforming or intended for a nonconforming use, is completed and in use within two years from the time the building permit is issued. [Ord. 508 § 6.01.5, 1982].


18.140.070 Nonconforming lots of record.

A building or structure may be erected on any existing single lot of record even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width or both; provided, that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to the area or width or both shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance to yard requirements shall be obtained through action of the city administrator or the city administrator’s designee. [Ord. 508 § 6.01.6, 1982].


Chapter 18.145 EXCEPTIONS TO DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS

Sections:

18.145.010    Exceptions to dimensional standards.

18.145.020    Yards abutting streets – Insufficient right-of-way.

18.145.030    Permitted deviations – Yard requirements.

18.145.040    Minimum lot frontage – Planned developments only.

18.145.050    Exceptions to height regulations.

18.145.060    Architectural projections from buildings.


18.145.010 Exceptions to dimensional standards.

It is the purpose of the following sections to provide a means to determine when greater or lesser setbacks are appropriate and to provide exceptions which allow minor deviations from certain dimensional standards in an attempt to promote good design. [Ord. 508 § 6.02.0, 1982].


18.145.020 Yards abutting streets – Insufficient right-of-way.

(1) Setbacks Increased. To permit or afford better light, air and vision on more heavily traveled streets and on streets of substandard width, to protect arterial streets, and to permit the eventual widening of streets, every yard abutting a portion of street deemed to have insufficient or incomplete right-of-way in accordance with MCMC 18.155.020 shall be increased over the required yard dimension specified in the zone so that the minimum distance from the centerline to the building shall be one-half of the standard right-of-way width plus the applicable yard requirement of the zone.

(2) Commercial/Industrial Districts. Notwithstanding any greater provisions of Chapters 18.25 through 18.70 MCMC and subsection (1) of this section, but to permit better light, air and vision on all streets located within commercial and industrial districts, the distance from the street centerline and building line shall be a minimum of 40 feet. The central business district (C-1) is specifically exempted from the provisions of this subsection. [Ord. 508 § 6.02.1, 1982].


18.145.030 Permitted deviations – Yard requirements.

(1) Solar Orientation. Where buildings are aligned to achieve proper solar orientation and units are designed for solar collectors or passive solar heating, the narrowest part of any yard may be 65 percent of the minimum yard required by the district regulations (see illustration below). A shadow plan based on a statement of the degree of solar access to be provided to each unit and containing the covenants limiting landscaping shall be submitted.
[IMAGE]


(2) Angled Placement. Where a single-family dwelling is placed on a parcel such that its entire front is not parallel to the street, as illustrated below, the minimum yard requirements may be met by averaging the yard width from one end of the building (point A in the illustration below) to the other end of the building (point B); provided, that the yard at the narrowest point is not less than 80 percent of the minimum yard required by the district regulations.


[IMAGE]


(3) Structures may be located within the required side yard and rear yard, and may be located across a lot line, under the following circumstances and subject to the following conditions:

(a) The yard within which the structure is to be located shall abut a lot or parcel which is under the same ownership, and within the same zoning district, as the lot or parcel upon which the structure is to be located;

(b) The city administrator shall have determined that a property line adjustment, as provided for in MCMC Title 17, is impractical or impossible; and

(c) The owner(s) of the property shall execute and record with the Douglas County clerk a deed restriction and covenant to convey both parcels as a single unit of land, thereby recognizing one lot of record. The deed restriction and covenant shall be prepared and recorded in a form which is acceptable to the city administrator. [Ord. 508 § 6.02.2, 1982].


18.145.040 Minimum lot frontage – Planned developments only.

Where a dwelling lot is laid out so that it takes access from a common open space area or pedestrian path, rather than a street, the requirement that a minimum amount of the lot front on a street need not be met. This provision applies to all of the following unit types: single-family, lot line, village house, patio house, atrium house and duplex; provided, that an alley provides for individual auto access to a garage, carport or driveway on each lot and that part of a lot shall be within 120 feet of a street right-of-way along the open space. (See illustration below.)
[IMAGE]


[Ord. 508 § 6.02.3, 1982].


18.145.050 Exceptions to height regulations.

(1) General Exceptions. The height limitations contained in the district regulations do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys, or other appurtenances measuring under six feet in any horizontal dimension which are not intended for human occupancy and which are usually required to be placed above the roof level.

(2) Residential Exception. The residential height restrictions otherwise imposed by this title may be exceeded; provided (a) that any increase of height will not produce an increase in the area covered by the shadow of that building on either its lot or the lot of a neighboring property; and (b) that the shadows shall be projected for the period between 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. solar time on December 21st. In no event shall the maximum height be increased by more than eight feet than otherwise permitted. (See illustration below.)


[IMAGE]


[Ord. 508 § 6.02.4, 1982].


18.145.060 Architectural projections from buildings.

Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, canopies, sunshades, gutters, chimneys, and flues shall not project more than 25 inches into a required yard unless otherwise provided for in this title. [Ord. 508 § 6.02.5, 1982].


Chapter 18.150 SITE REVIEW PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS

Sections:

18.150.010    Site review procedure.

18.150.020    Site review criteria.

18.150.030    Supplemental conditions.

18.150.040    Site investigation report.


18.150.010 Site review procedure.

No structure shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, extended or moved and no land or building shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any use whatsoever until the owner, tenants, contract purchaser, or authorized agent thereof has received verification that the building or use complies with all zoning requirements.

At the time of the erection of any new commercial, industrial, or public/semi-public building, or any new multifamily residential development of three dwelling units or more, or at the time of substantial improvement of more than 50 percent of the gross floor area or more than 3,000 square feet of increased parking area, whichever is greater, of any existing building, a site review shall be conducted. All applications and accompanying site plans shall be reviewed by the city administrator or the city administrator’s designee and, when applicable, by the planning commission. To approve such application for development, it shall be determined that the proposed development maintains or improves the character, integrity, and harmonious development of the general area and provides a safe, stable, efficient and attractive on-site environment consistent with the intent of this title and the comprehensive plan. The criteria set forth in MCMC 18.150.020 and the applicable standards and procedures contained in this chapter shall be utilized in making such determination. Such site review requests shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with the procedures detailed in Chapters 18.185, 18.190 and 18.195 MCMC. After the site plan is formally approved, a “certificate of plan check” shall be issued. [Ord. 508 § 5.01.0, 1982].


18.150.020 Site review criteria.

The site review shall be conducted in accordance with the criteria set forth herein. All applications and accompanying site plans shall be reviewed by the city administrator or the city administrator’s designee and, when applicable, by the planning commission. Any development proposal which deviates from the established criteria shall be referred to the planning commission for determination. The planning commission or the city administrator shall have the power to impose any or all of the supplemental conditions set forth in MCMC 18.150.030 in making their determination.

(1) Identify areas of potential natural hazards where area protection requirements shall be imposed and which shall include, but are not limited to, the following:

(a) Areas of mass movement and areas of greater than 25 percent slope shall require a written site investigation report (MCMC 18.150.040) prior to any excavation or change in topography.

(b) Areas of potential flooding hazards where the floodplain site criteria of the flood hazard area (SD/FHA) shall apply.

(c) Areas of lesser hazard where the imposition of supplemental conditions may be appropriate.

(2) Establish compliance with the use and dimensional standards of the district regulations of Chapters 18.25 through 18.70 MCMC and the supplemental regulations of Chapters 18.75 through 18.90 MCMC, including accessory use provisions and the provisions for off-street parking and loading.

(3) Establish compliance with the functional standards for public improvements contained in this title.

(4) Establish compliance with the protection standards for natural features contained in this title.

(5) Determine adequate sizing of water and sewer pipelines so as to meet the anticipated growth demands and fire protection requirements.

(6) Establish driveway and street grade limitations and traffic visibility on adjoining streets.

(7) Establish compliance with the applicable design standards and improvement requirements for a special district or use.

(8) Establish the adequacy of the grading and drainage plan for the collection and transmission of storm and ground water in order that the drainage from the proposed development will not adversely affect adjoining properties or public rights-of-way.

(9) Consider the effects of slope alteration (cut and fill) on erosion and runoff for surrounding properties and impose restrictions when appropriate.

(10) Determine that the privacy of nearby residents will not be substantially reduced nor will significant views from nearby properties be obstructed.

(11) Establish where the retention of existing vegetation and natural topographic features will be beneficial as a soil stabilizer or is of scenic significance and impose restrictions where appropriate.

(12) Consider the visual impact of the proposed development and the compatibility of the architectural features of the proposed structure(s) and impose restrictions, where appropriate, in order for the development to be harmonious with the character of the surrounding neighborhood or with the community as a whole.

(13) Identify any areas of historic significance where the imposition of protection requirements may be appropriate. [Ord. 508 § 5.01.1, 1982].


18.150.030 Supplemental conditions.

When the imposition of supplemental standards or conditions is authorized by the various provisions of this title, any of the following conditions may be attached to the approval of an application for development in order to avoid detrimental impacts or to protect the best interest of the surrounding properties or the community as a whole; however, any conditions attached shall not be used (1) to intentionally exclude needed housing types, (2) to unnecessarily decrease allowed densities, or (3) to have the effect of discouraging needed housing through unreasonable cost or delay. It is recognized that not all of the following may be applicable to a particular proposal:

(1) Limit the time a certain activity may take place, and/or require restraints to minimize such environmental effects as noise, air pollution emissions, odor, vibration, dust, glare, heat, fire hazards, wastes, traffic generation and visual impact.

(2) Limit, or otherwise designate, the number, size, location, height and lighting of signs.

(3) Limit the location and intensity of outdoor lighting and require its shielding.

(4) Limit the height of a building or other structure or the location of mechanical roof facilities to protect view, privacy or access to sunlight of neighboring properties.

(5) Require sidewalks to be installed.

(6) Require diking, berming, screening, landscaping, or other facility to protect adjacent or nearby property and designate standards for its installation and maintenance.

(7) Establish a special yard or other open space or lot area or dimensions to serve as a buffer yard.

(8) Designate the size, height and materials for the fence.

(9) Impose measures to ensure protection, preservation or enhancement of existing trees over 12 inches caliper, riparian vegetation, water resource, wildlife habitat or other significant natural resource, including requiring a revegetation program where appropriate.

(10) Designate the size, location, screening, drainage, surfacing or other improvement of a parking area or truck loading area.

(11) Designate the size, number, location and nature of vehicle access points including requiring the combining of accesses into commercial and industrial development.

(12) Prohibit direct residential access onto arterials and collectors.

(13) Increase the amount of street dedication or roadway widths or specify improvements within the street right-of-way in accordance with the standards contained in MCMC 18.155.020.

(14) Require the planned development approach for just cause based on significant topographic features or open space needs.

(15) Establish the suitability of a site plan, grading and drainage plan, or other plan by having it prepared and certified by an appropriate licensed professional.

(16) Require a site investigation report as described in MCMC 18.150.040 for just cause based on site hazards in situations not otherwise regulated.

(17) Require performance bonds, deed restrictions, and deed dedications to be posted or filed prior to issuance of a building permit.

(18) Specify other conditions where necessary to permit the development in conformity with the intent and purpose of this title and to avoid detrimental environmental impacts. [Ord. 508 § 5.01.2, 1982].


18.150.040 Site investigation report.

A site investigation report shall be submitted as part of the site review process when the proposed development involves identified mass movement hazard areas or areas of greater than 25 percent slope. Also, the planning commission may require a site investigation report to be submitted for development in other areas of potential natural hazards based on the recommendation of the city engineer for just cause. The site investigation report provides information on the site of development and adjacent land that is likely to be affected by the proposed development. Unless the city engineer determines that certain specifications are not required, the report shall include the information described in subsections (1) through (6) of this section, together with appropriate identification of information sources, the date of information, the methods used in the investigation and approximate man hours spent on the site.

(1) Qualifications to Conduct a Site Investigation Report. The site investigation report shall be prepared by an engineering geologist or an engineer who certifies he is qualified to evaluate soils for stability or a person or team of persons qualified by experience and training to assemble and analyze physical conditions in flood or slope hazard areas. The person or team shall be employed by the applicant but shall be subject to approval as to qualifications by the city administrator.

(2) Background Data in Report. The site investigation report shall contain the following information:

(a) A general analysis of the local and regional topography and geology including the faults, folds, geologic and engineering geologic units and any soil, rock and structural details important to engineering or geologic interpretations.

(b) A history of problems on and adjacent to the site, which may be derived from discussions with local residents and officials and the study of old photographs, reports and newspaper files.

(c) The extent of the surface soil formation and its relationship to the vegetation of the site, the activity of the land form and the location of the site.

(d) Ground photographs of the site with information showing the scale and date of the photographs and their relationship to the topographic map and profiles. The photographs will include a view of the general area, the site of the proposed development and unusual natural features which are important to the interpretation of the hazard potential of the site, including all sites of erosion or accretion.

(3) Topography Map. A topographic base map (one to 100 scale) with a contour interval of two feet (or as is otherwise recommended by the city engineer) may be required identifying the following features and accompanied by references to the sources and date of information used:

(a) The position of the lot line.

(b) The boundaries of the property.

(c) Open areas and the boundaries and species identification of major plant communities.

(d) Any springs, streams, marshy areas or standing bodies of water.

(e) Areas subject to flooding, including those shown on the flood hazard maps prepared under the HUD National Flood Insurance Program.

(f) Cut terraces, erosion scarps and areas exhibiting significant erosion due to improper drainage and runoff concentration.

(g) Geological information, including lithologic and structural details important to engineering and geologic interpretation.

(4) Subsurface Analysis. If, upon initial investigation, it appears there are critical areas where the establishment of geologic conditions at depth is required, a subsurface analysis obtained by drill holes, well logs and other geophysical techniques will be conducted by the person responsible for the site investigation report and will include the following data as appropriate:

(a) The lithology and compaction of all subsurface horizons to bedrock.

(b) The depth, width, slope and bearing of all horizons containing significant amounts of silt and clay and any other subsurface layers.

(c) Underlying areas of buried vegetation.

(5) Development Proposal. The site investigation report may include the following information on the proposed development as applicable. The information will be shown on the topography map as described in subsection (3) of this section or appropriately referenced.

(a) Plans and profiles showing the position and height of each structure, paved area and area where cut and fill is required for the construction.

(b) The percent and location of the surface of the site which will be covered by impermeable or semi-permeable surfaces.

(c) A description of proposed measures which will protect critical biological habitats from any adverse impacts of the development.

(d) A revegetation program designed to return the land to a stable condition as soon as possible following construction and the period of time during which revegetated areas will receive revegetation maintenance.

(e) The time of commencement of revegetation planting. If this does not fall within the optimal revegetation period of November through April, special care of the plantings will be provided for until they are well established.

(6) Conclusions. The site investigation report is to include specific conclusions. The report and its conclusions are a technical determination made by a qualified person; however, because of the potential complexity of many of the issues, the conclusions need not be accepted by the planning commission unless satisfied that all ordinance requirements and development standards are met. The conclusions will be based on data in the report and the sources of information and facts will be specifically referenced. The following conclusions should be stated:

(a) Whether the intended use of the land is or is not compatible with the conditions.

(b) Any existing or potential hazards noted during the investigation.

(c) The manner for achieving compliance with this title and other requirements.

(d) Mitigating recommendations for specific areas of concern and the degree to which they mitigate the concerns. [Ord. 508 § 5.02.0, 1982].


Chapter 18.155 FUNCTIONAL STANDARDS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

Sections:

18.155.010    Purpose.

18.155.020    Street standards.

18.155.030    Sidewalks.

18.155.040    Sanitary sewers.

18.155.050    Drainage.

18.155.060    Water system.

18.155.070    Other utilities.


18.155.010 Purpose.

The general standards set forth in MCMC 18.155.020 through 18.155.070 apply to all development which may involve or affect public facilities.

(1) Water and sewer for all districts shall be provided by public or approved private systems. Any private system shall be authorized by the planning commission.

(2) Construction, reconstruction and repair of streets, sidewalks, sewers, water mains and other public improvements shall be in accordance with specifications adopted by the city and shall be coordinated with the city engineer. [Ord. 508 § 5.03.0, 1982].


18.155.020 Street standards.

The location, width and grade of streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, and to the proposed use of land to be served by the streets. The street system shall be laid out in accordance with the future street plan and functional classification maps and designed to standards to assure adequate traffic circulation that is convenient and safe. Intersection angles, tangents and curves shall be appropriate for the traffic to be carried, considering the terrain. Street determinations shall be made in accordance with the street standards provided and the future street plan and functional classification maps. The criteria contained in the following subsections shall be consistent with adopted street standards as outlined in MCMC Title 17 and will consider both solar access to building sites and the need for utility location. Additional setbacks may be required as set forth in MCMC 18.145.020.

(1) Minimum Right-of-Way Width. All existing continuous minor streets shall be deemed to have insufficient right-of-way if the right-of-way is presently less than 60 feet in width and the street exceeds or is expected to exceed 2,400 feet in length. All other streets in the city shall be deemed to have insufficient or incomplete right-of-way if they are presently less than the standards for the type of street set forth in MCMC Title 17.

(2) Protection From Arterial. Where a development abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the development design shall provide adequate protection for residential properties and shall separate through and local traffic or, if separation is not feasible, shall minimize the traffic conflicts. The design requirements may include a street, parallel access street along the margin of the arterial, screen planting at the rear or side property line to be contained in a nonaccess reservation along the arterial, or other treatment suitable to meet the objectives of this section.

(3) Partial Width Streets. A partial width street, while generally not acceptable, may be approved by the planning commission where reasonably essential to the development and when in conformity with other requirements of this chapter and when it will be practical to require the dedication of the other portion when the adjoining property is developed. Reserve strips and street plugs may be required to preserve the objective of a partial width street.

(4) Future Extensions of Streets. Where necessary to give access to or permit a satisfactory future division of adjoining land, a public street may be extended to the boundary of the development and the resulting dead-end street may be approved without a turnaround. A reserve strip or street plug may be required to preserve the objective of the street extension. The street shall be located to align with any future streets identified in the future street plan and functional classification maps.

(5) Street Improvements.

(a) Streets, including alleys, within a development and streets adjacent to but only partially within a development will be improved. Catch basins will be installed and connected to drainage tile leading to storm sewers or drainage ways. Upon completion of the street improvement, monuments will be reestablished and protected in monument boxes at every public street intersection and all points of curvature and points of tangency of their centerlines.

(b) Street name signs will be installed at street intersections containing the name or number approved by the city council.

(c) Street lights may be required; street lights requiring new poles shall be installed on city approved metal poles and lights and shall be served from an underground source of supply unless exception is made because other electrical lines are not underground.

(6) Bicycle Routes. As identified in the bicycle plan map, the installation of bicycle lanes within streets, separate bicycle paths, or bike route signage shall be required when developing new or reconstructing existing streets. These new bicycle facilities will provide connections to improve the overall bicycle network for the community. Bicycle lanes shall be between four and six feet wide and located on both sides of the street, where practical. Refer to MCMC Table 17.50.030 for affected street types. [Ord. 508 § 5.03.1, 1982].


18.155.030 Sidewalks.

The same sidewalk improvements shall be installed to serve each building site as is required for a subdivision unless alternative pedestrian routes are available and such facilities are not called for in the pedestrian plan map. Required sidewalk widths will vary between five and eight feet, depending on the roadway’s functional classification. Refer to MCMC Table 17.50.030 for affected street types. [Ord. 508 § 5.03.2, 1982].


18.155.040 Sanitary sewers.

Sanitary sewers will be installed to serve each building site to connect the development to existing mains. The city engineer will take into account the capacity and grade to allow for future extension beyond the development. If required sewer facilities will, without further sewer connection, directly serve property outside the development, arrangements may be made to equitably distribute the cost. [Ord. 508 § 5.03.3, 1982].


18.155.050 Drainage.

An adequate system of storm drains will be installed to provide proper drainage for each new development and to connect the development to the existing downstream drainage system. If an upstream area discharges through the property proposed for development, the drainage system will provide capacity to receive the flood water discharge from the upstream area. If the proposed development, or the ultimate development the proposed development will serve, will cause an increase in flood water flow and the downstream drainage system is not sufficient to receive the increase, provisions will be made to increase the downstream capacity. [Ord. 508 § 5.03.4, 1982].


18.155.060 Water system.

Water lines shall be installed to serve each building site to connect the development to existing mains. The city engineer will take into account the need for extension beyond the development and to adequately grid the water system. If a required water main will, without further construction, directly serve property outside the development, arrangements may be made to equitably distribute the cost. Water supply mains shall be designed to serve public fire hydrants and, if a building site is more than 500 feet from a fire hydrant, hydrants shall be provided as designated by the city engineer. [Ord. 508 § 5.03.5, 1982].


18.155.070 Other utilities.

The developer will make necessary arrangements with utility companies or other persons or corporations affected for the installation of underground lines and facilities. Electrical lines and other wires, including, but not limited to, communication, street lighting and cable television, will be placed underground unless the size of the development and the points of connection to existing overhead utility facilities make underground installation impractical. [Ord. 508 § 5.03.6, 1982].


Chapter 18.160 PROTECTION STANDARDS FOR NATURAL FEATURES

Sections:

18.160.010    Purpose.

18.160.020    Steep slopes.

18.160.030    Bluffs and erosion hazard areas.

18.160.040    Ravines and ravine buffers.

18.160.050    Floodplains – Floodways.

18.160.060    Drainageways.

18.160.070    Soil erosion and sedimentation control.


18.160.010 Purpose.

All development shall be preceded by the identification of any environmental or natural feature described in MCMC 18.160.020 through 18.160.070 and shall meet the environmental protection standards applicable to each natural resource identified therein. Reference in this chapter to “open space” is intended to mean the term as it is defined in Chapter 18.10 MCMC. [Ord. 508 § 5.04.0, 1982].


18.160.020 Steep slopes.

In areas of steep slopes, the following standards shall apply:

(1) Twelve to less than 16 percent slope: no more than 40 percent of such areas shall be developed and/or regraded or stripped of vegetation.

(2) Sixteen to 25 percent slope: no more than 30 percent of such areas shall be developed and/or regraded or stripped of vegetation, with the exception that no more than 20 percent of such areas may be disturbed in the case of poor soil suitability (i.e., Nonpareil No. 5).

(3) More than 25 percent slope: not more than 15 percent of such areas shall be developed and/or regraded or stripped of vegetation, with the exception that no more than five percent of such areas may be disturbed in the case of very poor soil suitability (i.e., Nonpareil No. 6).

(4) All erodible slopes shall be protected in accordance with the control standards contained in MCMC 18.160.070. [Ord. 508 § 5.04.1, 1982].


18.160.030 Bluffs and erosion hazard areas.

(1) All such areas shall remain as permanent open space. No uses or improvements other than those permitted herein shall be permitted in any erosion hazard area or any area consisting of bluff as defined by this title.

(2) In the erosion hazard area associated with bluffs, any nonstructural recreational use is permitted, including pedestrian accessways.

(3) Erosion hazard areas may be used to provide vehicular access to nonhazard areas. In this event, an environmental assessment (or site investigation report) shall provide the basis for location of such access. Minimum damage to the area shall be the guide in location of the access.

(4) All erodible slopes shall be protected in accordance with the control standards contained in MCMC 18.160.070. [Ord. 508 § 5.04.2, 1982].


18.160.040 Ravines and ravine buffers.

(1) At least 98 percent of all ravines shall remain in permanent open space. At least 80 percent of all ravine buffers shall remain in permanent open space. No uses or improvements other than those permitted herein shall be permitted in any area consisting of ravines or ravine buffers as defined by this title.

(2) Ravines shall not be the site of any land use or development, with the exception that access to other areas may be provided in ravine areas. In this event, an environmental assessment (or site investigation report) shall provide the basis for location of such access. Minimum damage to the area shall be the guide in location of the access. The protected areas of ravine buffers shall be used only for passive recreation.

(3) All erodible slopes shall be protected in accordance with the control standards contained in MCMC 18.160.070. [Ord. 508 § 5.04.3, 1982].


18.160.050 Floodplains – Floodways.

(1) The determination of floodplain boundaries and the standards for flood hazard area protection are contained in the regulations for the special district/flood hazard area. Whenever any land located in a stream channel or body of water is disturbed, a soil erosion or sedimentation control plan shall be submitted in accordance with MCMC 18.160.070.

(2) Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodways. In accordance with the natural resources element of the comprehensive plan, the floodway shall be designated as open space, forming a greenway, and is to be incorporated in the recreation/open space system proposal. Rights-of-way or easements, whenever feasible, shall be provided at the time of development on all properties located in the floodway as shown on the open space (greenway) proposal.

(3) Greenways are linear green belts linking residential areas with other open space areas. These greenways may contain bicycle paths, footpaths and bridle paths. Connecting greenways between residences and recreational areas is encouraged. Maintenance is limited to minimum removal and avoidance of hazards, nuisances, or unhealthy conditions. [Ord. 508 § 5.04.4, 1982].


18.160.060 Drainageways.

No more than 50 percent of such areas shall be developed. The remaining 50 percent shall remain as permanent open space. Regrading, stripping of vegetation, or filling is permitted in these areas; provided, that:

(1) The time of concentration of stormwater flows remains unchanged or is lengthened.

(2) Stormwater and ground water storage capacity is unchanged or increased.

(3) Vegetation is replanted.

(4) The resultant new drainageway has less velocity than preexisted or reduces streambank erosion through the provision of erosion control measures. [Ord. 508 § 5.04.5, 1982].


18.160.070 Soil erosion and sedimentation control.

(1) SESC Plan. In order to prevent both soil erosion and sedimentation, a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be required as part of an application for development whenever any land located in a stream, stream channel or body of water is disturbed and whenever a development will involve any clearing, grading, transporting, or other form of disturbing land by the removal of earth, including the mining of minerals, sand, and gravel; provided, that any one of the following descriptions applies to said movement of land:

(a) Excavation, fill, or any combination thereof will exceed 500 cubic yards.

(b) Fill will exceed three feet in vertical depth at its deepest point as measured from the natural ground surface.

(c) Excavation will exceed four feet in vertical depth at its deepest point as measured from the natural ground surface.

(d) Excavation, fill, or any combination thereof will exceed an area of 5,000 square feet.

(e) Plant and/or tree cover is to be removed from an area exceeding 5,000 square feet on any parcel of land.

(Note: Specifically exempted from the requirement of a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan are agricultural uses.)

(2) Definitions for the purpose of this section are:

“Erodible slope” shall mean all land with inclines in excess of four percent.

“Large flat surface area (unpaved)” shall mean an area which is flat or whose slope is less than four percent and which consists of more than 1,000 square feet of exposed soil.

“Sedimentation” shall mean the settling out of the soil particles which are transported by water or wind. Sedimentation occurs when the velocity of water or wind in which soil particles are suspended is slowed to a sufficient degree and for a sufficient period of time to allow the particles to settle out of suspension or when the degree of slope is lessened to achieve the same result.

“Soil erosion” shall mean a removal and/or loss of soil by the action of water, ice, gravity, or wind. Erosion includes both the detachment and transport of soil particles.

(3) Erosion Control Measures. All measures necessary to minimize soil erosion and to control sedimentation in the disturbed land area shall be provided, which includes obtaining any appropriate state and/or federal erosion control permits. Specifically, the following protection shall be provided for all disturbed areas: Minimize velocities of water runoff, maximize protection of disturbed areas from stormwater runoff, and retain sedimentation within the development site as early as possible following disturbances. A list of major problem areas for erosion and sedimentation control follows. For each one, the purpose(s) of requiring control is described. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures for all such areas shall be provided with a view toward achieving the specific purpose listed below for which a control plan is required.

(a) Erodible Slopes. Prevent detachment and transportation of soil particles from slope.

(b) Streams, Streambeds, Streambanks, Bodies of Water, Shorelines. Prevent detachment and transportation of soil particles.

(c) Drainageways. Prevent detachment and transportation of soil particles (which would otherwise deposit in streams, bodies of water, or wetland); promote deposit or sediment loads (traversing these areas) before these reach bodies of water.

(d) Land Adjacent to Streams, Ponds, Lakes, and Wetlands. Prevent detachment and transportation of soil particles.

(e) Enclosed Drainage Structure. Prevent sedimentation in structure, erosion at outfall of system and deposit of sediment loads within system or beyond it.

(f) Large Flat Surface Areas (Unpaved). Prevent detachment of soil particles and their off-site transportation.

(g) Impervious Surfaces. Prevent the detachment and transportation of soil (in response to an increase in the rate and/or volume of runoff of the site or its concentration caused by impervious surfaces).

(h) Borrow and Stockpile Areas. Divert runoff from face of slopes which are exposed in the excavation process; convey runoff in stabilized channels to stable disposal points; leave borrow areas and stockpiles in stable condition.

(i) Adjacent Properties. Prevent their erosion and/or being deposited with sediment. [Ord. 508 § 5.04.6, 1982].


Chapter 18.165 VARIANCES

Sections:

18.165.010    Variances.

18.165.020    Authorization to grant a variance.

18.165.030    Variance approval criteria.

18.165.040    Variance classification.

18.165.050    Criteria for granting a sign variance.

18.165.060    Public hearing for a variance.

18.165.070    Final decision for a major variance.

18.165.080    Final decision for a minor variance.

18.165.090    Application procedure and service charge.

18.165.100    Time limit on a variance approval.


18.165.010 Variances.

A variance is an authorized relaxation of the terms of this title where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where conditions exist which are peculiar to the property and which are not the result of the actions of the applicant. A variance shall be permitted, altered or denied as set forth in MCMC 18.165.020 through 18.165.050. [Ord. 508 § 6.03.0, 1982].


18.165.020 Authorization to grant a variance.

A variance may be authorized only from the requirements for off-street parking and loading, building height, lot area, lot coverage, size of yards and open spaces. The authority to grant a variance does not include authority to approve a development that is designed, arranged or intended for a use not otherwise permitted in the location. A variance may be authorized from a specified provision of this title upon finding that strict application of the requirement would render the parcel incapable of reasonable economic use.

(1) Variances may be granted under the requirements of this title as follows when it can be shown that, owing to special and unusual circumstances related to a specific piece of property, the literal interpretation of this title would cause an undue or unnecessary hardship:

(a) The Myrtle Creek planning commission may grant major variances when part of a quasi-judicial application or an administrative decision is appealed to the commission or referred by the city administrator.

(b) Planning commission review shall be in accordance with MCMC 18.185.210 through 18.185.270.

(c) The city administrator or the administrator’s designee may grant major variances and minor variances.

(2) Variances to the requirements of the special district/flood hazard area shall be in accordance with MCMC 18.70.140.

(3) Minor variances may be requested to the building coverage, setbacks, projections into required yards and structure height development standards for permitted uses in the residential zoning districts.

(4) Minor variances may not be requested, nor approved, for lot area and lot width. Minor variances shall not be requested, nor shall they be approved, to the regulations in commercial zoning districts.

(5) Major and minor variances shall not be requested, nor shall they be approved, to allow a use of land that is not permitted in a zoning district.

(6) The planning commission or city administrator shall conduct a site review and, in granting a major variance, may impose those conditions set forth in MCMC 18.150.030, which it finds necessary to protect the best interest of the surrounding property or neighborhood and to otherwise achieve the objectives and purposes of the comprehensive plan and other applicable policies of the city. [Ord. 508 § 6.03.1, 1982].


18.165.030 Variance approval criteria.

The city may permit and authorize a variance from the requirements of this title only when there are practical difficulties in the application of this title. A major variance may only be granted by the planning commission, the administrator, or the administrator’s designee; and only after all of the following criteria are met. A minor variance may be granted only after the criteria in subsections (4) and (5) of this section are met.

(1) A hardship is created by exceptional or extraordinary circumstance or condition that applies to the property or to the intended use that does not apply generally to other property in the same vicinity or zoning district. The circumstance or condition may relate to the lot size or shape (legally existing prior to April 2003), natural features and topography of the property or other circumstances over which the applicant has no control. Circumstances of any hardship shall not be a result of actions of the applicant, owner, or previous owner, or from personal circumstances or financial situation of the applicant or owner, or from regional economic conditions.

(2) The variance is necessary for the preservation of a property right of the applicant or owner substantially the same as is possessed by owners of other property in the same zoning district or vicinity.

(3) The existing zoning requirement would restrict the use of the subject property to a greater degree than it restricts other properties in the vicinity or district.

(4) The authorization of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property in the vicinity or district in which the property is located, or adversely affect the appropriate development of adjoining properties.

(5) The granting of the variance will not adversely affect the implementation of the comprehensive plan or this title nor will it establish a use which is not listed in the underlying zone; and shall not be injurious to property in the zoning district or vicinity in which the property is located.

(6) The variance is the minimum remedy necessary to alleviate the hardship. [Ord. 508 § 6.03.2, 1982].


18.165.040 Variance classification.

(1) A major variance is a 50 percent or greater change in the applicable underlying zoning district standard or ordinance requirement. A major variance must be found to comply with MCMC 18.165.030; and

(a) A major variance may be approved by the city administrator, the administrator’s designee, or at a public hearing before the Myrtle Creek planning commission.

(b) The application shall include information set forth in MCMC 18.185.140.

(2) A minor variance is a change in the applicable underlying zoning district standard or requirement less than 50 percent of the applicable underlying zoning district standard or ordinance requirement. The city administrator or the administrator’s designee is authorized to process a minor variance. A minor variance may be granted only after the criteria in MCMC 18.165.030(4) and (5) are met. [Ord. 807 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 508 § 6.03.3, 1982].


18.165.050 Criteria for granting a sign variance.

No variance for a sign shall be granted by the Myrtle Creek planning commission. Signs not otherwise permitted shall be processed under MCMC 18.170.010 as a conditional use. [Ord. 508 § 6.03.4, 1982].


18.165.060 Public hearing for a variance.

The Myrtle Creek planning commission shall consider the matters listed in MCMC 18.165.020(1)(a) at a public hearing conducted in accordance with MCMC 18.185.210 through 18.185.270. [Ord. 508 § 6.03.5, 1982].


18.165.070 Final decision for a major variance.

(1) For a major variance application submitted concurrent with a historic review, subdivision, land partition, or property line adjustment application, the decision shall be incorporated into the historic review, subdivision, land partition, or property line adjustment decision. The decision shall be written and at a minimum shall identify the property owner, applicant, the date of the decision, the decision and any time frame and conditions to which the decision is subject. The decision shall be to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request.

(2) The decision shall become final 12 calendar days after the date the notice of the decision is given. Appeal of the major variance decision by the administrator or the administrator’s designee shall be in accordance with Chapter 18.190 MCMC. [Ord. 508 § 6.03.6, 1982].


18.165.080 Final decision for a minor variance.

(1) For a minor variance application submitted concurrent with a historic review, subdivision, land partition, or property line adjustment application, the decision shall be incorporated into the historic review, subdivision, land partition, or property line adjustment decision. The decision shall be written and, at a minimum, shall identify the property owner, applicant, the date of the decision, the decision and any time frame and conditions to which the decision is subject. The decision shall be to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request.

(2) The decision shall become final 12 calendar days after the date the notice of the decision is given. Appeal of a minor variance decision by the administrator or the administrator’s designee shall be in accordance with Chapter 18.190 MCMC. [Ord. 508 § 6.03.7, 1982].


18.165.090 Application procedure and service charge.

A request for a major or minor variance may be initiated by the property owners or the owners’ authorized agent by filing an application with the city upon forms prescribed for that purpose. The applicant shall discuss the proposed major or minor variance and site plans with the city planner and city engineer, if appropriate, in a preapplication conference prior to submitting an application. The application shall include information set forth in MCMC 18.185.140 and any drawings or materials essential to the understanding of the proposed use and its relationship to the surroundings. The application shall be accompanied by a service charge, which is nonrefundable and identified in the city of Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges. [Ord. 508 § 6.03.8, 1982].


18.165.100 Time limit on a variance approval.

Authorization of a variance shall be void after one year unless substantial construction pursuant thereto has taken place. However, the city administrator or the city administrator’s designee may, in his discretion, extend authorization for an additional one year, provided a written request from the applicant is submitted prior to the expiration date. [Ord. 508 § 6.03.9, 1982].


Chapter 18.170 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS

Sections:

18.170.010    Conditional use.

18.170.020    Authorization to grant a conditional use permit.

18.170.030    Criteria for conditional use permit approval.

18.170.040    Criteria for conditional use permit approval (specified uses).

18.170.050    Application procedure and service charge.

18.170.060    Time limit on permit.


18.170.010 Conditional use.

Uses designated as conditional are (1) those classified as a conditional use within the district regulations, and (2) signs not otherwise permitted by the supplemental regulations. A conditional use shall be permitted, altered, enlarged or denied in accordance with the standards and procedures of this chapter.

(1) Existing Structures. In the case of an existing development where an alteration of use is classified as a conditional use: The change in use shall conform to the requirements for a conditional use although it is not an actual structural change or new construction.

(2) Existing Uses. In the case of a use existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which is designated as a conditional use: An expansion of use or an alteration that affects significant elements of the site plan shall conform with the requirements for a conditional use. [Ord. 508 § 7.01.0, 1982].


18.170.020 Authorization to grant a conditional use permit.

The administrator shall conduct a site review when new construction is proposed or when significant elements of the site plan are affected.

(1) Findings Required. In judging whether or not a conditional use proposal shall be approved, altered or denied, the administrator shall weigh the proposal’s appropriateness and desirability or the public convenience or necessity to be served against any adverse conditions that would result from authorizing the particular development at the location proposed and shall establish findings based on the criteria set forth in MCMC 18.170.030 or 18.170.040, as applicable.

(2) Supplemental Conditions. As a condition of approval, the administrator or the planning commission may impose any of the supplemental conditions set forth in MCMC 18.150.030 which it finds necessary to carry out the purpose of this title and to otherwise achieve the objectives of the comprehensive plan and other applicable policies of the city. [Ord. 508 § 7.01.1, 1982].


18.170.030 Criteria for conditional use permit approval.

Except as provided for housing types specified in MCMC 18.170.040, a conditional use permit may be granted only when the following criteria are met, can be met by observance of conditions or are not applicable. The approval or denial shall be accompanied by a statement that explains the criteria and standards considered relevant to the decision, states the facts relied upon in rendering the decision and explains the justification for the decision based on the applicable criteria, standards and facts.

(1) The proposal will be consistent with the comprehensive plan and the objectives of this title and other applicable policies of the city.

(2) The location, size, design and operating characteristics under the proposal will not alter the character of the surrounding area in a manner that substantially limits, impairs, or precludes the use, abutting properties, and the surrounding area when compared to the impact of development that is permitted outright.

(3) The location and design of the site and structures for the use will be suited to the nature of the use and its setting.

(4) The proposal will preserve environmental assets of particular interest to the community.

(5) The property and proposed use in question are reasonably suited in regards to location, topography and other physical features, safe and efficient access, adequate area to provide for off-street parking and loading, and available improvements. [Ord. 508 § 7.01.2, 1982].


18.170.040 Criteria for conditional use permit approval (specified uses).

The following criteria shall be taken into consideration when evaluating a conditional use permit for development of a mobile home park or planned development. A conditional use permit may be granted only when the criteria are met, can be met by observance of conditions, or are not applicable. The approval or denial shall be accompanied by a statement that explains the criteria and standards considered relevant to the decision, states the facts relied upon in rendering the decision and explains the justification for the decision based on the applicable criteria, standards and facts.

(1) Mobile Home Park. The location, size, design and operating characteristics shall be suitable for the proper development of a mobile home park and shall have the endorsement of the city engineer, public works director, police chief, city fire marshal and/or other appropriate department or agency having an interest in the public welfare. The following criteria shall be considered in evaluating the suitability of the site:

(a) The relationship of the proposed park to existing and proposed street networks so that traffic generated by the development can be accommodated safely and without congestion;

(b) The relationship of the proposed park to public facilities such as, but not limited to, existing or proposed shopping centers and schools;

(c) The general impact on the immediate vicinity (including the effect of the proposed park on adjoining uses and the effect of the adjoining uses on the park) and, in the case of a departure in character from surrounding uses, that the design of the park will adequately reduce the impact of the development;

(d) The conditions of soil, ground water level, drainage and topography are suitable. In order to prevent the adverse impacts of slope alteration (cut and fill), mobile homes shall be prohibited on slopes greater than 12 percent unless satisfactory evidence is submitted that the area protection provisions of the R-H district regulations and the standards of Chapter 18.160 MCMC can be met;

(e) A proposed site which is within the designated flood hazard area shall comply with all area protection provisions ensuring that the site will provide a floor elevation that is not less than one foot above the 100-year flood elevation. Mobile homes shall be prohibited in the floodway;

(f) The proposal will be consistent with the comprehensive plan and the objectives of this title and there is a demonstrated intent and capability to meet the general conditions and limitations and park design standards contained in Chapter 18.120 MCMC; and

(g) In all cases, a condition shall be attached to approval of a conditional use permit for mobile home park purposes which stipulates that the approval of the permit is contingent upon the planning commission’s final acceptance of the site plan in accordance with the approval criteria for a mobile home park set forth in Chapter 18.120 MCMC. The time limit on authorization of the conditional use permit shall commence upon such final approval of the site plan.

(2) Planned Development. The location, size, design and operating characteristics shall be suitable for the proper development of a planned development and shall have the endorsement of the city engineer, public works director, police chief, city fire marshal and/or other appropriate department or agency having an interest in the public welfare. The following criteria shall be considered in evaluating the suitability of the site:

(a) The location, design, size and uses are consistent with the comprehensive plan and with any other applicable plan, development map, or ordinance adopted by the city council;

(b) That the location, design and size are such that the development can be well integrated with its surroundings and, in the case of a departure in character from surrounding uses, that the design of the planned development will adequately reduce the impact of the development;

(c) That the location, design, size and uses are such that traffic generated by the development can be accommodated safely and without congestion on existing or planned arterial or collector streets and will, in the case of commercial or industrial developments, avoid traversing local streets;

(d) That the location, design, size and uses are such that the residents or establishments to be accommodated will be adequately served by existing or planned facilities and services;

(e) That the location, design, size and uses will result in an attractive, healthful, efficient and stable environment for living, shopping or working;

(f) That there is a demonstrated intent and capability to meet the objective of a planned development described in MCMC 18.130.020 consistent with the general requirements and design standards contained in Chapter 18.130 MCMC; and

(g) In all cases, a condition shall be attached to approval of a conditional use permit for planned development purposes which stipulates that the approval of the permit is contingent upon the planning commission’s final acceptance of the site plan in accordance with the approval criteria for a planned development set forth in Chapter 18.130 MCMC. The time limit on authorization of the conditional use permit shall commence upon such final approval of the site plan. [Ord. 508 § 7.01.3, 1982].


18.170.050 Application procedure and service charge.

A request for a conditional use permit or modification of an existing conditional use may be initiated by a property owner or his authorized agent by filing an application with the planning department. The application shall include the information set forth in MCMC 18.185.140 and any drawings or materials essential to the understanding of the proposed use and its relationship to the surrounding properties. The application shall be accompanied by a service charge established by the city of Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges. [Ord. 508 § 7.01.4, 1982].


18.170.060 Time limit on permit.

Authorization of a conditional use permit shall be void after one year unless the use requested has commenced operation or unless substantial construction pursuant thereto has taken place. The city administrator or the city administrator’s designee may extend authorization for an additional one year, provided a written request from the applicant is submitted prior to the expiration date. [Ord. 508 § 7.01.5, 1982].


Chapter 18.175 TEMPORARY USE PERMITS

Sections:

18.175.010    Temporary use permits.

18.175.020    Authorization to grant a temporary use permit.

18.175.030    Permitted temporary uses.

18.175.040    Conditions relative to the issuance of a temporary use permit.

18.175.050    Application procedure and service charge.


18.175.010 Temporary use permits.

It is recognized that there are special uses which, because of their unique characteristics or temporary or seasonal nature, cannot be properly classified in any particular zoning district without consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular location. A temporary use permit may be approved to allow the limited use of structures or activities which do not conflict with the zoning district in which they are located; however, no temporary use permit shall be issued which would have the effect of providing a temporary means of establishing permanence. Temporary use permits are subject to approval under MCMC 18.175.020 through 18.175.050. [Ord. 508 § 7.02.0, 1982].


18.175.020 Authorization to grant a temporary use permit.

The city administrator may issue temporary use permits for interim uses which are incidental to construction, such as those listed in MCMC 18.175.030(1). All other requests for a temporary use permit shall be heard by the planning commission, where the proposal shall be reviewed for impact on the surrounding area. In issuing a temporary use permit, the approving authority may impose any of the conditions set forth in MCMC 18.175.040 which it finds necessary for the protection and preservation of property rights and values of adjacent properties. It shall be within the authority of the planning commission to, based on just cause, require that a public hearing be held on a specific application prior to making their decision or that the application shall be forwarded to the city council for determination. [Ord. 508 § 7.02.1, 1982].


18.175.030 Permitted temporary uses.

Temporary use permits shall be issued for structures or uses which are not specified in this title as a specific or general regulation and are of a temporary nature such as, but not limited to, the following:

(1) The city administrator, on his own authority, may issue permits for:

(a) Enclosures and buildings for the storage of equipment during the building of roads, structures and other development;

(b) Auxiliary real estate offices used for the sale of lots or houses in subdivisions (i.e., tract office) and other temporary structures to provide for housing of personnel;

(c) Signs advertising a subdivision or tract of land or the lots therein and other temporary signs;

(d) Contractor’s job sheds used in conjunction with the building of a structure, road, etc.;

(e) Short term outdoor gatherings; and

(f) Roadside stands.

(2) The planning commission shall have the authority to issue permits for:

(a) A mobile home as a temporary office area for permitted commercial or industrial uses when separated by a minimum of 20 feet from any permanent structure and then placed in accordance with MCMC 18.175.040;

(b) A mobile home as a temporary classroom at existing public or private schools when separated from each other and existing buildings by the minimum distance specified in the fire code or 20 feet, whichever is greater, and when placed in accordance with MCMC 18.175.040;

(c) A mobile home as a temporary residence during the construction of a permanent home, provided there is compliance with MCMC 18.175.040; and

(d) All other requests of a temporary nature that do not fall within the limits of subsection (1) of this section. [Ord. 508 § 7.02.2, 1982].


18.175.040 Conditions relative to the issuance of a temporary use permit.

(1) No temporary use permit shall be issued except upon a finding that the proposed structure, activity or use would not permit the permanent establishment within a zoning district of any use which is not a permitted use or any use for which a conditional use permit is required.

(2) Reasonable conditions may be imposed in connection with the temporary use permit to minimize the potential impact of the proposed use to other uses in the vicinity. Guarantees and evidence may be required that such conditions will be or are being complied with. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

(a) Special yards or open spaces;

(b) Fences or walls;

(c) Control of points of vehicular ingress and egress;

(d) Special provisions or signs;

(e) Landscaping or buffer yards and maintenance thereof;

(f) Maintenance of the grounds and/or parking area;

(g) Control of noise, odors or other nuisances; and

(h) Limitation of time for certain activities.

(3) The owner of a mobile home that is authorized as a temporary use shall comply with the following in addition to any other conditions that may be attached to issuance of a temporary use permit:

(a) A mobile home placement permit shall be obtained prior to placement;

(b) The standards for mobile home placement contained in MCMC 18.115.010 may be applied where a mobile home will be used as temporary office, classroom or similar activity;

(c) The owner of the lot shall agree in writing to remove the footings, foundation, mobile home and mobile home accessory structures and disconnect sewer, water and other utilities immediately upon expiration of the temporary use permit. The agreement shall further state that the city may make the removal and disconnection and place a lien against the property for the cost of the work if the owner fails to perform the work within 30 days of expiration of the permit; and

(d) If a temporary use permit for a mobile home is authorized for occupancy while constructing a dwelling, the following shall also be required:

(i) The mobile home shall be occupied by the owner of the lot on which the mobile home is located;

(ii) A building permit for construction of the permanent dwelling shall be obtained prior to the effective date of the temporary use permit and the mobile home shall be placed upon the lot for which the building permit has been issued; and

(iii) The owner of the lot shall agree in writing to remove the mobile home from the lot not later than 18 months from the date on which the building permit for the housing unit is issued or not later than two months following the completion of the housing unit, whichever is first.

(4) Any temporary use permit shall clearly set forth the conditions under which the permit is granted and shall clearly indicate the time period for which the permit is issued. No temporary use permit shall be transferable to any other owner or occupant, but may be renewable upon expiration if all applicable conditions can again be met. Renewal of a temporary use permit shall follow the same procedure as the initial application.

(5) All structures for which a temporary use permit is issued shall:

(a) Meet all other requirements of the zoning district in which they are located;

(b) Meet all applicable health and sanitation requirements;

(c) Meet all applicable building code requirements; and

(d) Be removed upon expiration of the temporary use permit, unless renewed. [Ord. 508 § 7.02.3, 1982].


18.175.050 Application procedure and service charge.

A request for a temporary use permit may be initiated by a property owner or his authorized agent by filing an application with the city upon forms prescribed for this purpose. The application shall include the information set forth in MCMC 18.185.140 and any drawings or materials essential to the understanding of the proposed use and its relationship to the surrounding properties. The application for a temporary use permit regulated by MCMC 18.175.030(2) shall be accompanied by a service charge (which is nonrefundable) by the city of Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges. Applications for uses regulated by MCMC 18.175.030(1) are exempt from the service charge. Temporary use permits shall be issued for the time period specified by the approving authority but, unless specifically provided otherwise by these regulations, in no case shall a temporary use permit be issued for a period exceeding one year. [Ord. 508 § 7.02.4, 1982].


Chapter 18.180 AMENDMENTS AND ZONE CHANGES

Sections:

18.180.010    Authorization to initiate amendments.

18.180.020    Application procedure and service charge.

18.180.030    Public hearing on amendments.

18.180.040    Notice.

18.180.050    Additional procedures effecting a zone change.

18.180.060    Resolution of intent to change zone.

18.180.070    Resolution of intent binding.

18.180.080    Resolution of intent void upon failure to comply.

18.180.090    Amendments affecting transportation facilities.

18.180.100    Minor text corrections.


18.180.010 Authorization to initiate amendments.

Whenever public necessity, convenience or general welfare requires amendments to the provisions of this title, they may be initiated by the city council, by the planning commission or by application of a property owner or his authorized agent. [Ord. 508 § 8.01.0, 1982].


18.180.020 Application procedure and service charge.

An application for amendment by a property owner or his authorized agent shall contain the information described in MCMC 18.185.140 and shall be filed with the planning department at least 30 days prior to the date of hearing upon forms prescribed for that purpose. If the proposed amendment involves a change to the comprehensive plan text or map that requires notice to the Department of Land Conservation and Development, the application shall be submitted at least 60 days prior to the date of the hearing. The application shall be accompanied by a service charge established by the city of Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges. [Ord. 508 § 8.02.0, 1982].


18.180.030 Public hearing on amendments.

(1) In judging whether or not a zone change or amendment shall be initiated, approved, modified or denied, the planning commission shall establish the proposal’s appropriateness and desirability or the public convenience or necessity to be served and shall establish compliance with the comprehensive plan and other applicable policies of the city by adoption of findings of fact. Prior to making a recommendation for approval or denial, the planning commission shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed amendment or zone change. Such public hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions of MCMC 18.185.210 through 18.185.270. In making their recommendation, the planning commission may impose any of those conditions set forth in MCMC 18.150.030, which it finds necessary to carry out the purpose of this title and to otherwise achieve the objectives of the comprehensive plan.

(2) The planning commission findings and recommendation shall be forwarded to the city council, whereupon the council shall either grant the amendment or zone change in whole or in part by adoption of findings of fact and by the adoption of an ordinance, or deny the same by appropriate motion and findings of fact. Such public hearing shall be limited to the record established by the planning commission. Notice of the hearing shall be provided only to those parties qualified by the planning commission, and the parties shall be given an opportunity to speak at the hearing. At the hearing, or at a subsequent hearing, the council shall take final action on the decision of the planning commission. The decision of the council shall be based on the record of hearing, except that the planning commission, in the case of a major reclassification or an amendment or zone change initiated by the planning commission, may recommend that the city council conduct a de novo hearing prior to final action.

(3) Notice of each hearing shall be in accordance with MCMC 18.180.040.

(4) The findings of fact explain the criteria and standards considered relevant to the decision, state the facts relied upon in rendering the decision and explain the justification for the decision based on the comprehensive plan and other applicable criteria, standards and facts.

(5) Records of amendments to the text and map of this title shall be maintained in a form convenient for use by the public. [Ord. 508 § 8.03.0, 1982].


18.180.040 Notice.

(1) At least 20 days prior to the quasi-judicial hearing by the city planning commission, notice thereof shall be given as provided in MCMC 18.185.170 and 18.185.180.

(a) Notice for hearings involving quasi-judicial zone changes and comprehensive plan amendments shall also be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the area affected at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.

(2) If the application proposes an exception to a statewide planning goal, such exception shall specifically be noted in the notice.

(3) At least 10 days prior to the hearing by the city council, notice of the city council public hearing shall be provided to all parties of quasi-judicial decisions.

(a) A notice of the city council public hearings involving legislative zone changes and comprehensive plan amendments shall also be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the area affected at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. [Ord. 508 § 8.03.1, 1982].


18.180.050 Additional procedures effecting a zone change.

It is the purpose and intent of MCMC 18.180.060 through 18.180.080 to provide additional procedures in the matter of effecting a change of zone so that the health, safety and general welfare and environmental amenities of the citizens of the city are ensured as certain development occurs. [Ord. 508 § 8.04.0, 1982].


18.180.060 Resolution of intent to change zone.

If, from the report and recommendation of the planning commission as required by this title, the city council determines that the public health, safety, welfare and convenience will be best served by the requested zone change or any portion thereof, the council may indicate its general approval in principle of the change of zone by the adoption of a “resolution of intent to change the zone” of said property. This resolution shall include any conditions, stipulations or limitations which the council may feel necessary to impose in the public interest as a prerequisite to final action. [Ord. 508 § 8.04.1, 1982].


18.180.070 Resolution of intent binding.

The fulfillment of all conditions, stipulations and limitations contained in the “resolution of intent” to effect a change of zone on the part of the applicant shall make such resolution a binding commitment on the council. [Ord. 508 § 8.04.2, 1982].


18.180.080 Resolution of intent void upon failure to comply.

Upon fulfillment of all conditions by the applicant, the council shall, by ordinance, effect such change of zone. The failure of the applicant to substantially meet any or all conditions, stipulations or limitations contained in a “resolution of intent” to effect a change of zone, including the time limit placed on the resolution, shall render said resolution null and void, unless an extension is granted by the council upon recommendation of the planning commission. In the event of a change of zone approval by the council, but not on the basis of a “resolution of intent” to effect a change of zone, the council shall by ordinance effect such change of zone. [Ord. 508 § 8.04.3, 1982].


18.180.090 Amendments affecting transportation facilities.

(1) A plan or land use regulation amendment significantly affects a transportation facility if it:

(a) Changes the functional classification of an existing or planned transportation facility;

(b) Changes standards implementing a functional classification system;

(c) Allows types or levels of land use that would result in levels of travel or access that are inconsistent with the functional classification of a transportation facility; or

(d) Would reduce the performance standards of the facility below the minimum acceptable level identified in the transportation system plan.

(2) Amendments to the comprehensive plan and land use regulations which significantly affect a transportation facility shall assure that allowed land uses are consistent with the function, capacity, and performance standards of the facility identified in the transportation system plan.

(a) The proposed amendment shall comply with the statewide planning goals and applicable administrative rules, which include OAR 660-12, Transportation Planning Rule. The applicant shall certify that the proposed land use designations, densities or design standards are consistent with the function, capacity and performance standards for roads identified in the city transportation system plan.

(b) The applicant shall cite the identified comprehensive plan function, capacity and performance standard of the road used for direct access and provide findings that the proposed amendment will be consistent with the city transportation system plan.

(c) The jurisdiction providing direct access (city, county or ODOT) may require the applicant to submit a traffic impact study (TIS) certified by a traffic engineer that supports the findings used to address subsection (2)(a) of this section. [Ord. 508 § 8.05.0, 1982].


18.180.100 Minor text corrections.

The administrator may correct MCMC Title 17 and this title and the comprehensive plan without prior notice or hearing, so long as the administrator does not alter the sense, meaning, effect, or substance of any adopted ordinance and, within such limitations, the administrator may:

(1) Renumber chapters, articles, sections, subsections, findings, goals, objectives, and policies, and parts of chapters, articles, sections, subsections, findings, goals, objectives, and policies, of MCMC Title 17 and this title and the comprehensive plan;

(2) Rearrange chapters, articles, sections, subsections, findings, goals, objectives, and policies, and parts of chapters, articles, sections, subsections, findings, goals, objectives, and policies;

(3) Change reference numbers to agree with renumbered chapters, articles, sections, subsections, findings, goals, objectives, and policies, and parts of chapters, articles, sections, subsections, findings, goals, objectives, and policies;

(4) Delete references to repealed chapters, articles, sections, subsections, findings, goals, objectives, and policies, and parts of chapters, articles, sections, subsections, findings, goals, objectives, and policies;

(5) Substitute the proper chapter, article, section, subsection, finding, goal, objective, or policy numbers;

(6) Change capitalization and spelling for the purpose of uniformity;

(7) Correct manifest clerical, grammatical or typographical errors; and

(8) Change the name of an agency by reason of a name change prescribed by law.

The administrator shall maintain a record, available for public access, of all corrections made under this section.

Corrections to MCMC Title 17 and this title and the comprehensive plan made by the administrator pursuant to this section are prima facie evidence of the law, but they are not conclusive evidence. If any correction to MCMC Title 17 and this title and the comprehensive plan made pursuant to this section differs in sense, meaning, effect, or substance from any adopted ordinance, the adopted ordinance shall prevail. [Ord. 508 § 1.08.0, 1982].


Chapter 18.185 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

18.185.010    Purpose.

18.185.020    Review process.

18.185.030    Scope and compliance.

18.185.040    Who may apply.

18.185.050    Preapplication conference.

18.185.060    Duties of the planning department.

18.185.070    Building official duties and powers.

18.185.080    City public works director duties and powers.

18.185.090    City administrator duties and powers.

18.185.100    Duties of the planning commission.

18.185.110    City council.

18.185.120    City attorney.

18.185.130    Forms of petitions, applications and appeals.

18.185.140    Information to be submitted with application.

18.185.150    Processing procedures.

18.185.160    Land use actions.

18.185.170    Notice.

18.185.180    Contents of notice.

18.185.190    Ministerial actions of the city administrator.

18.185.200    Administrative actions of the city administrator.

18.185.210    Public hearing procedures.

18.185.220    Open hearing required.

18.185.230    Establishment of party status.

18.185.240    Conduct of hearing.

18.185.250    Official notice.

18.185.260    Modification of application at hearing.

18.185.270    Record of hearing and decision.


18.185.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter and Chapters 18.190 and 18.195 MCMC is to establish procedures for approval of development required by this title, appeals from aggrieved persons and parties, and review of any decision by a higher authority. [Ord. 508 § 9.01.0, 1982].


18.185.020 Review process.

An application for development required by the city of Myrtle Creek shall be processed by quasi-judicial public hearing or administrative action, pursuant to applicable sections of this title. Quasi-judicial hearings shall be held on all applications for a permit or approval required by these regulations; provided, that hearings shall not be held in those matters the city administrator has authority to act upon, unless appealed or referred pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and Chapters 18.190 and 18.195 MCMC. [Ord. 508 § 9.01.1, 1982].


18.185.030 Scope and compliance.

This chapter sets forth the procedures required for obtaining development approvals and certificates of occupancy. The powers and duties of city officials and boards are specified herein insofar as administration of this title is concerned. Actions initiated under this title shall be consistent with the adopted comprehensive plan of the city of Myrtle Creek and with applicable state and federal laws and regulations as these plans, laws and regulations may now or hereafter provide.

The city administrator shall be responsible for the coordination of a development application and decision-making procedures and shall approve developments when proper application is made and the proposed development is in compliance with the provisions of this title. Before approving any development, the city administrator shall be provided with information by the applicant sufficient to establish full compliance with the requirements of this title.

(1) No development, including accessory and temporary uses, may be established or changed; no structure shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, and no building used, occupied, or altered with respect to its use, after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title except as this title permits.

(2) Site alterations, regrading, filling, or clearing of land prior to submission of the plans for development shall be a violation of this title.

(3) No lot area, yard, or other open space or off-street parking or loading area which is required by this title for one use shall be used as a required lot area, yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading area for another use, except as allowed by MCMC 18.90.050(1).

(4) The requirements of this title apply to the person undertaking a development or the user of a development and to the person’s successors in interest. Nothing herein shall relieve any applicant of the additional responsibility of seeking any permit required by any applicable statute, ordinance or regulation in compliance with all of the terms of this title. [Ord. 508 § 9.01.2, 1982].


18.185.040 Who may apply.

(1) An application for development approval may be initiated by one or more of the following:

(a) The owner(s) of the property which is the subject of the application; or

(b) The purchaser(s) of such property who submits a duly executed written land sales contract or copy thereof which has been recorded with the Douglas County clerk; or

(c) A lessee in possession of such property who submits written consent of the owner(s) to make such application; or

(d) A person or entity authorized by resolution of the city council.

Any of the above may be represented by an agent who submits written authorization by his principal to make such application.

(2) If an applicant submits a letter of withdrawal of an application, the application shall be terminated, the application withdrawn and the file closed without a decision, with no opportunity for refund of the application fee. [Ord. 508 § 9.01.3, 1982].


18.185.050 Preapplication conference.

An applicant shall meet with a planning department staff person in a preapplication conference prior to submitting a request for development approval. The purpose of the conference shall be to acquaint the applicant with the substantive and procedural requirements of this title, provide for an exchange of information regarding applicable elements of the comprehensive plan and development requirements, arrange such technical and design assistance as will aid the applicant, and to identify policies and regulations that create opportunities or pose significant constraints for the proposed development. [Ord. 508 § 9.01.4, 1982].


18.185.060 Duties of the planning department.

The planning department shall receive, examine and process all applications for development as required by this title and shall:

(1) Review and evaluate all site plans to establish compliance with the provisions of this title; prepare staff reports for development applications requiring submission to the planning commission or city council; and issue certificates of plan check as directed by the authorizing body.

(2) Receive and process all applications for land use actions in accordance with the processing procedures of MCMC 18.185.150 and 18.185.160.

(3) Record and file all applications with accompanying plans and documents and otherwise act as secretary to the planning commission. All applications and documents shall be a public record. [Ord. 508 § 9.06.0, 1982].


18.185.070 Building official duties and powers.

(1) Receive, examine and process all applications for building permits.

(2) Issue building permits only where there is compliance with the provisions of this title. Permits for construction of uses requiring a variance, conditional use permit, temporary permit or certificate of plan check shall be issued only upon order of the city administrator, planning commission or city council, as applicable.

(3) Conduct inspections and surveys to determine compliance or noncompliance with the terms of this title.

(4) Revoke, by writing, a permit or approval issued contrary to this title or based on a false statement or misrepresentation in the application.

(5) Stop, by written order, work being done contrary to the building code or to this title. Such written order, posted on the premises involved, shall not be removed except by order of the building official. Removal without such order shall constitute a violation of this title.

(6) Institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use; restrain, correct or abate such violation, so as to prevent the occupancy or use of any building, structure or land; or prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.

(7) Record and file all applications for permits with accompanying plans and documents. All applications, plans, and documents shall be a public record. [Ord. 508 § 9.07.0, 1982].


18.185.080 City public works director duties and powers.

The city public works director is charged with the administration and enforcement of public facility construction standards and flood hazard and slope hazard area protection requirements as specified herein. The city public works director shall coordinate all plans for construction to ensure application of engineering principles. [Ord. 508 § 9.08.0, 1982].


18.185.090 City administrator duties and powers.

The city administrator shall coordinate the administration of this title with other city, state or federal laws and regulations as these plans, laws and regulations may now or hereafter provide. Additional duties of the city administrator shall be specified in other parts of this title. In addition, the administrator shall be expected to seek the fulfillment of the provisions of this title, both general and specific, and shall be called upon to interpret the provisions of this title including interpretations of the various uses in any district not expressly mentioned in this title. However, an interpretation which would result in any identifiable loss of protection or which would increase the nuisance potential of any use should not be made by an administrator but should only be made when the party interpreting this title has the power to impose additional restrictions or conditions. [Ord. 508 § 9.09.0, 1982].


18.185.100 Duties of the planning commission.

(1) The planning commission shall conduct public hearings and review and decide on all quasi-judicial applications and administrative applications appealed to the commission, and make a recommendation to the city council as provided by this title.

(2) The planning commission shall study and report on all proposed amendments to the text or map of this title referred to it by the city council or upon receipt of a petition.

(3) The planning commission shall review this title and report on the same to the city council at least once every five years, commencing on the date of enactment of the ordinance codified in this title. Specifically, the planning commission shall:

(a) Analyze the extent to which development has occurred in the city as compared to the projected growth at the time of the last previous mapping of the districts created by this title;

(b) Recommend any changes in the zoning map or comprehensive plan which would be required in order to accommodate the expected 20-year growth of Myrtle Creek for residential, industrial, commercial and other land uses; and

(c) Analyze the continued validity of any other regulations imposed by this title in terms of changed conditions since the last review of the same. [Ord. 508 § 9.10.0, 1982].


18.185.110 City council.

This is the legal ruling body of the city of Myrtle Creek and, as such, the only one which can adopt or amend ordinances, including the ordinance codified in this title. Therefore, it shall be the city council which hears and passes on initiations for amendments and zone changes. This body shall also appoint the planning commission members and the city administrator, if any, and shall hear and decide on appeals. [Ord. 508 § 9.11.0, 1982].


18.185.120 City attorney.

The city attorney shall be the official to seek redress for the city for any violations of this title. [Ord. 508 § 9.12.0, 1982].


18.185.130 Forms of petitions, applications and appeals.

Petitions, applications and appeals provided for in this title shall be made on forms prescribed by the city. Applications shall contain the information described in MCMC 18.185.140 and shall be accompanied by plans and specifications, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and locations on the lot of existing and proposed structures, the intended use of each structure, the number of families, if any, to be accommodated thereon, the relationship of the property to the existing area and such other information as is needed to determine conformance with this title.

Any land use applications, plan reviews, development permits, public hearings or other proceedings required by this title may be consolidated to allow at one time for all such required development permits. [Ord. 508 § 9.02.0, 1982].


18.185.140 Information to be submitted with application.

An application for development shall consist of the following information, as applicable, plus any other materials that may be required by additional provisions of this title because of the unique type of development proposed or the area involved.

(1) A completed application form and the appropriate filing fee.

(2) Proof that the applicant is the exclusive owner, or that the applicant has the consent of all parties in ownership of the affected property.

(3) Legal description and street address of the property affected by the application.

(4) A site plan, sketches and any other explanatory information that may have a bearing on determining the action to be taken or that may be necessary to establish compliance to ordinance requirements and all relevant laws. Plans shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed. The following information shall be shown on, or attached to, a site plan:

(a) The first sheet of each set of plans shall give the name and address of the property owner, the name and address of the person, engineer or surveyor who prepared the plans, the scale to which the plan is drawn, the north point and the date prepared;

(b) The property boundary lines and individual lot lines indicating total acreage and square footage of individual lots;

(c) A vicinity map, where appropriate, showing adjacent land and how proposed streets and utilities may be extended to connect to existing streets and utilities;

(d) The location, width and name of all existing streets, railroads and utility rights-of-way or easements;

(e) The location of existing sewers, water mains, fire hydrants, culverts and other underground facilities within the tract, indicating pipe sizes, grades, manholes and location;

(f) The location and use of existing and proposed buildings or structures and exterior dimensions where appropriate;

(g) The location of landscaping, fences (indicating height and material), buffer areas, common property or required open spaces;

(h) The location, size, type and illumination of existing and proposed signs;

(i) The location, size and surface treatment of all existing and proposed driveways and pedestrian entrances and exits; the location, total number and dimensions of off-street parking spaces and loading areas; and the drainage plan for all paved surfaces;

(j) The location of areas subject to flooding as defined in Chapter 18.70 MCMC, special flood hazard area; the location of any outstanding natural features; and the topography of the property, existing and proposed, showing the grades, elevations and character of the site as they relate to the improvements and to the adjacent area. Where site topographic surveys are required, they shall be prepared with two-foot contour intervals for slopes of less than five percent, with five-foot contour intervals for slopes of five percent to 15 percent, and with 10-foot contour intervals for slopes of 15 percent and above, or as is otherwise approved by the city engineer;

(k) Where appropriate, architectural perspectives, layout and elevation drawings of proposed structures shall be drawn without exaggeration, except where noted, including locations, area and design of signs and landscaping. The location and description of mechanical roof facilities shall also be shown if subject property is so oriented as to become part of the view from adjacent properties; and

(l) If the application relates to property scheduled for phased development, the proposed layout of the total projected development shall be indicated and each phase’s projected scope and time period indicated to the extent possible. [Ord. 508 § 9.02.1, 1982].


18.185.150 Processing procedures.

All projects involving the erection of a new building or structure or the enlargement or intensification of use of any existing building or structure shall be reviewed for compliance with this title and the comprehensive plan prior to issuance of a building permit, placement permit, or certificate of plan check. Except where planning commission or city council approval is required for applications involving a public hearing or where it is necessary for an application to be considered by a body having the power to impose additional conditions or restrictions, the city administrator may approve an application for development. Decisions of the city administrator may be appealed to the planning commission, and decisions of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 18.190 MCMC. Applications shall be processed as follows:

(1) Certificate of Occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy as required by the building code.

(a) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the premises in question have been inspected, subsequent to issuance of a building permit, to verify compliance with the requirements of the building code and this title.

(2) Site Review. No structure shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, extended or moved and no land or building shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any use whatsoever until the owner, tenants, contract purchaser, or authorized agent thereof has received verification that the building or use complies with all zoning requirements.

At the time of the erection of any new commercial, industrial, or public/semi-public building, or any new multifamily residential development of three dwelling units or more, or at the time of the substantial improvement of more than 50 percent of the gross floor area or more than 3,000 square feet of increased parking area, whichever is greater, of any existing building, a site review shall be conducted. All site plans shall be evaluated subject to the procedures, standards and limitations set forth in Chapter 18.150 MCMC. All required applications and accompanying site plans shall be reviewed by the city administrator or the city administrator’s designee and, when applicable, by the planning commission. A certificate of plan check shall be issued by the planning/engineering department upon order of the city administrator or the city administrator’s designee, planning commission or city council as authorized by the various provisions of this title.

(3) Variance. An application for a variance to the specified provisions of this title shall be made following the procedure detailed in Chapter 18.165 MCMC.

(4) Conditional Use or Temporary Use Permit. An application for any conditional use permit or temporary use permit required by this title shall be made following the procedures detailed in Chapters 18.170 and 18.175 MCMC.

(5) Amendments. Amendments to either the text or maps of this title shall be made following the procedures detailed in Chapter 18.180 MCMC.

(a) All map amendments shall be consistent with the applicable statewide planning goals, state statutes and administrative rules, and the goals and policies of the city of Myrtle Creek comprehensive plan; and

(b) A petition for an amendment to the text of this title may be submitted to the planning commission by any interested party. The petition shall state in particular the chapter, section, subsection and paragraph sought to be amended. The petition shall contain the language of the proposed amendment and shall recite the reasons for such proposed change in the text. If, upon consideration of the petition, the planning commission determines that the public health, safety and welfare may best be served by the requested change in the text, the commission shall recommend the amendment to the city council for consideration. Such proposed text amendment shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 18.180 MCMC.

(6) Final Action on Application. Except as provided for in subsections (6)(a) and (b) of this section, final action on administrative and quasi-judicial applications processed pursuant to this section, including any appeals to the city council, shall occur not later than 120 days following receipt of a complete application.

(a) The 120-day period set forth in subsection (6) of this section may be extended for a reasonable period of time at the written request of the applicant. Pursuant to the provisions of ORS 227.178, the total of all extensions on the 120-day period may not exceed 245 days.

(b) The 120-day period set forth in subsection (6) of this section does not apply to amendments of the comprehensive plan or this title which have been forwarded to the Department of Land Conservation and Development pursuant to ORS 197.610.

(7) If the city does not take final action on an application which is subject to the requirements of this section within 120 days after the application was deemed complete, the applicant may apply in the Douglas County circuit court for a writ of mandamus to compel the city to either approve the application or show that the approval would violate the comprehensive plan or local land use regulations. [Ord. 508 § 9.03.0, 1982].


18.185.160 Land use actions.

(1) Ministerial Actions. The city administrator shall have the authority to review the following applications as ministerial actions, and shall follow the procedures provided by this title to accomplish such review:

(a) Issuance of building permits and manufactured home placement permits.

(b) Issuance of sign permits.

(c) Property line adjustments.

(2) Administrative Actions. The city administrator shall have the authority to review the following applications as administrative actions, and shall follow the procedures provided by this title to accomplish such review. The following applications shall be processed as administrative actions:

(a) Conditional use permit.

(b) Major and minor variances.

(c) Land partition.

(d) Site review (when processed administratively).

(e) Temporary use permits (MCMC 18.175.030(1)).

(f) Approval of major amendments.

(3) Quasi-Judicial Actions. Within 45 days after accepting a completed application for quasi-judicial action pursuant to this section of this title, the city administrator shall act upon, or cause a hearing to be held upon, the application, unless such time limitation is extended with the consent of the applicant. The following matters shall be heard by the planning commission, pursuant to the procedures established in this chapter:

(a) Zone change.

(b) Planned unit development.

(c) Subdivision preliminary plat.

(d) Mobile home park preliminary plan review.

(e) Comprehensive plan map amendment.

(f) Review of historic structures or sites alteration or demolition (as the historic resources review committee).

(g) Site review (not reviewed by city administrator).

(h) Temporary use permits (MCMC 18.175.030(2)).

(i) Appeal of a decision by the city administrator.

(j) Matters referred to the commission by the city administrator or city council.

(k) Interpretations of this title requested by the city administrator. [Ord. 508 § 9.03.1, 1982].


18.185.170 Notice.

(1) Notice for a quasi-judicial public hearing or an administrative action shall be given to neighboring property owners by mailing of written notice not less than 20 days prior to the date of the public hearing or the date of the administrative decision to all owners of record of real property, any portion of which is located within 150 feet of the boundaries of the property that is the subject of the application or appeal. For this purpose, the names and addresses of the owners as they are shown in the records of the Douglas County assessor shall be used.

(2) Notice for a quasi-judicial public hearing or an administrative action shall be given to the applicant or appellant and any other person who makes a written request for notice by mailing to such persons written notice not later than 20 days in advance of the public hearing or the date of the administrative decision.

(3) If the proposed zoning map amendment (zone change) (a) has been initiated by the planning commission or city council, and (b) is declared by the city council to be a major reclassification, the mailing of individual notice required by subsection (1) of this section is not required; however, notice of hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. Additional means of informing the public, as may be specified by the council, shall be observed.

(4) Notice shall be given to affected neighborhood or community organizations.

(5) Notice of applications within the urban growth area shall be given to the Douglas County planning department.

(6) If the proposed zone change includes all or part of a mobile home or manufactured dwelling park, written notice shall be given by first class mail to each existing mailing address for tenants of the mobile home or manufactured dwelling park at least 20 days but not more than 40 days before the date of the first hearing on the application. Applicant shall be required to pay for mailing costs.

(7) To maintain a process for coordinated review of future land use decisions affecting transportation facilities, corridors and sites, the city shall provide notice to ODOT when the following applications for development have been received:

(a) Land use applications that require public hearings;

(b) Subdivision and partition applications;

(c) Developments generating more than 400 trips per day or accessing directly onto a state transportation facility. [Ord. 508 § 9.03.2, 1982].


18.185.180 Contents of notice.

(1) The notice for an administrative action shall contain the following information:

(a) The location, file number and title of the file containing the request and the date such notice was sent.

(b) The name and mailing address of the applicant.

(c) The nature of the application and the proposed use or uses which could be authorized.

(d) The applicable criteria from the comprehensive plan and this title which will be applied to the decision.

(e) The address and geographic location of the subject property.

(f) The deadline for filing comments on the request.

(g) A statement that issues which may provide the basis for an appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals shall be raised in writing prior to the expiration of the comment period. Issues shall be raised with sufficient specificity to enable the decision maker an opportunity to respond to the issue.

(h) A statement that a copy of the application, together with all documents and evidence submitted by or on behalf of the applicant, and applicable criteria, is available for inspection at no cost in the Myrtle Creek planning department and will be provided at reasonable cost.

(i) The name and telephone number of the city representative to contact for further information.

(2) The notice of a quasi-judicial public hearing shall contain the following information:

(a) The location, file number and title of the file containing the request and the date such notice was sent.

(b) The name and mailing address of the applicant.

(c) The nature of the application and the proposed use or uses which could be authorized.

(d) The applicable criteria from the comprehensive plan and this title which will be applied to the decision.

(e) The address and geographic location of the subject property.

(f) The deadline for filing comments on the request.

(g) The date, time, and location of the hearing.

(h) A statement that failure of an issue to be raised in the hearing, either in person or by letter, or failure to provide statements or evidence with sufficient specificity to afford the decision maker an opportunity to respond to the issue precludes appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals based on that issue.

(i) A statement that a copy of the application, together with all documents and evidence submitted by or on behalf of the applicant, and applicable criteria, is available for inspection at no cost in the Myrtle Creek planning department and will be provided at reasonable cost.

(j) A statement that a copy of the official staff report will be available for inspection at no cost in the planning department not less than seven days prior to the hearing and will be provided at reasonable cost.

(k) A general explanation of the requirements for submission of testimony and the procedure for conducting the hearing.

(l) The name and telephone number of the city representative to contact for further information.

(m) The requirements and limitations for appeal, including appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA). [Ord. 508 § 9.03.3, 1982].


18.185.190 Ministerial actions of the city administrator.

(1) Within 30 days after accepting an application for a ministerial action, the city administrator or the administrator’s designee shall take action on or cause a hearing to be held on the application unless such time limitation is extended with the consent of the applicant.

The city administrator or the administrator’s designee shall not accept applications which he/she deems cannot be acted upon initially in a rational manner within 30 days of receipt unless the applicant consents to a longer period for action.

(2) Within such 30-day period, the city administrator or the administrator’s designee shall issue the permit or approval, or advise the applicant that the application has been denied.

(3) Ministerial actions are effective on the date of the decision of the city administrator. [Ord. 508 § 9.03.4, 1982].


18.185.200 Administrative actions of the city administrator.

(1) Within 45 days after accepting an application for an administrative action pursuant to MCMC 18.185.160(2), the city administrator or the administrator’s designee shall take action on, or cause a hearing to be held on, the application unless such time limitation is extended with the consent of the applicant.

The city administrator or the administrator’s designee shall not accept applications which he/she deems cannot be acted upon initially in a rational manner within 45 days of receipt unless the applicant consents to a longer period for action.

(2) Within such 45-day period, the city administrator or the administrator’s designee shall:

(a) Publish or otherwise give notice pursuant to MCMC 18.185.170 and 18.185.180.

(b) Prepare findings of fact and conclusions of law.

(c) Decide to approve or deny the request. Approvals may include conditions considered necessary to assure conformance with the comprehensive plan, MCMC Title 17 and this title and applicable criteria.

(3) The notice of an administrative decision shall be filed in the records of the city administrator and also mailed to the applicant, to those persons who are entitled to notice pursuant to MCMC 18.185.170, and to others who participated in the process.

(4) The notice of an administrative decision shall contain:

(a) A statement that a copy of the application, all documents and evidence submitted by or on behalf of the applicant, and the applicable criteria are available for inspection at no cost and will be provided at reasonable cost;

(b) A statement that the decision will not become final until the period for filing an appeal has expired;

(c) A statement that any person who is mailed written notice of the decision cannot appeal the decision directly to the Land Use Board of Appeals under ORS 197.830; and

(d) Notice that any persons who are entitled to written notice (pursuant to MCMC 18.185.170) or who are adversely affected or aggrieved by the decision may appeal the decision within 12 days from the date the written notice of decision was mailed by filing a timely written statement with the city administrator.

(5) If the application does not meet the criteria or if written objections are received, or if the applicant or the city administrator so desires for any reason, the city administrator may schedule any application made under MCMC 18.185.160(2) for public hearing before the planning commission. The planning commission shall hear and decide the matter as if it were listed in MCMC 18.185.160(3). Notice of such hearing shall be provided pursuant to MCMC 18.185.170 and 18.185.180. [Ord. 508 § 9.03.5, 1982].


18.185.210 Public hearing procedures.

Before making a decision on an application requiring a public hearing or an appeal or permit revocation, the planning commission or city council, as the case may be, shall hold a public hearing on the appeal or application in accordance with the laws of the state of Oregon and the following sections. [Ord. 508 § 9.04.0, 1982].


18.185.220 Open hearing required.

(1) All hearings shall be open to the public and all persons interested in the outcome of the appeal or application shall be given an opportunity to present evidence and arguments and ask questions of persons who testify.

(2) All of the documents or evidence relied upon by an applicant must be submitted to the city and made available to the public for review at least 20 days in advance of the hearing date. The staff report to be used at the hearing must be available to the public at least seven days in advance of the hearing. The city may charge a reasonable fee for photocopies of the staff report, documents and other evidence. [Ord. 508 § 9.04.1, 1982].


18.185.230 Establishment of party status.

(1) In order to have standing under this chapter, a person shall be recognized as a party by the presiding officer.

(a) Party status, when recognized by the presiding officer, establishes the right of the person to be heard, either orally or in writing, and to pursue a review or appeal under Chapter 18.190 MCMC.

(b) Of those who appear and are heard at the time of hearing, the presiding officer shall determine who are parties and who are witnesses only, and shall give them an opportunity, if they choose, to be heard with regard to the ruling. Persons who appear by written communication only shall be accorded the status of witnesses unless they are included among those persons entitled to notice of hearing under this title, or the written statement both asserts a position on the merits of an application and establishes the person’s status as a party to the satisfaction of the presiding officer.

(c) For any determination made by the presiding officer under this section, the approving authority may overrule the presiding officer upon motion timely made and passed.

(2) A request for establishment of party status may be made at least eight days before the date set for a quasi-judicial public hearing by any person filing a written statement regarding the application being considered. Such statement shall include:

(a) The name, address and telephone number of the person filing the statement;

(b) How the person qualifies as a party, as defined in Chapter 18.10 MCMC;

(c) Comments which the party wishes to make with respect to the application under consideration; and

(d) Whether the person desires to appear and be heard at the hearing.

(3) Seven or more days before the date set for the first evidentiary hearing on a matter, the city administrator shall mail the applicant any statements that have been filed and the report of the city administrator.

Any person or entity who is entitled to notice may appeal a decision of the city administrator relative to an administrative action. In the conduct of a consequent hearing, the approving authority shall establish the appellant as a party or the appeal shall not be heard and the contested decision shall become final.

(4) The approving authority may authorize a person to have party status, at any time prior to the close of the hearing, if that person is otherwise a party, as defined by Chapter 18.10 MCMC.

(5) In cases where a matter has been referred back to the planning commission from the city council, only those individuals or agencies who were given party status at the first evidentiary hearing on the matter shall be allowed as parties in the matter when reheard by the commission. [Ord. 508 § 9.04.2, 1982].


18.185.240 Conduct of hearing.

(1) In the conduct of a public hearing, the planning commission shall have the authority, pursuant to the provisions of this title, to:

(a) Regulate the course, sequence and decorum of the hearing.

(b) Dispose of procedural requirements or similar matters.

(c) Determine for the record those persons who have standing in the subject matter and rule on requests for granting party status.

(d) Rule on offers of proof and relevancy of evidence and testimony.

(e) Impose reasonable limitations on the number of witnesses heard and set reasonable time limits for oral presentation, cross-examination of witnesses and rebuttal testimony.

(f) Take such other action appropriate for conduct commensurate with the nature of the hearing.

(g) Grant, deny or, in appropriate cases, attach conditions to the matter being heard.

(2) The applicant or any party wishing to subpoena witnesses to a hearing may do so by application to the city administrator. Such subpoenas shall be enforceable upon proper completion and inclusion of those fees applicable to civil cases in the Douglas County circuit court. Payment of fees and services shall be the responsibility of the party desiring such service.

(3) Order of Procedure. Unless otherwise specified, the planning commission (or approving authority) shall:

(a) At the commencement of the hearing, read a statement to those in attendance that:

(i) Lists the applicable substantive criteria;

(ii) States that testimony, evidence and arguments to be heard must be directed toward the applicable criteria in the plan or this title which the person believes to apply to the decision; and

(iii) States that failure to raise an issue accompanied by statements or evidence with sufficient specificity to afford the approving authority and the parties an opportunity to respond to the issue precludes appeal based on that issue.

(b) Announce the nature and purpose of the hearing and summarize the rules for conducting the hearing.

(c) Permit members of the approving authority to announce:

(i) A potential conflict of interest (any proceeding where the decision made would be to the private pecuniary benefit or detriment of the member or the member’s household except for those benefits or detriments described in ORS 244.020(12)).

(ii) A direct or substantial financial interest in the proceeding of the member or those persons or businesses described in ORS 244.135.

(iii) The inability of the member to render a fair judgment because of prejudice or prejudgment (bias).

No member shall serve on any proceeding in which such member has bias or the member (including those persons or businesses described in ORS 244.135) has a direct or substantial financial interest. If a member refuses to disqualify himself or herself for bias, or direct or substantial financial interest, the approving authority shall have the power to remove such member for that proceeding.

(d) Prior to taking any action at the hearing, all members of the planning commission shall disclose the content of any significant prehearing or ex parte contacts with regard to the matter being heard. Any party to such contact shall be given the opportunity to rebut the substance of the ex parte disclosure.

(e) Recognize parties to hearing.

(f) Request the city administrator or the city administrator’s designee to present the introductory report of the city administrator and explain any graphic or pictorial displays which are a part of the report. Request the city administrator or the city administrator’s designee to read findings and recommendations, if any, and provide such other information as may be requested by the planning commission.

(g) Allow the applicant to be heard first, on his behalf or by representative.

(h) Allow parties or witnesses in favor of the applicant’s proposal to be heard.

(i) Allow other parties or witnesses in opposition to the applicant’s proposal to be heard next in the same manner as in the case of the applicant.

(j) Upon failure of any party to appear, the planning commission may take into consideration written material submitted by such party.

(k) Allow the parties to offer rebuttal evidence and testimony, and to respond to any additional evidence. The scope and extent of rebuttal shall be determined by the chairman.

(l) Conclude the hearing.

(4) Questions may be asked at any time by members of the planning commission. Questions by the parties or city administrator may be allowed by the chairman, and questions may be submitted directly to the witnesses or parties. The witnesses or parties shall be given a reasonable amount of time to respond solely to the questions.

(5) Unless there is a continuance, if a participant so requests before the conclusion of the initial evidentiary hearing, the record shall remain open for at least seven days after the hearings. When the chair reopens the record to admit new evidence or testimony, any person may raise new issues which relate to the new evidence, testimony or criteria for decision-making which apply to the matter at issue.

(6) The planning commission may continue the hearing to a specified time to gather additional evidence or to consider the application fully, or to allow a party to respond. Unless otherwise provided by the planning commission, no additional notice need be given of continued hearings if the matter is continued to a specific date.

(7) At the conclusion of the hearing, the planning commission shall either make a decision and state findings (which may incorporate findings proposed by any party or the city administrator), or may take the matter under advisement. If a majority of the quorum fails to agree and there is no lower decision, the matter shall be deemed denied, unless the members present at the hearing vote to reschedule the deliberation. The planning commission may request proposed findings and conclusions from any party to the hearing. The planning commission, before finally adopting findings and conclusion, may circulate the same in the proposed form to the parties for written comment. All actions taken by the planning commission pursuant to adopting findings and conclusions shall be made part of the record. The decision and findings and conclusions which support the decision of the planning commission shall not be final until reduced to writing and signed by the chairman. The planning commission shall grant, deny or, in appropriate cases, attach conditions to the proposal being heard, and the city administrator shall notify by mail the parties of the decision.

(8) General Conduct of Hearing. The following rules apply to the general conduct of the hearing:

(a) No person shall be disorderly, abusive or disruptive of the orderly conduct of the hearing.

(b) No person shall testify without first receiving recognition from the approving authority and stating his full name and address.

(c) No person shall present irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious testimony or evidence. Formal rules of evidence as used in courts of law shall not apply. Evidence received at any hearing shall be of the quality that reasonable persons rely upon in the conduct of their everyday affairs.

(d) Audience demonstrations such as applause, cheering and display of signs, or other conduct disruptive of the hearing, shall not be permitted. Any such conduct may be cause for immediate suspension of the hearing. [Amended during 2012 recodification; Ord. 508 § 9.04.3, 1982].


18.185.250 Official notice.

(1) The approving authority may take official notice of the following:

(a) All facts which are judicially noticeable. Judicially noticed facts shall be stated and made part of the record.

(b) The comprehensive plan and other officially adopted plans, ordinances, rules and regulations of the city of Myrtle Creek.

(2) Matters officially noticed need not be established by evidence, and may be considered by the approving authority in the determination of the application. [Ord. 508 § 9.04.4, 1982].


18.185.260 Modification of application at hearing.

(1) In response to questions or comments by persons appearing at the hearing or to suggestions or recommendations by the planning commission or city council, the applicant may agree to modify his application, including the plans and specifications submitted.

(2) Unless such modifications are so substantial or extensive that the decision-making body cannot reasonably be expected to perceive the nature and impact of the proposed changes without revised plans before it, the commission/council may approve the application with the stipulation that the permit will not be issued until plans reflecting the agreed-upon changes are submitted to the planning staff. [Ord. 508 § 9.04.5, 1982].


18.185.270 Record of hearing and decision.

(1) A tape recording shall be made of all hearing proceedings and, in accordance with state regulations for records retention, such recordings shall be kept for a minimum of one year. Accurate minutes shall also be kept of all such proceedings; however, the record need not set forth the evidence verbatim. A permanent record of each set of minutes shall be maintained in a safe place by the city recorder.

(2) Whenever practicable, all documentary evidence presented at a hearing as well as all other types of physical evidence shall be made a permanent part of the record of the proceedings.

(3) Any party in a hearing may request and receive approval for the record to remain open seven days after the hearing. When a request is received to reopen the record to admit new evidence, it shall be treated in accordance with procedures for an appeal and a new hearing shall be held to provide an opportunity for any party to raise new issues relating to the new evidence.

(4) The planning commission (or city council) may approve the application, deny the application, or grant approval subject to special conditions necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of this title. For all cases, the approving authority shall make a decision based on the record before it as justification for its action.

(5) The planning commission (or city council) shall make its decision upon the close of its hearing or upon continuance of the matter to a specified date.

(6) A decision made by the planning commission or city council regarding an application or appeal or revocation of a permit shall not be official until reduced to writing and mailed to the applicant and any other qualified parties. A registry of all land use decisions shall be kept on file, regardless of whether or not the holding of a public hearing is required.

(7) The written decision described in subsection (6) of this section shall include a statement of the principal findings and conclusions utilized in the decision-making process whenever a land use decision involves discretionary action by the planning commission or city council. These “findings of fact” shall be made available to the public; however, a fee may be charged for photocopies in accordance with the Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges.

(8) The city administrator or the city administrator’s designee shall send a copy of the planning commission’s (or city council’s) final written decision to all parties to the proceeding within seven days of said decision, and the city recorder shall, at the same time, file a copy of the final order or decision in the official records of the city.

(9) Prior to the expiration of the appeal period prescribed in Chapter 18.190 MCMC, no building or development permit shall be issued, nor shall any development activity commence, including the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, use or occupancy of the land or a structure, when such development, use or occupancy is the subject of a planning commission or city council decision. [Ord. 508 § 9.04.6, 1982].


Chapter 18.190 APPEALS

Sections:

18.190.010    Appeals of city administrator decision.

18.190.020    Review of planning commission decision.

18.190.030    Review by the city council.

18.190.040    Amendments to land use actions.


18.190.010 Appeals of city administrator decision.

(1) Any action taken by the city administrator in the interpretation, administration or enforcement of this title shall be subject to review by the planning commission.

(2) Any person or entity who would have been entitled to notice, or a person who is adversely affected or aggrieved by the city administrator’s decision, may file a timely written statement to appeal a decision of the city administrator relative to an administrative action. In the conduct of an appeal hearing, the planning commission shall establish that the appellant is qualified as a party as defined by this title, or the appeal shall not be heard and the contested decision shall become final.

(3) The planning commission may review the action of the city administrator upon its own motion by resolution filed within 12 days of the city administrator’s decision, or upon receipt of a notice of appeal as prescribed herein. For the purpose of this section, an appeal shall be filed with the city administrator no later than 12 days following the date of the decision or action of the city administrator.

(4) Every notice of appeal shall contain:

(a) A reference to the application sought to be appealed.

(b) The date of the final decision on the action.

(c) A statement as to how the petitioner qualifies as a party.

(d) The specific facts from the record of the hearing which form the basis of the petitioner’s request for review.

(5) The appeal shall be accompanied by the required fee, as designated in the city of Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges.

(6) At least 20 days prior to the date of the planning commission meeting, the city administrator shall give notice as provided by MCMC 18.185.170 and 18.185.180 of the time and place of the meeting to all interested persons to the case.

(7) Members of the planning commission shall neither:

(a) Communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or representative in connection with any issue related to the appeal except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to participate; nor

(b) Take notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda, or any other materials prepared in connection with the particular case, unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to review the material so noticed.

(8) During the course of the review, the city administrator or the city administrator’s designee shall first present to the planning commission the decision and the reasons for such action. The appellant then may present his argument and may call witnesses to give additional testimony.

(9) Appeal of an administrative decision to the planning commission shall be conducted as a new hearing without prejudice (de novo hearing).

(10) The review shall be accomplished in accordance with the provisions of this title. The planning commission may continue the appeal hearing to a specified time to gather additional evidence or to consider the application fully, or to allow a party to respond. Unless otherwise provided by the planning commission, no additional notice need be given of continued hearings if the matter is continued to a specific date.

(11) The planning commission shall act upon appeal within 30 days of filing thereof, unless such time limitation is extended with the consent of the applicant; provided, that unless otherwise ordered by the planning commission, the city administrator shall forward such appeals in the order in which they are filed.

(12) Any person wishing to subpoena or depose witnesses to an appeal may do so by application to the city administrator not less than seven days prior to the hearing, and by showing that the witness resides in Oregon, is unable or unwilling to appear, and his testimony is material and relevant. Such subpoenas or depositions shall be enforceable upon proper completion and inclusion of those fees applicable to civil cases in the Douglas County circuit court.

(13) All evidence offered may be received. Evidence received at any hearing shall be of the quality that reasonable persons rely upon in the conduct of their everyday affairs. All evidence received shall become a part of the record of the hearing.

(14) The planning commission may affirm, reverse or modify the action of the city administrator and may reasonably grant approval subject to conditions necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of this title.

(a) For all cases, the planning commission shall make a decision based upon the findings and conclusions from the record of the hearing.

(b) The planning commission shall make its decision upon the close of its hearing, or upon continuance of the matter to a specific date.

(c) Only those members of the planning commission reviewing the entire record may act on the matter reviewed. Upon failure of a majority of a quorum to agree, the decision of the lesser authority shall stand.

(d) The city administrator shall send a copy of the planning commission’s final written decision to all parties to the appeal within seven days of said decision and shall, at the same time, file a copy of the planning commission’s final order in the records of the city.

(e) If a request is denied by the planning commission, and no higher local authority reverses such denial upon appeal, no new application for the same or substantially similar action shall be filed for at least 12 months from the date of the final order on the action denying the application. [Ord. 508 § 9.05.1, 1982].


18.190.020 Review of planning commission decision.

(1) Ten days from the date of the written decision of the planning commission, the decision shall become effective, unless review is sought pursuant to this section.

(2) Review of the decision of the planning commission:

(a) Shall be made by the city council upon any party filing a notice of review with the city administrator within 10 days of the filing of the written decision sought to be reviewed. Review by the city council shall be conducted pursuant to MCMC 18.190.030.

(b) May be made by the city council on its own motion passed within 10 days of the filing of the written decision sought to be reviewed. Review by the city council shall be conducted pursuant to MCMC 18.190.030.

(3) Notice of the time and place of the review, together with any notice of review filed, shall be mailed to all parties at least 10 days prior to the date of review by the city council.

(4) A record of the review shall be made and shall be the same as that required at the hearing before the planning commission, pursuant to MCMC 18.185.270.

(5) Every notice of review shall contain:

(a) A reference to the decision sought to be reviewed.

(b) The date of the decision sought to be reviewed.

(c) A statement as to how the petitioner qualifies as a party.

(d) The specific facts from the record of the hearing which form the basis of the petitioner’s request for review.

(6) Except when filed by the city council, a notice of review shall be accompanied by the required fee, as designated in the city of Myrtle Creek handbook of fees and charges.

(a) If the city council does not desire a transcript, the applicant or any party may request a transcript. Any such transcript request shall be paid for by the person requesting it in the manner provided in this section. The estimated cost of the transcript shall be specified by the city administrator. Within five days of such estimate, the person making the request for a transcript shall deposit the estimated cost with the city administrator. Any deposit excess shall be returned to the depositing person.

(b) If a transcript is desired by the city council, the costs shall be borne by the city. [Ord. 508 § 9.05.2, 1982].


18.190.030 Review by the city council.

(1) The review of the planning commission’s decision by the city council shall be confined to the arguments of the parties and the record of the proceeding below, which will include the following:

(a) All materials, pleadings, memoranda, stipulations and motions submitted by any party to the proceeding and recorded or considered by the planning commission as evidence.

(b) All materials submitted by the city administrator to the planning commission with respect to the application.

(c) The transcript of the hearing, if desired by the city council, or the tape recording of the hearing or other evidence of the proceedings before the planning commission.

(d) The written findings, conclusions and decision of the planning commission.

(e) Additional evidence, upon election of the council, to cure ex parte contacts.

(2) Review by the city council upon appeal by a party shall be limited to the facts from the record of the hearing which form the basis of the petitioner’s request for review. New materials or testimony containing facts which were not made part of the original hearing shall not be received.

(3) At the commencement of the review of any application, a statement shall be made to those in attendance that describes the applicable substantive criteria; that the arguments to be heard on the testimony and evidence in the record must be directed towards these criteria; and that the failure to address a criterion precludes appeal based on that criterion.

(4) Order of Procedure. In the conduct of a hearing, the city council shall:

(a) Announce the nature and purpose of the hearing.

(b) Permit members of the city council to announce a potential conflict of interest, direct or substantial financial interest or any prejudice of bias as specified in MCMC 18.185.240(3)(c). No member shall serve in any proceeding in which such member has bias or the member has a direct or substantial financial interest. If a member refuses to disqualify himself or herself for bias or direct or substantial financial interest, the council shall have the power to remove such member for that proceeding.

(c) Advise all parties that they have the right to rebut the substance of the communication.

(d) Request the city administrator or the city administrator’s designee for an introductory and summary report of the matter before the council and to provide such other information as may be requested by the council.

(e) Allow the appellant to be heard first.

(f) Allow other parties in support of the appellant to be heard next.

(g) Allow parties opposed to the appeal to be heard next.

(h) Allow the appellant and parties in support of the appeal to make any rebuttal arguments they may have. The scope and extent of rebuttal shall be determined by the council.

(i) Allow parties opposed to the appeal to make any rebuttal arguments they may have. The scope and extent of rebuttal shall be determined by the council.

(j) Conclude the hearing.

(5) The city council may affirm, reverse or modify the action of the planning commission, and may approve or deny the request, or grant approval subject to special conditions necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of this title.

(a) For all cases, the city council shall make a decision based upon the findings and conclusions from the record of the original hearing.

(b) The city council shall enter such findings, conclusions and final orders upon the close of its hearings or upon continuance of the matter to a specific time.

(c) The city council shall, within seven days of its final order, cause copies of its final written order to be sent to all parties participating in the review before it.

(6) The city council may remand the matter to the planning commission if it is satisfied that testimony or other evidence could not have been presented at the initial hearing. In deciding such remand, the city council shall consider and make findings and conclusions:

(a) That substantial prejudice to parties resulted;

(b) That material, relevant and competent evidence at the time of the initial hearing was unavailable through no lack of diligence of the party offering such testimony and evidence; or

(c) That surprise to opposing parties occurred.

(7) Only those members of the city council reviewing the entire record may act on the matter reviewed. The agreement of a majority of those reviewing is necessary to amend, reverse or remand the action of the planning commission. Upon failure of a majority of those reviewing to agree, the decision of the planning commission shall stand.

(8) City council decisions for discretionary permits may be appealed to the Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA), as provided in ORS 197.830. It shall be the responsibility of the appellant to contact LUBA regarding proper appeal procedure. [Ord. 508 § 9.05.3, 1982].


18.190.040 Amendments to land use actions.

(1) “Minor amendment” means a change which:

(a) Does not increase the intensity of the approved land use;

(b) Does not change the general location or amount of land devoted to an approved land use; or

(c) Includes only minor shifting of established lines, location of buildings, proposed public or private streets, pedestrian ways, utility easements, parks or other public open spaces.

(2) “Major amendment” means any change which is not a minor amendment.

(3) Approval of Minor Amendments. A minor amendment to an approved ministerial, administrative or quasi-judicial land use action may be approved by the city administrator.

(4) Approval of Major Amendments. Approval of a major amendment to an approved land use action requested within two years of the date of decision (or within the extension period for the decision if an extension has been authorized) shall be a land use action subject to the provisions of Chapters 18.185 and 18.195 MCMC and this chapter. [Ord. 508 § 9.05.4, 1982].


Chapter 18.195 ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

18.195.010    Enforcement and review.

18.195.020    Persons liable.

18.195.030    Enforcement procedures.

18.195.040    Penalties and remedies.

18.195.050    Permit revocation.


18.195.010 Enforcement and review.

Whenever the administrator receives a written and signed complaint alleging a violation of this title, he shall investigate the complaint, take whatever action is warranted, and inform the complainant in writing what actions have been or will be taken. [Ord. 508 § 9.15.0, 1982].


18.195.020 Persons liable.

The owner, tenant, or occupant of any building or land or part thereof and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, or maintains any situation that is contrary to the requirements of this title may be held responsible for the violation and suffer the penalties and be subject to the remedies herein provided. [Ord. 508 § 9.15.1, 1982].


18.195.030 Enforcement procedures.

(1) If the administrator finds that any provision of this title is being violated, he shall mail written notice to the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation, ordering the action necessary to correct it and the time limit in which action must be taken. Additional written notices may be sent at the administrator’s discretion.

(2) The final written notice (the initial written notice may be the final notice) shall state what action the administrator intends to take if the violation is not corrected and shall advise that the administrator’s decision or order may be appealed in accordance with Chapter 18.190 MCMC.

(3) Notwithstanding the foregoing, in cases where delay would seriously threaten the effective enforcement of this title or pose a danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, the administrator may seek enforcement without prior written notice by invoking any of the penalties or remedies authorized in MCMC 18.195.040. [Ord. 508 § 9.15.2, 1982].


18.195.040 Penalties and remedies.

(1) A violation of this title or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including conditions established in connection with grants of variances, conditional use permits and other permits regulated herein, shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $50.00, or a maximum 30 days’ imprisonment, or both.

(2) Any act constituting a violation of the provisions of this title or a failure to comply with any of its requirements, including conditions established in connection with the granting of a permit or variance, shall also subject the offender to a civil penalty of $25.00. If the offender fails to pay this penalty within 10 days after being cited for a violation, the penalty may be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt. A civil penalty may not be appealed if the offender was sent a final notice of violation in accordance with MCMC 18.195.030 and did not take an appeal (as provided by Chapter 18.190 MCMC) within the prescribed time.

(3) This chapter may also be enforced by any appropriate equitable action, including declaring the building or land thus in violation a nuisance or instituting injunction, mandamus, abatement or other appropriate proceedings to prevent or remove the unlawful use.

(4) Each day that any violation continues after notification by the administrator that such violation exists shall be considered a separate offense for purposes of the penalties and remedies specified in this section.

(5) Any one, all, or any combination of the foregoing penalties and remedies may be used to enforce this title. [Ord. 508 § 9.15.3, 1982].


18.195.050 Permit revocation.

(1) Planning clearance for variances, conditional use permits, sign permits, fence permits and all other permits regulated by this title (hereinafter called “permits”) may be revoked by the permit-issuing authority if the permit recipient fails to develop or maintain the property in accordance with the plans submitted or in accordance with the requirements of this title or any additional requirements or conditions lawfully imposed by the planning commission or city council.

(2) Before a permit may be revoked, the administrator shall give the permit recipient 10 days of notice of intent to revoke the permit and shall inform the recipient of the alleged reasons for the revocation and of his right to obtain an informal hearing on the allegations. If a hearing is requested, notice shall be given in accordance with MCMC 18.185.210.

(a) The burden of presenting evidence sufficient to authorize the permit-issuing authority to conclude that a permit should be revoked for any of the reasons set forth in subsection (1) of this section shall be upon the party advocating that position. The burden of persuasion shall also be upon that party; and

(b) A motion to revoke a permit shall include, insofar as practicable, a statement of the specific reasons or findings of fact that support the motion, and the administrator shall provide to the permittee a written statement of the decision and the reasons therefor.

(3) No person may continue to make use of land or buildings in the manner authorized by permit after such permit has been revoked in accordance with this section. [Ord. 508 § 9.15.4, 1982].

 



-----------------------------

The Myrtle Creek Municipal Code is current through Ordinance No. 834, passed July 21, 2020.

Disclaimer: The city recorder’s office has the official version of the Myrtle Creek Municipal Code. Users should contact the city recorder’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: http://www.cityofmyrtlecreek.com/ City Telephone: (541) 863-3171

Code Publishing Company