CHARTER CITY OF MOLALLA, OREGON
Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Title 4 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES, TAXES AND REGULATIONS
Title 6 ANIMALS
Title 7 (RESERVED)
Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Title 11 (RESERVED)
Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES
Title 14 (RESERVED)
Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Title 16 (RESERVED)
Title 17 DEVELOPMENT CODE
Title 18 SIGNS
Titles 19 and 20 (RESERVED)
Title 21 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS

CHARTER CITY OF MOLALLA, OREGON
PREAMBLE
 

We, the voters of Molalla, Oregon exercise our power to the fullest extent possible under the Oregon Constitution and laws of the state, and enact this Home Rule Charter. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Chapter I NAMES AND BOUNDARIES
 

Section 1. Title. This charter may be referred to as the 2010 City of Molalla Charter. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 2. Name. The City of Molalla, Oregon, continues as a municipal corporation with the name City of Molalla. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 3. Boundaries. The city includes all territory within its boundaries as they now exist or are legally modified. The city will maintain as a public record an accurate and current description of its boundaries. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Chapter II POWERS
 

Section 4. Powers. The city has all powers that the constitutions, statutes and common law of the United States and Oregon expressly or impliedly grant or allow the city, as fully as though this charter specifically enumerated each of those powers. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 5. Construction. The charter will be liberally construed so that the city may exercise fully all powers possible under this charter and under United States and Oregon law. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 6. Distribution. The Oregon Constitution reserves initiative and referendum powers as to all municipal legislation to city voters. This charter vests all other city powers in the council except as the charter otherwise provides. The council has legislative, administrative and quasi-judicial authority. The council exercises legislative authority by ordinance, administrative authority by resolution, and quasi-judicial authority by order. The council may not delegate its authority to adopt ordinances. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Chapter III ELECTED OFFICIALS
 

Section 7. Council. The council consists of a mayor and six councilors nominated and elected from the city at large. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 8. Mayor. The mayor presides over and facilitates council meetings, preserves order, enforces council rules and determines the order of business under council rules. The mayor is a voting member of the council and has no veto authority. The mayor, with the consent of council, appoints members of boards, commissions and committees established by ordinance or resolution. The mayor must sign all records of council decisions. The mayor serves as the political head of the city government. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 9. Council President. At its first meeting each year, the council must elect a president from its membership. The president presides in the absence of the mayor and acts as mayor when the mayor is unable to perform duties. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 10. Term Limit. No councilor, including those serving on July 1, 2012, may be elected to a city office, or any combination of such offices, for a period to exceed eight consecutive years. (Reso. No. 2011-12)

 

Section 11. Rules. The council must adopt by resolution rules to govern its meetings and proceedings. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 12. Meetings. The council must meet at least once a month at a time and place designated by council rules, and may meet at other times in accordance with the rules. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 13. Quorum. A majority of the council members is a quorum to conduct business. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 14. Vote Required. The express approval of a majority of a quorum of the council is necessary for any council decision, except when this charter requires approval by a majority of the council. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 15. Record. A record of council meetings must be kept in a manner prescribed by the council rules. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Chapter IV LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY
 

Section 16. Ordinances. The council will exercise its legislative authority by enacting ordinances. The enacting clause for all ordinances must state “The City of Molalla ordains:” (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 17. Ordinance Enactment.

 

(a)    Except as authorized by subsection (b), enactment of an ordinance requires approval by a majority of the council at two meetings.

 

(b)    The council may enact an ordinance at a single meeting by the unanimous approval of at least four members of the council, provided the proposed ordinance is available in writing to the public at least five days before the meeting.

 

(c)    Any substantive amendment to a proposed ordinance must be read aloud or made available in writing to the public before the council enacts the ordinance at that meeting.

 

(d)    After the adoption of an ordinance, the vote of each councilor must be entered into the council minutes.

 

(e)    After ordinance enactment, the city recorder must attest to the ordinance by name, title and date of enactment. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 18. Effective Date of Ordinances. Ordinances normally take effect on the 30th day after enactment, or on a later day provided in the ordinance. An ordinance may take effect as soon as enacted or any other date less than 30 days after enactment if it contains an emergency clause. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Chapter V ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY
 

Section 19. Resolutions. The council will normally exercise its administrative authority by adopting resolutions. The adopting clause for resolutions must state “The City of Molalla resolves:” (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 20. Resolution Adoption.

 

(a)    Adoption of a resolution or any other council administrative decision requires approval by the council at one meeting.

 

(b)    Any substantive amendment to a resolution must be read aloud or made available in writing to the public before the council adopts the resolution at that meeting.

 

(c)    After adoption of a resolution or other administrative decision, the vote of each councilor must be entered into the council minutes.

 

(d)    After adoption of a resolution, the city recorder must attest to the resolution by name, title and date of adoption. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 21. Effective Date of Resolutions. Resolutions and other administrative decisions take effect on the date of adoption, or on a later date provided in the resolution. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Chapter VI QUASI-JUDICIAL AUTHORITY
 

Section 22. Orders. The council will normally exercise its quasi-judicial authority by approving orders. The approving clause for orders must state “The City of Molalla orders:” (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 23. Order Approval.

 

(a)    Approval of an order or any other council quasi-judicial decision requires approval by the council at one meeting.

 

(b)    Any substantive amendment to a proposed order must be read aloud or made available in writing to the public at the meeting before the council approves the order.

 

(c)    After approval of an order or other council quasi-judicial decision, the vote of each councilor must be entered in the council minutes.

 

(d)    After approval of an order, the city recorder must attest to the order by name, title and date of adoption. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 24. Effective Date. Orders and other quasi-judicial decisions take effect on the date of final approval, or on a later date provided in the order. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Chapter VII ELECTIONS
 

Section 25. Councilors. At each general election after the effective date of this charter, three councilors will be elected for four-year terms. The term of a councilor in office when this charter is adopted is the term for which the councilor was elected. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 26. Mayor. At every other general election after the effective date of this charter, a mayor will be elected for a four-year term. The term of the mayor in office when this charter takes effect is the term for which the mayor was elected. (Reso. No. 2011-11; Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 27. State Law. City elections must conform to state law except as this charter or ordinances provide otherwise. All elections for city offices must be nonpartisan. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 28. Qualifications.

 

(a)    The mayor and each councilor must be a qualified elector under state law, and reside within the city for at least one year immediately before election or appointment to office.

 

(b)    No person may be a candidate at a single election for more than one city office.

(c)    Neither the mayor nor a councilor may be employed by the city.

 

(d)    The council is the final judge of the election and qualifications of elected officials. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 29. Nominations. The council must adopt an ordinance prescribing the manner for a person to be nominated to run for mayor or a councilor position. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 30. Terms. The term of an officer elected at a general election begins at the first council meeting of the year immediately after the election, and continues until the successor qualifies and assumes the office. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 31. Oath. The mayor and each councilor must swear or affirm to faithfully perform the duties of the office and support the constitutions and laws of the United States and Oregon, and the charter, ordinances and resolutions of the city. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 32. Vacancies. The mayor or a councilor office becomes vacant:

 

(a)    Upon the incumbent’s:

        (1)    Death;

        (2)    Adjudicated incompetence; or

        (3)    Recall from the office.

 

(b)    Upon declaration by the council after the incumbent’s:

        (1)    Failure to qualify for the office within 10 days of the time the term of office is to begin;

        (2)    Absence from the city for 30 days without council consent, or from all council meetings within a 60-day period;

        (3)    Ceasing to reside in the city;

        (4)    Ceasing to be a qualified elector under state law;

        (5)    Conviction of a public offense punishable by loss of liberty;

        (6)    Resignation from the office; or

        (7)    Violation of Section 33(i) of this charter. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 33. Filling Vacancies. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilor will be filled by a majority of the remaining council members. The term of office for the appointee runs from appointment until expiration of the term of office of the last person elected to that office. If a disability prevents a council member from attending council meetings or a member is absent from the city, a majority of the consent of the council may appoint a councilor pro tem. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Chapter VIII APPOINTIVE OFFICERS
 

Section 34. City Manager.

 

(a)    The office of city manager is established as the administrative head of the city government. The manager is responsible to the mayor and council for the proper administration of city business. The manager will assist the mayor and council in the development of city policies and carry out policies set by ordinances and resolutions.

 

(b)    A majority of the council may appoint and may remove the manager. The appointment must be made without regard to political considerations and solely on the basis of education and experience relating to local government management.

 

(c)    The manager is appointed for a definite or an indefinite term, and may be removed at any time by a majority of the council. The council must fill the office by appointment as soon as practicable after a vacancy occurs.

 

(d)    The manager must:

        (1)    Countersign all orders on the city treasury;

        (2)    Ensure that an accurate record is kept of the city’s proceedings;

        (3)    Ensure that all books, papers, records and other documents connected with business of the council, or which may be the property of the city are securely kept;

        (4)    Attend all council meetings unless excused by the mayor or council;

        (5)    Make reports and recommendations to the mayor and council about the needs of the city;

        (6)    Administer and enforce all city ordinances, resolutions, franchises, leases, contracts, permits, and other city decisions;

        (7)    Appoint, supervise, and remove city employees;

        (8)    Organize city departments and administrative structure;

        (9)    Prepare and administer the annual city budget;

        (10)  Administer city utilities and property;

        (11)  Encourage and support regional and intergovernmental cooperation;

        (12)  Promote cooperation among the council, staff and residents in developing city policies, and building a sense of community;

        (13)  Perform other duties as directed by the council; and

        (14)  Delegate duties, but remain responsible for acts of all subordinates.

 

(e)    The mayor and councilors may not directly or indirectly attempt to coerce the manager or a candidate for the office of manager in the appointment or removal of any city employee, or in administrative decisions regarding city property or contracts. Violation of this prohibition is grounds for removal from office by a majority of the council after a public hearing. In council meetings, councilors may discuss or suggest anything with the manager relating to city business.

 

(f)    The manager has no authority over the council or over the judicial functions of the municipal judge.

(g)    The manager and others designated by the council may sit at council meetings but have no vote. The manager may take part in all council discussions.

 

(h)    When the manager is temporarily disabled from acting as manager or when the office becomes vacant, the council must appoint a manager pro tem as prescribed by council rules. The manager pro tem has the authority and duties of manager, except that a manager pro tem may not appoint or remove employees without council approval. (Reso. No. 2011-14; Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 35. City Attorney. The office of city attorney is established as the chief legal officer of the city government. A majority of the council may appoint and may remove the city attorney. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 36. Municipal Court and Judge.

 

(a)    A majority of the council may appoint and remove a municipal judge. A municipal judge will hold court in the city at such place as the council directs. The court will be known as the municipal court.

 

(b)    All proceedings of this court will conform to state laws governing justices of the peace and justice courts.

 

(c)    All areas within the city and areas outside the city as permitted by state law are within the territorial jurisdiction of the court.

 

(d)    The municipal court has jurisdiction over every offense created by city ordinance. The court may enforce forfeitures and other penalties created by ordinances. The court also has jurisdiction under state law unless limited by city ordinance.

 

(e)    The municipal judge may:

        (1)    Render judgments and impose sanctions on persons and property;

        (2)    Order the arrest of anyone accused of an offense against the city;

        (3)    Commit to jail or admit to bail anyone accused of a city offense;

        (4)    Issue and compel obedience to subpoenas;

        (5)    Compel witnesses to appear and testify and jurors to serve for trials before the court;

        (6)    Penalize contempt of court;

        (7)    Issue processes necessary to enforce judgments and orders of the court;

        (8)    Issue search warrants; and

        (9)    Perform other judicial and quasi-judicial functions assigned by ordinance.

 

(f)    The council may appoint and may remove municipal judges pro tem.

 

(g)    The council may transfer some or all of the functions of the municipal court to a state court. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Chapter IX PERSONNEL
 

Section 37. Personnel Rules. The council by resolution will adopt rules governing recruitment, selection, promotion, transfer, demotion, suspension, layoff, and dismissal of city employees based on merit and fitness. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Chapter X ANNEXATIONS
 

Section 38. Annexations. Annexations of territory to the city that are initiated by property owners shall be approved by the voters in an election to be paid for by the property owners seeking annexation. (Reso. No. 2011-13)

 

Chapter XI MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
 

Section 39. Debt. City indebtedness may not exceed debt limits imposed by state law. A charter amendment is not required to authorize city indebtedness. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 40. Ordinance Continuation. All ordinances, resolutions, orders and rules in force and consistent with this charter when it takes effect remain in effect until amended or repealed. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 41. Repeal. All charter provisions adopted before this charter takes effect are repealed. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 42. Severability. The terms of this charter are severable. If any provision is held invalid by a court, the invalidity does not affect any other term of this charter. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

 

Section 43. Time of Effect. This charter takes effect January 1, 2011. (Reso. No. 2011-10)

Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
Chapter 1.02 COUNCIL RULES
Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PENALTY
Chapter 1.10 SIGNATURE REQUIREMENTS FOR PROPOSED LEGISLATION (INITIATIVES)

Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
1.01.010 Adoption.
        There is adopted the “Molalla Municipal Code” as published by Quality Code Publishing, Seattle, Washington. (Ord. 2011-01 §1)

 

1.01.020 Title—Citation—Reference.
        This code shall be known as the “Molalla Municipal Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to the code as the “Molalla Municipal Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the “Molalla Municipal Code.” Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections, of the “Molalla Municipal Code,” and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 1983-4 §2, 1983)

 

1.01.030 Contents.
        This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the City of Molalla, Oregon. (Ord. 1983-4 §3, 1983)

 

1.01.040 Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.
        The last codified ordinance included in the code prior to recodification is Ordinance 2010-15, passed December 8, 2010. (Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 1983-4 §4, 1983)

 

1.01.050 Reference applies to all amendments.
        Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “Molalla Municipal Code” or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the City of Molalla, Oregon, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 1983-4 §5, 1983)

 

1.01.060 Title, chapter and section headings.
        Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section of this code. (Ord. 1983-4 §6, 1983)

 

1.01.070 Reference to specific ordinances.
        The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 1983-4 §7, 1983)

 

1.01.080 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
        Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the City shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee or penalty at the effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations there under appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 1983-4 §8, 1983)

 

1.01.090 Effective date.
        This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code as the “Molalla Municipal Code” becomes effective. (Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 1983-4 §9, 1983)

 

1.01.100 Constitutionality.
        If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The Council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this code, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or Molalla Municipal Code 31, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 1983-4 §10, 1983)

Chapter 1.02 COUNCIL RULES
1.02.010 Council rules.
        The Council shall review its rules at least once every four years. Amendments shall be adopted by a majority vote. The Council has an obligation to be clear and simple in its procedures and consideration of the questions coming before it. The Council rules are not intended to replace or supersede any applicable federal or state laws or regulations, city ordinances or policies, or provisions of the City Charter. (Ord. 2007-05 §1)

 

1.02.020 Definitions.
        A.    “City committees” means all city committees, commissioners, task forces, and advisory bodies.

        B.     “Council” and “Councilors” means the Mayor, the Council President, and the Councilors.

        C.     “Councilors” means the Council President and the Councilors.

        D.    “Mayor” means the Mayor, or in the absence of the Mayor, the Council President or other presiding officer. (Ord. 2007-05 §1)

 

1.02.030 Robert’s Rules adopted.
        Unless otherwise provided by federal or state law or administrative rule or modified by these rules, the procedure for Council meetings shall be governed by Robert’s Rules of Order. The Council has an obligation to the citizens to be clear and simple in its procedures and in the consideration of the questions coming before it. Therefore, Councilors should avoid invoking the finer points of parliamentary procedure when such points serve only to obscure the issues before the Council as a whole, or to confuse the audience at public meetings and the citizens in general. (Ord. 2007-05 §1)

 

1.02.040 The presiding officer.
        A.    The Mayor. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council and shall be the recognized head of the city for all ceremonial purposes. The Mayor shall have all duties and privileges of any Councilor, and shall not be denied any right or privilege by reason of the Mayor’s position as Presiding Officer.

        B.     Council President. At the first meeting of each year, the Council shall elect a president from its membership. In the event of the Mayor’s absence from any Council meeting, the Council President shall act as the Presiding Officer. Whenever the Mayor is unable, on account of absence, illness or other cause, to perform the functions of the office, the Council President shall act as Mayor Pro Tem.

        C.     Temporary Chair. In event of the absence of the Mayor and Council President, the City Attorney shall call the Council to order and call the roll of the members. If a quorum is present, those Councilors present shall elect, by majority vote, a temporary chair for that meeting. Should the Mayor or Council President arrive, the temporary chair shall relinquish the chair immediately upon the conclusion of the item of business then in consideration before the Council.

        D.    Privileges Not Affected by Status. The Presiding Officer may move, second and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed on all members, and shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a Councilor by reason of acting as the Presiding Officer. (Ord. 2012-01 §1; Ord. 2007-05 §1)

 

1.02.050 Parliamentarian.
        The City Attorney, or in the City Attorney’s absence, the City Manager, shall be the parliamentarian, and shall advise the presiding officer on any questions of order. (Ord. 2007-05 §1)

 

1.02.060 Council meetings.
        A.    Regular meetings to conduct Council business will be held on the 2nd and 4th Wednesdays of each month unless canceled by the Mayor for good cause.

        B.     Work sessions may be held prior to each City Council meeting. Work sessions and agendas will be developed by the City Manager in consultation with the City Council, or by motion with Council approval or by concurrence of the Council.

        C.     Special meetings or work sessions may be called by the Mayor or Council President in the absence of the Mayor or by a majority of the Council. Final decisions shall not be made at work sessions.

        D.    Executive sessions will be held in compliance with the Oregon Public Meetings law.

        E.     Minutes of regular meetings, special Council meetings and work sessions will be taken as provided by the Oregon Public Records law.

        F.     Telephone/electronic meetings may be held in compliance with the Oregon Public Meetings law. Councilors may participate and vote in Council meetings via telephone, electronically, or by other means consistent with the Oregon Public Meetings law.

        G.    Attendance at meetings is expected of Councilors who should use their best efforts to attend all Council meetings. Councilors will inform the Mayor and the City Manager if they are unable to attend any meeting. Additionally, the Mayor will inform the Council President and the City Manager regarding any absence by the Mayor. (Ord. 2019-07 §§1—3; Ord. 2007-05 §1)

 

1.02.070 Agenda.
        A.    Order. The order of business for Council meetings is generally as follows:

        •       Call to Order

        •       Flag Salute

        •       Roll Call

        •       Consent Agenda/Approval of Minutes

        •       Communications—Written and Verbal

        •       Awards and Recognitions

        •       Public Hearing

        •       Continuing Business

        •       New Business

        •       Ordinances and Resolutions

        •       Proclamations

        •       Reports and Announcements

        •       Executive Session

        •       Adjournment

        B.     Preparation. The City Manager/Mayor shall prepare an agenda of the business to be presented at a regular Council meeting. Wherever possible, it is desirable that no item of business be added to an agenda after 12:00 noon on the Friday prior to a regular Council meeting. The agenda packet containing all agenda bills will be available for the City Council and public on the Friday afternoon prior a regular Council meeting.

        C.     Councilors may place an item on a Council agenda by motion or with the Mayor’s approval. Any two members of the Council may place an item on the agenda over the objection of the Mayor. The City Manager shall be notified. Councilors will endeavor to have subjects they wish considered submitted in time to be placed on the agenda. Agendas will generally be set to allow meetings to end no later than 9:30 p.m. If the Council is still in session at 9:30 p.m., then the Council will decide whether to continue with the agenda or move items to a future agenda.

        D.    In the event of an emergency, the City Manager may place an item on the agenda. The City Manager shall strive to provide 24 hours notice to the Council and the news media. (Ord. 2007-05 §1)

 

1.02.080 Order and decorum.
        A.    Councilors will conduct themselves so as to bring credit upon the City government by respecting the rule of law, ensuring non-discriminatory delivery of public services, keeping informed concerning the matters coming before the Council and abiding by all Council decisions, whether or not the member voted on the prevailing side.

        B.     Councilors will assist the Mayor to preserve order and decorum during Council meetings and may not, by conversation or other actions, delay or interrupt the proceedings or refuse to obey the orders of the Mayor or Council rules. When addressing staff or members of the public, Councilors will confine themselves to questions or issues under discussion and not engage in personal attacks, or impugn the motives of any speaker.

        C.     The following ground rules will be observed to maintain order and decorum during Council discussions:

        1.     Councilors will strive to gather necessary information and ask questions of City staff before meetings. During regular public meetings, questions should be directed to staff through the City Manager.

        2.     Councilors will have an opportunity to speak at least once on any pending motion or agenda item.

        3.     Councilors will not speak on behalf of the Council, unless they have been authorized by the Council to do so.

        4.     Except for minor revisions or corrections, which shall be approved by motion or consensus, Councilors shall not attempt to amend or revise prepared ordinances during public meetings. Amendments to proposed ordinances may be appropriate, but input from the City Manager or the City Attorney will be sought to accomplish the Councilors’ objectives.

        5.     Councilors will be open, direct and candid in the Council forum. Members should be brief and succinct in stating their views and focus on a single issue or topic at any one time.

        6.     Councilors will focus on City issues and avoid becoming involved in issues not properly within the purview of the Council.

        7.     The Mayor will recognize Councilors wishing to speak in the order of their requests. The Mayor will provide a Councilor with an opportunity to speak before recognizing another Councilor. Councilors will not interrupt another Councilor who has the floor.

        8.     Councilors will not disguise statements as questions or use repetitions as a way to convince others.

        9.     Councilors will keep discussions moving and call for a “process check” if the Council becomes bogged down in discussions.

        10.   Councilors may by motion set time limits on discussions.

        11.   Councilors will not publicly criticize or attack each other, City staff or other persons. Councilors will not personally attack each other, City staff or other persons.

        12.   If a Councilor wishes to discuss a major policy issue that is not on the agenda, it should be raised during new business for consideration at a future work session or meeting, not during the current meeting.

        13.   City staff and others attending Council meetings shall observe the same rules of procedure, decorum and conduct as Councilors.

        14.   While addressing or attending a Council meeting, any person who disrupts proceedings may be removed if directed by the presiding officer. In the event the presiding officer fails to act, this rule may be enforced by motion approved by a majority vote. A Sergeant-at-Arms may be appointed by the presiding officer to preserve decorum.

        15.   Councilors should obtain the appropriate permission before representing another Councilor’s view or position to the media. (Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 2010-12 §2; Ord. 2007-05 §1)

 

1.02.090 Public comment.
        A.    Citizen and community group sign-up forms will be available at each regular business meeting. At the time on the agenda designated for public comment and during any public hearing, any member of the public desiring to address the Council must first request to be recognized by the Mayor and then state their name and address for the record. The Council may set time limits for comments. The Council may request that groups with like comments choose a spokesperson to present joint remarks.

        B.     During public meetings, all public comments should be directed to the question under discussion and addressed to the Mayor representing the Council as a whole.

        C.     In general, Councilors will not respond to comments made during the public comment agenda time, except to ask clarifying questions. Any public requests for Council action will be referred to staff and reviewed before placing on a future agenda. (Ord. 2007-05 §1)

 

1.02.100 Motions.
        A.    Councilor motions will be clearly and concisely stated. The minute taker will take down the name of the Councilor who made the motion and the Councilor who made the second.

        B.     The motion maker, Mayor, or City Manager should repeat the motion prior to voting.

        C.     Most motions die if they do not receive a second. Motions for nominations, withdrawal of a motion, agenda order, roll call votes, and a point of order do not require a second.

        D.    Discussion of a motion is open to all Councilors who wish to address the motion. A Councilor may speak more than once on each motion unless a motion to call the previous question is adopted. A Councilor must be recognized by the Mayor before speaking.

        E.     The Mayor will ask for a voice vote for all final decisions. All Councilors are expected to vote on each motion unless they are disqualified for some reason. A Councilor who does not vote must state the basis for any conflicts of interest or other disqualification. The City Recorder will maintain a record of the votes. Any Councilor may request a roll call vote on any motion.

        F.     At the conclusion of any vote, the Mayor will announce the results. Councilors who wish to explain the reasons for their votes must do so briefly and succinctly.

        G.    Withdrawal. A motion may be withdrawn by the mover at any time without the consent of the Council.

        H.    Tie. A motion that receives a tie vote fails.

        I.      Table. A motion to table is not debatable and precludes all amendments or further debate. If the motion prevails, the item may be taken from the table only by a motion approved by a majority vote.

        J.      Postpone. A motion to postpone to a certain date is debatable and amendable. A motion to postpone indefinitely is a motion to reject without a direct vote and is debatable and not amendable.

        K.    Call for Question. A motion to “call for the question” or to “move the previous question” ends debate on the item and is not debatable. This motion is out of order unless each Councilor wishing to speak on the item has had at least one opportunity to speak. A second is required for this motion. When the question is called, the Mayor will inquire whether any Councilor objects. If there is an objection, the matter will be put to a vote, and it fails without a two-thirds vote. Debate may continue if the motion fails. Two-thirds shall be defined as follows:

        1.     If four members of the Council are present, three affirmative votes are required.

        2.     If five members of the Council are present, three affirmative votes are required.

        3.     If six members of the Council are present, four affirmative votes are required.

        4.     If seven members of the Council are present, five affirmative votes are required.

        L.     Amendment. A motion to amend may be made to a previous motion that has been seconded, but not voted on. Amendments will be voted on first, then the main motion as amended (or not amended). Motions to adjourn, agenda order, table, point of order, take from table, and reconsider may not be amended.

        M.    Reconsideration. When a motion has been decided, any Councilor who voted with the majority may move for reconsideration. A motion for reconsideration may only be made at the meeting at which the motion on the ordinance, resolution, order or other decision was approved. (Ord. 2007-05 §1)

 

1.02.110 Councilor conduct.
        A.    Representing City. In all statements relating to public issues or policies, a Councilor shall take care to state whether his or her comments are personal opinions or represent the official position of the city.

        B.     Censure.

        1.     The Council may make and enforce its own rules and ensure compliance with city and state laws applicable to governing bodies. If a Councilor substantially violate these rules or state law, the Council may take action to protect Council integrity and discipline the Councilor with a public reprimand, by motion approved by the Council.

        2.     A motion to censure shall include a public statement by the maker as to the grounds or basis for the motion. Upon being seconded, a vote on a motion to censure shall be placed on the agenda under new business for the next regular Council meeting, but no sooner than two weeks from the date of the motion, in order for the Councilor who is the subject to the censure motion to have time to prepare an explanation or a defense.

        3.     Discussion on the motion to censure shall occur at the next regular Council meeting. The presiding officer shall grant the Councilor who is the subject of the motion a reasonable opportunity to present a defense or explanation. Documents relevant to the Councilor’s explanation or defense may be presented to the Council for consideration. In its deliberations, the Council may seek clarification of any points raised in the explanation or defense. The presiding officer shall then call for a vote on the motion to censure. (Ord. 2008-17 §1; Ord. 2007-05 §1)

 

1.02.120 Confidentiality.
        A.    Councilors will keep all written materials provided to them on matters of confidentiality under law in complete confidence to insure that the city’s position is not compromised. No mention of the information read or heard should be made to anyone other than other Councilors, the City Manager or City Attorney.

        B.     If the Council meets in executive session, members should attempt to provide direction or consensus to staff on proposed terms and conditions for negotiations. All contact with other parties must be left to the designated staff or representative(s) handling the negotiations or litigation. Councilors may not have any contact or discussions with any other party or its representatives nor communicate any executive session discussion.

        C.     All public statements, information or press releases relating to a confidential matter will be handled by designated staff or a designated Councilor.

        D.    Unless required by law, no Councilor may make public the discussions or information obtained in executive session. Council may censure a member who discloses a confidential matter or otherwise violates these rules. (Ord. 2007-05 §1)

 

1.02.130 Communications.
        A.    Council will respect the separation between policy making (Council function) and administration (City Manager function) by:

        1.     Working with the staff as a team with a spirit of mutual respect and support.

        2.     Not attempting to influence a city employee or the City Manager concerning personnel matters, purchasing issues, the award of contracts or the selection of consultants, the processing of development applications or granting of city license and permits. However, the sharing of ideas on these matters is appropriate.

        3.     Except during work sessions, limiting individual contacts with city staff to the City Manager so as not to influence staff decisions or recommendations, to interfere with their work performance, to undermine the City Manager authority or to prevent the full Council from having benefit of any information received.

        B.     All written informational material requested by Councilors will be submitted by staff to the entire Council with a notation stating who requested the information.

        C.     The Mayor will refer any comments or questions regarding city personnel or administration to the City Manager. The Mayor may redirect other questions to a Councilor or the City Manager, as appropriate. Councilors may also address questions directly to the City Manager, who may either answer the inquiry or ask a staff member to do so.

        D.    In keeping with Oregon’s open meetings law, members of the Council shall not use telephonic or electronic communications with each other, serially or in conference, as a means of developing policy or working toward consensus on issues, unless such deliberations are properly noticed.

        E.     Members of the Council shall take care to retain official correspondence and e-mails in accordance with Oregon’s public records law. (Ord. 2012-01 §2; Ord. 2007-05 §1)

 

1.02.140 Minutes.
        A.    Minutes will be prepared with sufficient detail to meet their intended use. Verbatim minutes are not required. The minutes of meetings of the Council will comply with provisions of ORS 192.650 by containing the following information at a minimum:

        1.     The name of Councilors and staff present;

        2.     All motions, proposals, resolutions, orders, ordinances and measures proposed and their disposition;

        3.     The result of all votes, including ayes and nays and the names of the Councilors who voted;

        4.     The substance of the discussion on any matter;

        5.     Reference to any document discussed at the meeting.

        B.     The Council may amend the minutes to more accurately reflect what transpired at the meeting. Upon receipt of the minutes in the Council agenda packet, the Councilor should read and submit any changes, additions or corrections to the City Manager during or prior to the work session immediately preceding a Council meeting.

        C.     The City Recorder or designee will make an audio recording of all meetings except for executive sessions. The City Recorder will maintain custody of all recordings, but a Councilor may obtain a copy of any recording. A Councilor may obtain a meeting transcript or partial transcript if it can be produced with nominal staff time. If a transcript would require a significant amount of staff time, the City Recorder may only produce the transcript with Council approval. The City Recorder is authorized to produce transcripts as required by law. (Ord. 2007-05 §1)

 

1.02.150 Adjournment.
        A.    Upon motion and majority vote of the Councilors present, any meeting of the Council may be continued or adjourned from day to day or for more than one day. No adjournment may be for a period longer than until the next regular meeting.

        B.     Upon the request of two or more Councilors a short recess may be taken during a Council meeting.

        C.     A motion to adjourn will be in order at any time except as follows:

        1.     When made as an interruption of a member while speaking; or

        2.     While a vote is being taken. (Ord. 2007-05 §1)

 

1.02.160 Bias and disqualification.
        A.    Any proponent, opponent or other party interested in a quasi-judicial matter to be heard by Council may challenge the qualification of any Councilor to participate in such hearing and decision. Any challenge must state any fact(s) relied upon by the party relating to a Councilor’s bias, pre-judgment, personal interest or other factor from which the party has concluded the Councilor should not participate and may not make an impartial decision. Such challenges must be made prior to the commencement of the public hearing. The Mayor will give the challenged member an opportunity to respond. A motion to accept or deny the challenge will be accepted and voted upon by the Council. Such challenges and the Council’s decision will be incorporated into the record of the hearing.

        B.     In quasi-judicial matters, each Councilor must disclose participation in a prior decision or action on the matter that is before the Council. Common examples include when a Planning Commission member is elected or appointed to the City Council or when a Councilor testifies at a Planning Commission meeting. The Councilor must state whether the member can participate in the hearing with no regard for the prior decision made. If the Councilor is unable to be impartial, the member has a duty not to participate in proceedings and leave the Council table.

        C.     If the Council believes that the member is actually biased, it may disqualify the member by majority vote from participating in a decision on the matter. A Councilor who has been disqualified from participating in a decision may participate in the proceeding as a private citizen.

        D.    Generally, conflicts of interest arise in situations where a Councilor, as a public official deliberating in a quasi-judicial proceeding, has an actual or potential financial interest in the matter before the Council. Under state law, an actual conflict of interest is defined as one that would be to the private financial benefit of the Councilor, a relative or a business with which the Councilor or a relative is associated. A potential conflict of interest is one that could be to the private financial benefit of the Councilor, a relative or a business with which the Councilor or a relative is associated. A relative means the spouse, children, siblings or parents of the public official or public official’s spouse. A Councilor must publicly announce potential and actual conflicts of interest and, in the case of an actual conflict of interest, must refrain from participating in debate on the issue or from voting on the issue. (Ord. 2007-05 §1)

 

1.02.170 Ex parte contacts and disqualification.
        A.    For quasi-judicial hearings, Councilors should refrain from ex parte contacts relating to any issue of the hearing. Ex parte contacts are those contacts by a party on a fact in issue under circumstances that do not involve all parties to the proceeding. Ex parte contacts may be either oral statements when other interested parties are not present or written information that other interested parties do not receive.

        B.     If a Councilor has ex parte contact prior to a hearing, the member must reveal the contact at the meeting and before the hearing. The Councilor must describe the substance of the contact and the Mayor will announce the right of interested persons to rebut the substance of the communication. The Councilors also will state whether such contact affects their impartiality or ability to vote in the matter. The Councilor must state whether the member will participate or abstain.

        C.     For quasi-judicial hearings, a Councilor who was absent during the presentation of evidence may not participate in any deliberations or decision regarding the matter, unless the Councilor reviews all the evidence and testimony received. (Ord. 2007-05 §1)

 

1.02.180 Oregon Ethics Commission requirements and reporting.
        A.    Councilors must review and observe the requirements of the State Ethics Law (ORS 244.010 to ORS 244.390) dealing with use of public office for private financial gain.

        B.     Councilors must give public notice of any conflict of interest or potential conflict of interest and the notice will be reported in the meeting minutes. In addition to matters of financial interest, Councilors will maintain the highest standards of ethical conduct and assure fair and equal treatment of all persons, claims and transactions coming before the Council.

        C.     In accordance with ORS 244.195, it is each Councilor’s responsibility to file statements of economic interest with the Government Standards and Practices Commission. (Ord. 2007-05 §1)

 

1.02.190 Legal advice.
        A.    Requests to the City Attorney for legal advice may not be made by a Councilor without the concurrence of a majority of the Council or the Mayor.

        B.     Before requesting research or other action by the City Attorney, Councilors are encouraged to consult with the City Manager to determine if the request or action can be accomplished more cost-effectively.

        C.     Outside a Council meeting, a Councilor should direct requests of the City Attorney through the City Manager or the Mayor.

        D.    Exceptions to this are issues related to the performance of the City Manager and unique/sensitive personal, yet City business-related, requests. These requests must be made through the Mayor. (Ord. 2007-05 §1)

 

1.02.200 Manager evaluation.
        A.    Criteria. The standards, criteria, and policy directives used in the evaluation of the City Manager will be adopted at a regular Council meeting in accordance with state law.

        B.     Process.

        1.     Councilors will make written comments in response to the evaluation.

        2.     Evaluation sessions will be scheduled in accordance with the employee’s decision on whether to hold the evaluation in open or executive session.

        3.     At evaluation sessions, Council summary comments and individual Councilor comments will be made. The City Manager will have an opportunity to respond to all comments. The effect of the evaluation on the City Manager’s employment contract will be discussed. Sufficient time will be allotted for the evaluation discussion with the City Manager.

        4.     Councilors will then complete their individual evaluations and convene to discuss overall evaluation of the City Manager and reach a consensus.

        5.     Council will then reconvene with the City Manager to review final performance evaluation and discuss compensation.

        C.     Contract. The City Attorney will prepare any employment contract amendments to the City Manager’s contract. Contracts normally will be approved as a consent agenda item at the next regular Council meeting. (Ord. 2007-05 §1)

 

1.02.210 Council expenses.
        Reimbursement. The Council shall receive a monthly reimbursement for expenses, the amount to be set appropriately by the Mayor and Council. (Ord. 2007-05 §1)

 

1.02.220 Boards and commissions.
        A.    Appointments to boards and commissions shall be made as provided in the City Charter.

        B.     Each board, commission and committee will annually report to the Council on their activities for the previous year at a regular City Council meeting. The report will be prepared in a format prescribed by the Council. (Ord. 2019-04 §1; Ord. 2011-09 §1; Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 2007-05 §1)

 

1.02.230 News media.
        A.    The Council recognizes the important role of the news media in informing the public about the decisions, activities and priorities of government. Work space shall be reserved for members of the news media at Council meetings in order that proceedings may be observed and heard clearly. See also Executive Sessions.

        B.     A member of the news media is someone who:

        1.     Represents an established channel of communication, such as a newspaper or magazine, radio or television station, and either:

        2.     Regularly reports on the activities of government or the governing body, or

        3.     Regularly reports on the particular topic to be discussed by the governing body. (Ord. 2007-05 §1)

 

1.02.240 Authorization of expenditures.
        A.    A department director or manager shall not spend or commit more than $5,000.00 of budgeted funds without approval of the City Manager.

        B.     Subject to Section 34.d.1. of the City of Molalla Charter, the City Manager shall receive Council approval prior to making any budgeted expenditures in excess of $100,000.00 that are outside the scope of regular daily city operations.

        C.     The City Manager shall receive Council approval prior to making any expenditures, regardless of the dollar amount, if the contemplated expenditure is not included in the adopted budget for the given fiscal year in which the contemplated expenditure is to be made. (Ord. 2017-09 §1; Ord. 2012-01 §3; Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 2007-05 §1)

 

1.02.250 Personnel records.
        Unless otherwise provided in ORS 192.410—192.990, Oregon’s public records law, no member of the Council may review personnel records of current or former employees of the City of Molalla without approval of a majority of the Council. (Ord. 2010-12 §1)

Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PENALTY
1.04.010 Designated.
        A.    Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of any ordinance of the city is guilty of a violation. Except in cases where a different penalty is prescribed by any ordinance of the city, any person found in violation must pay a fine not to exceed $1,000.00.

        B.     Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the ordinances of the city is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and he or she shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 1982-3 §2)

Chapter 1.10 SIGNATURE REQUIREMENTS FOR PROPOSED LEGISLATION (INITIATIVES)
1.10.010 Requirements for the proposed legislation and referendum.
        Signatures of 15% of the qualified voters of the City shall be required to propose legislation by initiative petition and the signatures of 10% of the qualified voters of the City shall be required to order a referendum on any legislation. The total number of qualified voters shall be determined as of the date of the last general election. The date the first signature on an initiative petition is affixed shall be no later than 90 days after the issuance of the ballot title on the measure, and the initiative petition shall be filed with the City Recorder for certification and approval no later than 180 days after the date the first signature on the petition has been affixed or at the end of 100 days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, whichever is later.

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 2.02 CITY ELECTIONS—INITIATIVES AND REFERENDUMS
Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL
Chapter 2.06 HEARINGS BODIES AND THEIR DUTIES
Chapter 2.08 LIBRARY BOARD
Chapter 2.10 MOLALLA AREA SENIORS BOARD
Chapter 2.12 MUNICIPAL COURT JURIES
Chapter 2.17 COMMUNITY PROGRAM COMMITTEE
Chapter 2.18 PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD
Chapter 2.20 URBAN RENEWAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Chapter 2.24 TRANSPORTATION ADVISORY COMMISSION

Chapter 2.02 CITY ELECTIONS—INITIATIVES AND REFERENDUMS
Article I. In General
2.02.010 State law applies.
        As provided by City Charter Section 32 state elections laws apply to matters not regulated by this subchapter. The City Charter and this code chapter prevail over any conflicting state laws. (Ord. 2008-05)

 

2.02.020 Definitions.
        Words or phrases have the following meanings unless the context clearly requires a different meaning:

        “Candidate” means an individual whose name appears or is expected to appear on an official ballot.

        “City legislation” means an ordinance or proposed ordinance, or a proposed amendment, revision or repeal of the City Charter.

        “Elective City position” means the office of Mayor or Councilor.

        “Elector” means an individual eligible under state and City law to vote in a City election.

        “Initiative” means proposed City legislation submitted to electors by a petition of qualified electors.

        “Measure” means City legislation, or a proposition or question for City electors.

        “Prospective petition” means information required for a completed petition, except for signatures and other identification of petition signers.

        “Qualified elector” means an individual qualified to vote under Section 2, Article II, Oregon Constitution.

        “Recorder” means the City Recorder or authorized representative.

        “Referendum” means City legislation submitted to electors by the Council or by a petition of qualified electors, or a proposition or question submitted to City electors by the Council.

        “Regular election” means a City election held at the same time as a general biennial election for electing federal, state or county officers.

        “Special election” means a City election not held on the date of a regular election.

        “Term of office” means the term of office of the last person elected to the office. (Ord. 2008-05)

 

Article II. Candidates
2.02.030 Eligibility.
        A qualified elector who has resided in the City during the 12 months immediately preceding the election may be a candidate for an elective City position. (Ord. 2008-05)

 

2.02.040 Nomination petition.
        A.    An eligible elector may become a candidate for an elective City position by filing a nomination petition in a form prescribed by the Secretary of State and available from the Recorder.

        B.     A nomination petition must contain signatures of not fewer than 20 City-qualified electors as follows:

        1.     No elector may sign more than four petitions. If more than four are signed, the signature is valid only on the first four valid petitions filed.

        2.     The signatures need not all be attached to one paper, but each separate paper of the petition must be attached to an affidavit of the circulator showing the number of signers and stating that each signature is the genuine signature of the person.

        3.     Each signature must have next to it the signer’s residence, by its street and number or other description.

        4.     The County Elections Division must certify the signatures in the nomination petition for genuineness by comparing them and the other required information with the elector registration cards on file with the County Clerk.

        5.     After the petition is filed with the Recorder, it shall be submitted it to the Clackamas County Elections Division within two business days. The County Elections Division then has 15 days to verify the signatures and attach to the petition a certificate stating the number of signatures believed genuine. (Ord. 2008-05)

 

2.02.045 Criminal background checks for candidates for elected office.
        A.    Any individual who files a nomination petition for an elective City position under Section 2.02.040 shall file a form with the City Recorder either consenting or refusing to consent to a criminal history check.

        B.     City police personnel, pursuant to standards established by the City Recorder or City Recorder’s designee, shall conduct a criminal history check for every individual who: (1) consents to such a check pursuant to subsection A of this section; and (2) has qualified for nomination as a candidate for an elective City position.

        C.     City police personnel shall report to the City Recorder or the City Recorder’s designee whether any criminal history check conducted pursuant to this section revealed any misdemeanors or felonies, and if so, in what jurisdiction the misdemeanors and/or felonies occurred. The City Recorder or the City Recorder’s designee shall thereafter create a voter information document that shall be available at City Hall and on the City’s website. For each candidate, the voter information document shall state: (1) that a misdemeanor or felony was found in the candidate’s criminal history and the jurisdiction in which such misdemeanor and/or felony occurred; (2) if no misdemeanor or felony is discovered in a candidate’s history, a statement that no misdemeanors or felonies were discovered; or (3) if a candidate refuses to consent to a criminal history check, a statement that the candidate did not consent to a criminal history check. (Ord. 2012-11 §1)

 

2.02.050 Petition contents.
        A.    A nomination petition must contain:

        1.     The name by which the candidate is commonly known. A candidate may use a nickname in parentheses in addition to the candidate’s full name;

        2.     The residence address of the candidate;

        3.     The office or position number for which the candidate seeks nomination;

 

        4.     A statement that the candidate is willing to accept the office if elected;

        5.     A statement that the candidate will qualify if elected;

        6.     A statement of the candidate’s occupation, educational and occupational background, and prior governmental experience; and

        7.     The signature of the candidate.

        B.     A declaration of candidacy must include a statement that the required fee is included with the declaration.

        C.     The required fee shall be established by a resolution approved by the City Council. (Ord. 2008-05)

 

2.02.060 Filing.
        A.    A nomination petition must be filed with the Recorder.

        B.     The Recorder will date and time stamp immediately upon filing a nominating petition, withdrawal or other document required to be filed.

        C.     A nomination petition will be filed not sooner than 120 days nor later than 70 days before the election date. (Ord. 2008-05)

 

2.02.070 Deficient petitions.
        If a nomination petition is not signed by the required number of qualified electors or is not complete, the Recorder will notify the candidate within five days after the filing. The Recorder will return it immediately to the candidate, and state in writing how the petition is deficient. The deficient petition may be amended and filed again as a new petition, or a substitute petition for the same candidate may be filed within the time requirements for filing petitions. (Ord. 2008-05)

 

2.02.080 Withdrawal of candidacy.
        A candidate who has filed a nomination petition or declaration of candidacy may withdraw not later than the 67th day before the election date by filing a statement of withdrawal with the Recorder. The withdrawal must be made under oath and state the reasons for the withdrawal. (Ord. 2008-05)

 

2.02.090 Certificate of nomination.
        The Recorder will certify the nominations to the County Clerk in accordance with the time requirements of state law stating the offices and the terms of office for which the candidates are nominated. (Ord. 2008-05)

 

Article III. Vacancies in Office
2.02.100 Vacancy in office.
        A City elective office becomes vacant as provided by City Charter Section 19. (Ord. 2008-05)

 

2.02.110 Filling of vacancy.
        A.    Upon becoming aware of a vacancy in an elective office, the Council must promptly determine and declare the date of vacancy.

        B.     A vacancy in an elective office must be filled as provided by City Charter Section 20. (Ord. 2008-05)

 

2.02.120 Appointment by Council.
        A.    In filling a vacancy, the Council may make inquiries and hold interviews as it considers necessary for the appointment. The appointment may be made at a regular or special Council meeting.

        B.     The Council will use the following procedures in the appointment process:

        1.     Public notice to appropriate neighborhood organizations, civic groups, a newspaper of general circulation and other recognized groups.

        2.     Deadline for submitting applications at least two weeks after the notice.

        3.     Appointment from those applicants nominated and seconded for consideration by members of the Council. The Recorder will announce the results of each ballot and will record each Councilor’s ballot. An applicant who receives a majority of the votes by the current Councilors will be appointed to the vacant position. If no applicant receives a majority vote on the first ballot, the Council will continue to vote on the two applicants who receive the most votes until an applicant receives a majority of the Councilors voting. (Ord. 2008-05)

 

Article IV. Initiative and Referendum
2.02.130 Prospective petition.
        A.    Before circulating a petition proposing an initiative or referendum for City legislation, the chief petitioners must file a prospective petition with the Recorder. The Recorder will provide the form showing:

        1.     The signatures, printed names and mailing addresses of at least two and not more than three chief petitioners, all of whom must be City electors;

        2.     For initiative petitions, the text of the City legislation proposed for adoption, and, where applicable, the title, ordinance number, and charter or code section numbers proposed for amendment, revision or repeal;

        3.     For referendum petitions, the text of the City legislation proposed for referral, and where applicable, the title, ordinance number or code section numbers of the City legislation proposed for referral; and

        4.     Whether one or more persons will be paid for obtaining signatures on the petition.

        B.     The Recorder must date and time stamp any prospective petition filed.

        C.     After the Recorder determines that the prospective petition complies with this subchapter and state law, the Recorder will certify to one of the chief petitioners that petitions may be circulated among City electors in accordance with Section 2.02.150. (Ord. 2008-05)

 

2.02.140 Ballot title—Appeal.
        A.    Prior to the end of the fifth business day after a prospective initiative petition is filed and meets all legal requirements, the Recorder will review the text of the proposed initiative to determine if it complies with the single subject requirement and if it proposes City legislation.

        B.     If the proposed text does not meet the requirements of subsection A, the Recorder will notify a chief petitioner by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the prospective petition does not meet the single subject or City legislation requirement.

        C.     Any City elector dissatisfied with the Recorder’s determination may file a petition for review in circuit court. The petition for review must be filed not later than the seventh business day after the written determination by the Recorder.

        D.    If the proposed initiative meets the requirements of subsection A or a referendum petition is certified for circulation, the Recorder will send two copies of the prospective petition to the City Attorney. The City Attorney has five business days after receipt to prepare a ballot title for the proposed measure for the voter’s pamphlet. The ballot title must conform to the requirements of state law. The City Attorney or the City administrator will prepare an explanatory statement for the voter’s pamphlet.

        E.     The explanatory statement must consist of an impartial, simple and understandable statement of not more than 500 words explaining the measure and its effect.

        F.     After preparing the ballot title, the City Attorney will return one copy of the prospective petition and ballot title to the Recorder and one copy to one of the chief petitioners.

        G.    After receiving a ballot title from the City Attorney, the Recorder must publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the City a notice of receipt of the ballot title. The notice must state that a City elector may file a petition for review of the ballot title not later than the date referred to in subsection F.

        H.    After receiving the prospective petition, ballot title from the City Attorney, the Recorder must write the date of receipt on it. Within seven business days after that date, any City elector may petition in circuit court to challenge the ballot title prepared by the City Attorney. After the seven-day period, or following the final adjudication of any legal review, the Recorder must certify the ballot title as prepared by the City Attorney or as prescribed by the court to a chief petitioner.

        I.      Any City elector filing a petition of review with the circuit court must file a copy of the challenge with the Recorder not later than the end of the next business day following the date the petition is filed with the circuit court. This requirement does not invalidate a petition that is timely filed with the circuit court.

        J.      The procedures in subsections A through G also apply to referendum measures. However, the completion of these procedures is not a prerequisite to the circulation of petitions for referendum measures under Section 2.02.150. Ballot titles need not be stated on petitions circulated to propose referendum measures. (Ord. 2008-05)

 

2.02.150 Petition and circulation requirements.
        A.    After the requirements of Section 2.02.130(C) are met for referendum petitions and after the requirements of Section 2.02.140(F) are met for initiative petitions, the chief petitioners may circulate a petition for the measure among City electors. The petition (cover sheet and signature sheet) must conform to the requirements of state law.

        B.     The petition identification number will be assigned by the Recorder.

        C.     Each signature sheet of a referendum petition must contain the title, ordinance number or code section numbers of the City legislation proposed by referral and the date it was adopted by the Council.

        D.    No signature sheet may be circulated by more than one person. Each signature sheet must contain a statement signed by the circulator that each elector who signed the sheet did so in the circulator’s presence, and, to the best of the circulator’s knowledge, each such elector is a legal elector of the City and that the information placed on the sheet by each elector is correct. (Ord. 2008-05)

 

2.02.160 Filing and percentage requirements—Verification.
        A.    The Recorder will accept for signature verification only petitions that comply with the requirements of this subchapter and other applicable law.

        B.     No petition may be accepted for filing unless it contains at least the required number of verified signatures to submit the measure to the electors, as prescribed by subsections G, H or I.

        C.     No initiative petition may be accepted for signature verification more than six months after the date of the Recorder’s certification.

        D.    Any petition to refer legislation adopted by the Council must be submitted for signature verification not more than 30 days after the Council’s adoption of the legislation.

        E.     An initiative or referendum petition may not be accepted for signature verification if it contains less than 100% of the required number of signatures.

        F.     Upon the acceptance of a petition, the Clackamas County Elections Division must verify the signatures. The verification may be performed by random sampling in a manner approved by the Secretary of State. Within 30 days after the Recorder’s acceptance of a petition, the Recorder must certify to the Council whether the petition contains a sufficient number of qualified signatures to require the submission of the proposed measure to City electors. The Recorder shall state in a certificate the number of qualified signatures prescribed by subsections G, H or I to require the proposed City legislation to be submitted to City electors. The petition is considered filed as of the date of the certification.

        G.    An initiative measure proposing the amendment, revision or repeal of the City Charter will be submitted to the electors if the number of qualified signatures on the petition equals or exceeds 15% of the total number of registered voters in the City on January 1 of the calendar year the petition is filed.

        H.    An initiative measure proposing the adoption, amendment or repeal of any other City legislation will be submitted to the electors if the number of qualified signatures on the petition equals or exceeds 15% of the total number of registered voters in the City on January 1st of the calendar year the petition is filed.

        I.      A referendum measure will be submitted to the electors if the number of qualified signatures on the petition equals or exceeds 10% of the total number of registered voters in the City on January 1st of the calendar year the petition is filed. (Ord. 2008-05)

 

2.02.170 Measure referred by Council.
        A.    The Council may directly refer to the electors any ordinance or any proposed ordinance, property tax, bond or other proposition or question. It may also directly refer to the electors any proposed amendment, revision or the repeal of the City Charter.

        B.     The City Attorney will prepare a ballot title that conforms to the requirements of state law. The Council will certify and file the ballot title and explanatory statement with the Recorder. The explanatory statement will be prepared by the City Attorney or the City Manager.

        C.     The Recorder will publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the City a notice of receipt of the ballot title including notice that an elector may file a petition for review of the ballot title not later than the date set in subsection D.

        D.    Any City elector may petition the circuit court to challenge the ballot title certified by the Council. Such petition must be filed with the circuit court within seven business days of Council filing of the ballot title. Any person filing a petition of review with the circuit court must file a copy of the challenge with the Recorder not later than the end of the business day next following the date the petition is filed with the circuit court. This requirement does not invalidate a petition that is timely filed with the circuit court.

        E.     A measure will be considered filed under this section as of the date the Council delivers its certified ballot title to the Recorder. (Ord. 2008-05)

 

2.02.180 Withdrawal, adoption or election.
        A.    The chief petitioners may withdraw a verified petition at any time before Council action to adopt the proposed legislation or submit it to the electors. Any withdrawal must be either by written or oral declaration made at a Council meeting and entered in the minutes of that meeting.

        B.     Unless a petition is withdrawn, after receiving a certification that a petition has sufficient signatures to require the proposed City legislation to be submitted to the electors under Section 2.02.160(F), the Council may either adopt the proposed legislation by ordinance, or call an election to submit the legislation to the electors. The Council may also call an election to submit matters to the electors upon referral under Section 2.02.170.

        C.     The Council may call the election on the next election date available under state law that is not sooner than the 90th day after the date of the Recorder’s certificate of sufficient signatures, and must call the election no later than the next regular election. For a Council referral, the election on the measure may be held on the next election date available under state law. (Ord. 2008-05)

 

2.02.190 Election notice and results.
        A.    Notice of elections on measures submitted to City electors on regular or special election dates must be given in accordance with state law.

        B.     Measures referred by the Council will be designated on the ballot: “Referred to the Voters by the City Council.”

        C.     Measures proposed by referendum petition will be designated on the ballot: “Referred by Petition.”

        D.    Measures proposed by initiative petition will be designated on the ballot: “Proposed by Initiative Petition.”

        E.     The Recorder must provide certification of the election results to the Council at the first Council meeting after the results are certified by the county clerk.

        F.     A measure adopted by the electors takes effect 30 days after the election, unless the measure expressly provides a later effective date. (Ord. 2008-05)

Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL
2.04.010 Council meetings.
        The regular meetings of the City Council of the City of Molalla shall be held on the second and fourth Wednesday of each month in the Molalla Adult Community Center at 7:00 p.m. (Ord. 1992-7 §1; Ord. 1989-10 §1; Ord. 1987-10 §1; Ord. 1987-1 §1; Ord. 1975-4 §1)

Chapter 2.06 HEARINGS BODIES AND THEIR DUTIES
Article I. Hearings Officer
2.06.010 Appointment.
        The City Manager, subject to the approval of the City Council, may appoint a planning and zoning Hearings Officer to serve the City Council. Said Hearings Officer shall conduct hearings, make decisions or recommendations on applications for such matters as approved in this chapter. (Ord. 2018-05 §1)

 

2.06.020 Qualification—Compensation.
        The Hearings Officer shall be a member in good standing of the Oregon State Bar Association and shall be paid such compensation as agreed between such Hearings Officer and the City of Molalla. (Ord. 2019-06 §1; Ord. 2018-05 §1)

 

2.06.030 Adoption of rules for conduct of hearings.
        The Hearings Officer shall follow rules of procedure for the conduct of hearings pursuant to this chapter, and not conflict with the Development Code. (Ord. 2019-06 §2; Ord. 2018-05 §1)

 

2.06.040 Rules of evidence at public hearings.
        Public hearings before the Hearings Officer shall be subject to the following rules of evidence: All interested persons shall be allowed to testify. A verbatim record of the proceeding shall be made by written, mechanical or electronic means. This record need not be transcribed except upon review of the record.

        A.    All evidence offered and not objected to may be received, unless excluded by the Hearings Officer on the Hearings Officer’s own motion. Evidence received at any hearing shall be of the quality that reasonable persons rely upon in the conduct of their everyday affairs. Evidence may be received in written form at or prior to the hearing.

        B.     The Hearings Officer may exclude irrelevant, unduly repetitious, immaterial or cumulative evidence. Any erroneous admission of evidence by the Hearings Officer shall not preclude action or cause reversal on appeal unless shown to have substantially prejudiced the rights of a party.

        C.     All evidence shall be offered and made a part of the record in the case, except for matters stipulated to and except as provided in subsection B of this section, no other factual information or evidence shall be considered in the determination of the case. Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies of excerpts or by in-corporation by reference.

        D.    The Hearings Officer may take notice of judicially cognizable facts, and take notice of general, technical or scientific facts within the Hearings Officer’s specialized knowledge.

        E.     Every party is entitled to an opportunity to be heard and present and rebut evidence. (Ord. 2018-05 §1)

 

2.06.050 Challenge of decision.
        A.    A party may challenge the Hearings Officer on the grounds of bias, ex-parte contact, or that the Hearings Officer has a legal conflict of interest. A written challenge must be delivered by personal service to the City Recorder and the Planning Department not less than three calendar days preceding the time set for public hearing.

        B.     A challenge of the Hearings Officer’s decision shall be entered in the record of the action. (Ord. 2018-05 §1)

 

Article II. Citizens Advisory Committee
2.06.060 Purpose.
        The purpose of the Citizens Advisory Committee is to assist in determining the community’s interest in land use proposals and present such view at public hearings before the Hearings Officer, Planning Commission and City Council. A Citizens Advisory Committee meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing current land use applications, ordinance and Comprehensive Plan amendments, and preparing written or oral testimony regarding such proposals to be presented at the appropriate public hearing. The Committee is authorized to file appeals from a decision of the city staff or Hearings Officer. The Planning Commission acts as the city’s officially recognized Citizen Advisory Committee. (Ord. 2018-05 §1)

 

2.06.070 Appointment and terms of members.
        The Planning Commission is appointed as the Citizens Advisory Committee. At the discretion of the City Council or on petition by resolution from the Planning Commission, the City Council may establish a separate Citizens Advisory Committee. Terms of members shall run concurrently with their membership on the Planning Commission. If a separate Citizens Advisory Committee is established, the Mayor with the consent of the City Council shall appoint to it at least three but no more than seven voting citizens who reside within the city limits. Such appointments shall be for a term of one year and may be terminated at the pleasure of the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. (Ord. 2018-05 §1)

 

2.06.080 Meetings—Quorums—Officers.
        The Citizens Advisory Committee shall operate under the same rules and policies as those established for the Planning Commission. (Ord. 2018-05 §1)

 

Article III. Planning Commission
2.06.090 Purpose.
        The purpose of the Planning Commission shall be to conduct the review of the Comprehensive Plan, implement ordinances, hold hearings and make decisions and recommendations to the City Council on major plan and ordinance amendment applications as well as other such matters approved in this chapter. (Ord. 2018-05 §1)

 

2.06.100 Created—Composition—Compensation.
        A.    There is created a City Planning Commission for the City of Molalla.

        1.     The Planning Commission shall consist of the following:

        a.     Voting Members.

        i.      A minimum of three but no more than seven members to be appointed as outlined in Section 2.06.110.

        ii.     No more than two voting members may be non-residents of the City. There shall be more residents of the City than non-residents on the Commission.

        b.     It is the policy of the City of Molalla that involving youth in the public decision-making process promotes interest and participation. Accordingly, the Planning Commission may also have up to two additional non-voting members of high-school age, who must live within the Molalla River School District. (Ord. 2019-06 §6; Ord. 2018-05 §1)

 

2.06.110 Terms of members.
        A.    Each member of the Planning Commission shall be appointed as provided in the City Charter to a four-year term. Any vacancies shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council for the remaining portion of the term.

        B.     Unexcused absences from three regular meetings may disqualify a member at which time the Planning Commission may request that the Mayor appoint a replacement. Members shall call, mail, or drop-off a letter to staff in order to be excused from regularly scheduled meetings.

        C.     All appointments to the Commission may be terminated at the pleasure of the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. (Ord. 2019-06 §7; Ord. 2018-05 §1)

 

2.06.120 Quorum—Rules of procedure.
        A.    A majority of the voting Commission shall constitute a quorum. The Commission is authorized to adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of its meetings and hearings, provided such rules do not conflict with state law, City Charter, Ordinances, and the Comprehensive Plan. A copy of such rules shall be filed with the City Recorder and made available for inspection to those appearing before the Planning Commission prior to their appearance.

        B.     When exercising the function of the Hearings Officer, the Planning Commission shall follow the rules of the Hearings Officer in performing said function. A majority vote of the Planning Commission members present shall be sufficient for taking any action authorized by ordinance. (Ord. 2018-05 §1)

 

2.06.130 Meetings—Officers.
        The Planning Commission shall meet on a monthly basis. At the first meeting of each calendar year, the Commission shall select a chair, vice-chair, and a secretary. The chair, or vice-chair in the chair’s absence, shall preside over the Planning Commission’s meetings and hearings. (Ord. 2018-05 §1)

 

2.06.140 Record of proceedings.
        A record of the proceedings shall be made by electronic recording and subject to retention schedule. A transcript can be made available upon written request within the first year of the proceeding. Summary written minutes will be kept of each meeting of record as a tracking method of the meeting and or hearing of record. (Ord. 2018-05 §1)

 

2.06.150 Right of parties to present evidence at hearings.
        A.    At public hearings before the Planning Commission, all interested persons and organizations shall be allowed an opportunity to be heard and to present and rebut evidence.

        B.     The chair may limit the speaking time allowed for interested parties to five minutes. (Ord. 2018-05 §1)

Chapter 2.08 LIBRARY BOARD
2.08.010 Composition—Terms—Function.
        A.    The Molalla Public Library Advisory Board shall consist of five members appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. All members must reside within the service area of Molalla Public Library as defined by the Intergovernmental Agreement forming the Library District in 2008. The City Council representative will be a non-voting liaison position on behalf of the City Council to the Library Board.

        B.     The Library Director shall be an ex-officio member of the Library Board, and shall serve as secretary to the board and act as the Custodian of Board Records.

        C.     The Library Board shall act in an advisory capacity for the City Council, and perform such duties as are assigned to it by the City Council in the following manner;

        1.     Uphold the right of all citizens to full access of information by providing open access to library resources and services in accordance with the Library Bill of Rights.

        2.     Serve as a collaborative body to represent the needs, interests and desires of the entire service area of the library.

        3.     Maintain awareness of public library standards, trends, regulations and legislation.

        4.     Assist the Library Director in obtaining sources of funding for library services as needed.

        5.     Encourage widespread public knowledge and support of the library in Molalla and the service area of the library.

        6.     Participate in meetings and activities within the Molalla service area that promote the library.

        7.     Represent the interest of the library users by recommending types of library services needed.

        8.     Assist in the development of short and long-term plans for library service and facilities, consistent with the City priorities and with state, regional and national goals pertinent to libraries.

        9.     Provide preliminary input to the Library Director regarding the annual budget.

        10.   Assist in the formulation of policies for the operation and development of library services and facilities to best meet the current and long-range needs of the community.

        11.   Be consulted in the process to select the Library Director.

        12.   Present semi-annual reports to the City Council, or more often as the Council requests.

        13.   Comment on selection and review of requirements of facilities.

        14.   Recruit and review of prospective Board members.

        15.   Conduct themselves according to the adopted Code of Conduct and Code of Ethics.

        16.   Perform such other duties as authorized by the City Council.

        D.    Library Board members shall hold office for a term of four years from July in the year of their appointment. At the expiration of the term of any member, a new member may be appointed or a member whose term has expired may be reappointed for a term of four years. If a vacancy occurs, a new member shall be appointed for the unexpired term. All appointments to the Library Board may be terminated at the pleasure of the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. (Ord. 2018-10 §1; Ord. 2013-04 §1; Ord. 2012-03 §1; Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 2007-06 §1)

 

2.08.020 Compensation.
        No compensation shall be paid to any member of the Library Board. (Ord. 1985-5 §1; Ord. 1971-1 §2)

 

2.08.030 Disbursement of monies.
        All monies, both revenues, fines and gifts, shall be paid to the office of the City Finance Director and all disbursements shall be in accordance with the adopted City budget, provisions of this code or state law, as applicable. (Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 1971-1 §3)

 

2.08.040 Rules and regulations.
        The Library Board shall assist with making such rules and regulations for the use and operation of the library as requested by the Library Director, City Manager, and/or the City Council. These rules and regulations shall be subject to revision by the City Council at their discretion. (Ord. 2018-10 §1; Ord. 1985-5 §2; Ord. 1971-1 §4)

Chapter 2.10 MOLALLA AREA SENIORS BOARD
2.10.010 Molalla Area Seniors Board.
        The Molalla Area Seniors Board is the advisory body to the Council on issues, activities and programs pertaining to senior citizens. City staff shall work cooperatively with the Board on those issues. The City Manager may allow for the use of City staff and fiscal resources to provide technical, logistical and other assistance to the Board in the fulfillment and performance of its advisory duties. (Ord. 2011-01 §1)

Chapter 2.12 MUNICIPAL COURT JURIES
2.12.010 Right of trial by jury—Composition of jury.
        Any person accused of any crime, as defined and made punishable by the charter or any ordinance of this City, shall have the right of trial by jury in the Municipal Court. The jury shall consist of six persons, selected as provided in this chapter. The verdict of the jury shall be unanimous. (Ord. 1980-12 §1)

 

2.12.020 Jury list—Made when—Method of selection.
        Within the first week of January each year, a jury list shall be made from the persons in the City of Molalla competent under this chapter to serve as jurors, who shall serve as jurors in the Municipal Court until a new list is selected. Juries shall be selected by lot from the latest tax roll and registration books used at the last City election in the same manner in which juries are selected for circuit courts. The list shall contain the names of 350 such qualified persons. (Ord. 1980-12 §2)

 

2.12.030 Jury list—When made if neglected in January.
        If for any reason the making of a jury list is omitted and neglected within the first week of January, it may be done within the first week of any month following. (Ord. 1980-12 §3)

 

2.12.040 Jury list—Authority of Municipal Court.
        The Municipal Court Clerk is authorized to select and make said jury list. (Ord. 1980-12 §4)

 

2.12.050 Jury list—Qualification of jurors.
        In preparing the jury list, names drawn of persons known or believed to be disqualified as jurors under this section shall be deleted, and opposite each name the reason for the name shall be set forth. A person is competent to act as a juror if he or she is:

        A.    A citizen of the United States;

        B.     A resident of the City of Molalla;

        C.     Over 18 years of age; and

        D.    Of a sound mind. (Ord. 1980-12 §5)

 

2.12.060 Jury list—Contents—Certification.
        The jury list shall contain the first and last name and the place of residence of each person name therein, and shall be certified by the Municipal Court Clerk at the time the list is prepared. (Ord. 1980-12 §6)

 

2.12.070 Keeping of jury box.
        The Municipal Court Clerk shall keep a secured jury box. After the jury list has been made, the Municipal Court Clerk shall prepare and deposit in such box separate ballots containing the name, address and occupation of each person on the jury list, and folded as nearly alike as practicable so that the name cannot be seen. (Ord. 1980-12 §7)

 

2.12.080 Drawing of names from jury box.
        Every month in which a jury trial is scheduled the Municipal Court Clerk, in the presence of the Municipal Court Judge or designate, shall draw by lot, 24 names from those names deposited in the jury box. The drawing for any jurors serving in January must be held as soon as practicable after the jury list is compiled; thereafter, the drawing shall take place not less than 10 days prior to the month the jurors are to serve. The names drawn shall be kept on record, said record to be signed by the Municipal Court Clerk and the Municipal Court Judge or designate. Jurors are only required to serve for a term of one month per year. (Ord. 1980-12 §8)

 

2.12.090 Notification of jurors to attend Municipal Court.
        At least one week prior to the term which the jurors are to serve, the Municipal Court Clerk shall summon the person’s names in the panel to attend the Municipal Court by giving written notice to each of them by certified mail. If the certified mail is returned “unclaimed,” the Municipal Court may order the Molalla Police Department to summon any such juror by giving written notice to them personally, or by leaving the notice at their place of residence with some person of suitable age and discretion, and such notice need be given only for a reasonable time before the day on which the juror is required to attend. (Ord. 1980-12 §9)

 

2.12.100 Drawing of additional jurors.
        A.    Whenever the number of jurors required does not attend a term of the Municipal Court, or when jurors have served the full time required of jurors and have been discharged, the Municipal Court has power to order an additional number of jurors drawn from the jury list to fill up the regular panel, in the same manner as the original panel is required to be drawn. These jurors shall be summoned and required to attend as jurors, in the same manner and with like effect as if drawn on the original panel.

        B.     Whenever the regular panel becomes exhausted, or whenever, in the opinion of the Municipal Court, the regular panel is likely to become exhausted, the Municipal Court shall order an additional number of jurors drawn from the jury list by the Municipal Court Clerk in the presence of the Municipal Court, and the jurors so drawn shall be summoned, unless relieved by the Municipal Court, and required to attend at such times as the Municipal Court may order.

        C.     Whenever the jury list becomes exhausted, or whenever, in the opinion of the Municipal Court, such list is likely to become exhausted, the Municipal Court may by an order stating the reasons and duly entered, direct the Molalla Police Department to summon forthwith from the body of the persons whose names are upon the latest tax rolls or voter registration list and who have the qualifications to serve in Municipal Court. (Ord. 1980-12 §10)

 

2.12.110 Record of ballots drawn.
        The Municipal Court Clerk shall preserve as records those ballots drawn as set forth in this chapter. Further, the Municipal Court Clerk shall keep records of those jurors who were discharged, did not appear, or those who attended and served, including the per term and mileage of each. (Ord. 1980-12 §11)

 

2.12.120 Selection of jurors.
        For each jury trial, the jurors shall be selected as follows:

        A.    Prior to the trial date the defendant or his or her attorney and the City Attorney shall appeal before the Municipal Court Judge for selection of the jury. The Municipal Court Judge shall designate the time and place for selection of the jury, and the parties shall be notified.

        B.     At the time and place so designated, the Municipal Court Clerk shall, by lot, draw the names of six jurors from the 24 jurors serving on the panel for that particular term. If it appears to the Municipal Court Judge that any of the jurors so drawn is unable to serve, the Municipal Court Clerk shall draw additional names.

        C.     The defendant or his/her attorney and the City Attorney may then each challenge by peremptory three of the jurors so drawn. The order of challenges shall be that the defendant or his/her attorney may challenge one juror and then the City Attorney may challenge one juror, so continuing until all challenges are exercised or waived and six regular jurors have been selected. After six regular jurors have been selected, five alternate jurors shall be selected. The defense and the prosecution shall each have two peremptory challenges in the selection of alternate jurors. The Municipal Court Judge may order additional alternate jurors to be selected for a particular trial.

        D.    When six regular and five alternate jurors have been selected, the Municipal Court Clerk shall summon them for the time set for trial.

        E.     At the time set for trial, the six regular jurors shall be called, and the Municipal Court Judge shall question the jury to determine if any jurors should be excused for cause. Regular jurors excused for cause shall be replaced by alternate jurors, in the order drawn, who shall also be subject to challenge for cause. The six jurors passed for cause shall constitute the trial jury. (Ord. 1989-11; Ord. 1980-12 §12)

 

2.12.140 Compensation and mileage reimbursement of jurors.
        Jurors who appear at the trial, whether or not they are chosen to serve, will receive as compensation for such services the fee provided by state statute plus the mileage fee and reimbursement for other expenses provided by state statute. (Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 1980-12 §14)

Chapter 2.17 COMMUNITY PROGRAM COMMITTEE
2.17.010 Committee established.
        A.    All Community Program Committees shall function under the direction of policy established by the City Council and may have one City Councilor as a voting member. A Councilor may also be assigned as a liaison. Each Community Program Committee shall consist of five members appointed by the City Council.

        B.     At least three persons shall be City residents or own a business within the City limits. The remaining appointed members do not require City residency.

        C.     Members of the Committee shall elect from among their members a chair and vice-chair.

        D.    Each Committee shall meet as deemed necessary and shall establish rules or procedures necessary to conduct business consistent with state or city requirements.

        E.     Committee meetings shall be publicly noticed and be in conformance with Oregon’s open meetings requirements.

        F.     Summary minutes of Committee proceedings shall be recorded and retained in conformance with Oregon’s public records requirements. Minutes of proceedings shall be submitted to the City Council for informational purposes as minutes are adopted.

        G.    In January of each year the Committee shall submit a report on its activities to the City Council.

        H.    All appointments to the Committee may be terminated at the pleasure of the Mayor with the consent of the City Council for the remaining portion of the term. (Ord. 2019-14 §2)

 

2.17.020 Mission.
        The mission of each Community Program Committee is to:

        A.    Carry out established City Council Policy.

        B.     Encourage greater participation and opportunities for the Molalla area.

        C.     Facilitate cooperation, coordination and communication among groups and individuals engaged in the community based on City Council policy direction.

        D.    Sponsor, facilitate or coordinate events and activities to showcase the Molalla area.

        E.     Encourage and promote Molalla based on Council policy direction.

        F.     Pursue funding sources, projects and programs to enhance the Molalla Area.

        G.    May provide liaison and representation to the City Council. (Ord. 2019-14 §2)

 

2.17.030 Definition of Community Program.
        Each Community Program includes, but not limited to: art and culture, economic development, visual design, community livability and such other endeavors promoting and enhancing the Molalla Community as may be designated by the Council. (Ord. 2019-14 §2)

 

2.17.040 City support.
        The City will provide web page access if deemed necessary. Other related support may occur through consultation with the City Manager; however, funding for events and projects is expected to be generated by the Committee. The City shall receive and disburse funds for the Committee in accordance with the City’s accounting and purchasing practices and provide guidance to the Committee on fundraising and finance matters. (Ord. 2019-14 §2)

Chapter 2.18 PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD
2.18.010 Parks and Recreation Board established.
        A.    The Parks and Recreation Board (Board) shall consist of seven members appointed as provided in the City Charter. All appointments to the Board may be terminated at the pleasure of the Mayor with the consent of the City Council.        B.     The first two persons appointed shall serve a term of one year; the third and fourth persons appointed shall serve two years; the fifth, sixth and seventh persons appointed shall serve three years and the persons appointed thereafter shall serve terms of three years.

        C.     The members of the Board shall elect from among their members a chair, a vice-chair, a secretary and a treasurer, such officers to serve for one year.

        D.    Five members of the Board shall be residents of the City of Molalla.

        E.     The Board shall meet as deemed necessary and shall establish rules or procedures necessary to conduct business consistent with state or city requirements.

        F.     Board meetings shall be publicly noticed and be in conformance with Oregon’s open meetings requirements.

        G.    Summary minutes of Board proceedings shall be recorded and retained in conformance with Oregon’s public records requirements. Minutes of proceedings shall be submitted to the City Council for information.

        H.    In January of each year the Board shall submit a report on its activities to the City Council. (Ord. 2012-03 §3; Ord. 2009-05 §1)

 

2.18.020 Mission.
        The mission of the Parks and Recreation Board is to:

        A.    Keep current on parks and recreation issues and advise the City Council regarding Parks and Recreation priorities, policies, projects, services, fees operations and capital improvements.

        B.     Promote park use and recreational opportunities in Molalla.

        C.     Provide liaison and representation for the City of Molalla to private, nonprofit, county, regional and state parks and recreation organizations and sports groups.

        D.    Advise the Council on any matter requested by the Council. (Ord. 2009-05 §1)

 

2.18.030 City support.
        The City will provide meeting space, web site, and related support in consultation with the Board with approval of the City Manager and/or City Council. The City of Molalla may also make grants to the Board or enter into agreements with other public agencies, associations, and individuals for services that will assist the Board. (Ord. 2009-05 §1)

 

2.18.040 Compensation of members.
        Parks and Recreation Board members shall receive no compensation for their services. The Board shall have no authority to make any expenditure on behalf of the city, or obligate the city for payment of any sums of money, or to enter into contracts on behalf of the city. However, the Board may make recommendations to the City Council from time to time regarding expenditures and/or obligations. (Ord. 2009-05 §1)

 

2.18.050 Quorum.
        A majority of the Parks and Recreation Board shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 2009-05 §1)

Chapter 2.20 URBAN RENEWAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE
2.20.010 Urban Renewal District Advisory Committee established.
        A.    The Urban Renewal Advisory Committee shall consist of five members appointed as provided in the City Charter. All appointments to the Urban Renewal Advisory Committee may be terminated at the pleasure of the Mayor with the consent of the City Council.

        B.     The first two persons appointed shall serve a term of two years; the third and fourth and fifth persons appointed shall serve three years; and the persons appointed thereafter shall serve terms of three years.

        C.     The members of the Committee shall elect from among their members a chair, a vice-chair, a secretary and a treasurer, such officers to serve for one year.

        D.    Two members of the Committee shall be representatives nominated by an organization established for the purpose of promoting economic development in the community; one member of the Committee shall be appointed from the Planning Commission; one member shall be appointed from a taxing district with jurisdiction in Molalla; and one member shall be a citizen at large.

        E.     The Committee shall meet as deemed necessary and shall establish rules or procedures necessary to conduct business consistent with state or city requirements.

        F.     Committee meetings shall be publicly noticed and held in conformance with Oregon’s open meetings requirements.

        G.    Summary minutes of Committee proceedings shall be recorded and retained in conformance with Oregon’s public records requirements. Minutes of proceedings shall be submitted to the City Council Urban Renewal Agency Board for information.

        H.    In January of each year the Committee shall submit a report on its activities to the City Council. (Ord. 2012-03 § 4; Ord. 2010-09 §1)

 

2.20.020 Mission.
        The mission of the Urban Renewal Advisory Committee is to:

        A.    Keep current on Urban Renewal District issues and advise the Urban Renewal Agency Board regarding Urban Renewal District priorities, policies, projects, services, fees operations and capital improvements.

        B.     Promote urban renewal opportunities in Molalla.

        C.     Provide liaison and representation for the Molalla Urban Renewal Agency to other organizations, as required.

        D.    Advise the Agency on any matter requested by the Agency. (Ord. 2010-09 §1)

 

2.20.030 City support.
        The city will provide meeting space, web site, and related support in consultation with the Committee with approval of the City Manager and/or the Urban Renewal Agency. The executive director of the Urban Renewal Agency or designee will serve as staff liaison to the Committee. The Urban Renewal Agency may also make grants to the Committee or enter into agreements with other public agencies, associations, and individuals for services that will assist the Committee. (Ord. 2010-09 §1)

 

2.20.040 Compensation of members.
        Committee members shall receive no compensation for their services. The Committee shall have no authority to make any expenditure on behalf of the city, or obligate the city for payment of any sums of money, or to enter into contracts on behalf of the city. However, the Boards may make recommendations to the Urban Renewal Agency Board from time to time regarding expenditures and/or obligations. (Ord. 2010-09 §1)

 

2.20.050 Quorum.
        A majority of the Committee shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 2010-09 §1)

Chapter 2.24 TRANSPORTATION ADVISORY COMMISSION
2.24.010 Establishment—Membership—Term.
        There is hereby established a Transportation Advisory Commission consisting of nine members appointed for four-year terms, except that the initial appointments shall be made so that the terms of not more than three members expire in any given year.

        A.    No more than eight members but no less than the majority must be Molalla city residents. Two members of the commission shall be owners of a business or property within the City (not necessarily residents of the City of Molalla), and one member shall be a resident of the area outside Molalla.

        B.     The members of the Commission shall elect from among their members a chair, a vice-chair, and a secretary, such officers to serve for one year.

        C.     The Commission shall meet as deemed necessary and shall conduct proceedings in accordance with Roberts Rules of Order.

        D.    Commission meetings shall be publicly noticed and be in conformance with Oregon’s open meetings requirements.

        E.     Summary minutes of Commission proceedings shall be recorded and retained in conformance with Oregon’s public records requirements. Minutes of proceedings shall be submitted to the City Council for information.

        F.     In January of each year the Commission shall submit a report on its activities to the City Council.

        G.    Members of the Commission shall receive no compensation. (Ord. 2012-08 §1; Ord. 2012-03 §6; Ord. 2011-03)

 

2.24.020 Powers and duties.
        The Commission shall:

        A.    Provide advice concerning development and implementation of the city’s Transportation System Plan.

        B.     Review and make recommendations regarding transportation improvement projects for inclusion in the Capital Improvement Plan.

        C.     Review the effectiveness of traffic management strategies and recommend actions for improvement.

        D.    Advise as to the coordination of planning and programming of transportation projects and funding with other governmental agencies and private interests.

        E.     Advise and make recommendations to the City Council, Planning Commission, Urban Renewal Agency and city staff on transportation related matters generally.

        F.     Encourage and promote mass transportation, use of alternative fuels, reduction of automobile dependency, and development of alternative transportation systems and choices.

        G.    Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the City Council. (Ord. 2011-03)

 

2.24.030 City support.
        The city will provide meeting space, clerical, administrative and related support in consultation with the Commission with approval of the City Manager and/or City Council. (Ord. 2011-03)

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 3.05 PUBLIC CONTRACTS
Chapter 3.08 UNCLAIMED AND CONFISCATED PROPERTY
Chapter 3.09 DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS PROPERTY

Chapter 3.05 PUBLIC CONTRACTS
3.05.010 Contract Review Board.
        The City Council is hereby designated as the local Contract Review Board pursuant to ORS 279.055. (Ord. 1999-09 §2)

 

3.05.020 Adoption of rules.
        The City Council may by resolution adopt and amend Local Contract Review Rules. (Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 1999-09 §2)

 

3.05.030 Purchasing.
        The City Council may by resolution adopt and amend local purchasing rules. (Ord. 2011-01 §1)

Chapter 3.08 UNCLAIMED AND CONFISCATED PROPERTY
3.08.010 Scope.
        This chapter shall apply to all personal property, except motor vehicles and boats, now or hereafter in custody of the City. (Ord. 1981-1 §6)

 

3.08.020 Custody of property.
Whenever any personal property other than motor vehicles or boats is taken into custody of any department by reason of seizure, abandonment or for any other reason, the personal property shall be turned over to and held by the Molalla Police Department at the expense and risk of the owner or person lawfully entitled to possession thereof. (Ord. 1981-1 §1)

 

3.08.030 Surrender to true owner.
        Within 60 days after such property is taken into possession, except when confiscated or held as evidence, the owner or person lawfully entitled to possession may reclaim the same upon application to the Molalla Police Department, submission of satisfactory proof of ownership or right to possession, and payment of charges and expenses, if any, incurred in the storage, preservation, and custody of the property. (Ord. 1981-1 §2)

 

3.08.040 Sale—Notice.
        At any time after said 60-day period, the Chief of Police shall sell at public auction any unclaimed property and any property which has been confiscated and not ordered destroyed, except such property held as evidence in any legal or Municipal Court proceeding. Notice of such sale shall be given once by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least 10 days before the date of the sale, giving the time and place of sale and generally describing the property to be sold. (Ord. 1981-1 §3(l))

 

3.08.050 Sale—To highest bidder.
        All sales of property shall be for cash to the highest and best bidder; provided, however, that any person appearing at or prior to such sale and proving ownership or right of possession thereto shall be entitled to reclaim the property upon the payment of the charges and expenses incurred by the City in the storage, preservation, and custody of the property and a proportionate share of the costs of advertising the same for sale. (Ord. 1981-1 §3(2))

 

3.08.060 Sale—Purchase by City.
        If no bids are entered for the property or if the highest bid entered is less than the costs incurred by the City, the Chief of Police may enter a bid on behalf of the City in an amount equal to such costs. If bid is by the City, the property shall become the property of the City as compensation for the costs incurred, or if no use or value to the City shall be disposed of in such manner as the Chief of Police directs. (Ord. 1981-1 §3(3))

 

3.08.070 Sale—Disposition of proceeds.
        The proceeds of a sale shall be first applied to payment of the cost of the sale and the expense incurred in the preservation, storage and custody of the property, and the balance, if any, shall be credited to the general fund of the City. (Ord. 1981-1 §3(4))

 

3.08.080 Sale—No right of redemption.
        Said sales shall be without the right of redemption. (Ord. 1981-1 §3(5))

 

3.08.090 Certificate of title.
        At the time of the payment of the purchase price, the Chief of Police shall execute a certificate of sale in duplicate, the original to be delivered to the purchaser and a copy to be kept on file in the office of the Finance Director, which certificate shall contain the date of sale, the consideration paid, a brief description of the property and a stipulation that the City does not warrant the condition or title of such property other than the return of the purchase price in case the title is for any reason invalid. The certificate of sale shall be in substantially the following form:

 

CERTIFICATE OF SALE

This is to certify that under the provisions of Ordinance No. _____ and pursuant to due notice of time and place of sale, I did on the _____ day of the month of _________ of 20__, sell at public auction to for the sum of $ ______ cash, that being the highest and best bidder, and that being the highest and-best sum bid therefore, the following described personal property, to-wit:

(brief description of property)

and in consideration of the payment of the said sum of $_____, receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, I have this day delivered to said purchaser the foregoing property. Dated this ____ day of the month of ______ of 20__.

Chief of Police

Note: The City of Molalla assumes no responsibility as to condition of title of the above described property. In case this sale shall for any reason be invalid, the liability of the City is limited to return of the purchase price. All property is sold “As Is”.

(Ord. 1981-1 §O)

 

3.08.100 Dangerous or perishable property.
        Any property coming into the possession of the Chief of Police which he or she determines to be unreasonably dangerous to store or perishable may be disposed of immediately, without notice, in such manner as he or she determines to be in the public interest. (Ord. 1981-1 §5)

Chapter 3.09 DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS PROPERTY
3.09.010 Introduction.
        City employees are expected to be responsible for and care for any City equipment or property in their possession. When the equipment or property has reached the end of its useful life the City shall properly dispose of the asset and attempt to obtain any residual value the asset may have. (Ord. 2008-06)

 

3.09.020 Real property versus personal property.
        A     Personal property is generally moveable and real property generally is not moveable. For example: Land, buildings and other structures are real property, while personal property consists of office equipment, vehicles, large mobile equipment, supplies and scrap.

        B.     State law governs the disposal of real property owned by the City. The City Manager shall be consulted prior to the listing, sale, disposal or transfer of any property or property rights—real or personal—owned by the City of Molalla. (Ord. 2008-06)

 

3.09.030 Identification process.
        A.    The identification of City property as surplus is the responsibility of each department. The City Manager or his/her designee will coordinate the disposal of surplus property.

        B.     Generally, all revenues generated from the sale of surplus property will be receipted into the fund that the asset was purchased from.

        C.     Exceptions may be:

        1.     Assets purchased with grant funds in which the grant provided for the asset’s future disposition.

        2.     A sale of assets that have been court ordered and the proceeds are required to go toward a specific purpose.

        3.     The Library Board’s policy will govern the disposal of all “unused or underused” books and similar materials in accordance with library policy.

        D.    The Finance Director will ensure a proper accounting of funds as mandated by federal and state statutes, as applicable. (Ord. 2008-06)

 

3.09.040 Disposal process.
        A.    Each department director will identify when there is no longer a need for specific City property, i.e., vehicles, office furniture, and/or other office related equipment. Exceptions are computers, telecommunications equipment and vehicles.

        B.     For all items, excluding computer, telecommunication equipment and vehicles, the department will complete a Surplus Property Disposition Form and submit it to the City Manager or designee with the items listed.

        1.     The City Manager or designee will identify the surplus property that may have some use in other City departments and circulate a list detailing the available property.

        2.     The notice will state that the items will be declared surplus by a specific date allowing when possible a minimum of 10 working days after notice has been sent.

        3.     If no claims have been made by other City departments within the time frame established, the items will be declared surplus and disposed of by one of the methods outlined below.

        C.     When computer and telecommunications equipment is identified as no longer being needed within the department the City Manager shall be informed.

        1.     The City Manager will then make the determination of whether or not the equipment has reached the end of its useful life, or should be placed in service in another work area within the city.

        2.     When the City Manager determines that the equipment should be declared surplus, he or she will so declare it and have it disposed of in one of the methods outlined below.

        3.     Routine replacement of computer and telecommunications equipment is determined by the City Manager.

        4.     Any computers determined to be surplus will have hard drives electronically wiped so as to prevent retrieval of data, or removed and destroyed prior to disposal.

        D.    The department director will decide based on the established replacement schedule for vehicles and in consultation with the person responsible for fleet management within the department which vehicles may be redistributed within the city or sold as surplus.

        1.     The individual responsible for fleet management within each department will obtain their department director’s approval and then send a list of surplus vehicles to the City Manager which will indicate which vehicles are to be surplused and which vehicles may be used by other departments.

        2.     The City Manager will then distribute a list of the vehicles available for use by other departments. All remaining vehicles will be declared surplus by the City Council and disposed of by one of the methods outlined below.

        3.     The City Manager and/or City Recorder is authorized to sign the titles and/or powers of attorney whenever motor vehicles, mobile equipment or other personal property requiring a title are being sold or disposed of.

        E.     Upon declaration of an item as surplus, departments may be responsible for providing a holding place for the items until the proper disposal can be made and/or a storage area becomes available for use. The object will be to move the items through the disposition process as quickly as possible so that storage will not be an issue.

        F.     For surplus property deemed by the City Manager to have a value of $1,000.00 per item or less, the City Manager may authorize the property to be disposed of in accordance with the options listed in this policy. For surplus property deemed by the City Manager to have a value of more than $1,000.00 per item or more than $5,000.00 in the aggregate, the City Council may authorize the property disposed of in accordance with the options listed in this policy.

        G.    The City Manager has the discretion to advertise the sale of surplus property in a newspaper of city-wide circulation. The following disposal options are to be used with the goals of maximizing the value to be received for the item while achieving the greatest efficiency in disposing of the item, while protecting the public interest.

        1.     State Surplus Program.

        2.     Sell at public auction or sealed bid sale.

        3.     Trade-in (applicable if buying like property, e.g., a road grader traded in on another road grader. NOTE: trade-ins are expected to have gone through the surplus property process).

        4.     General sale, subject to public notice being given in a newspaper of city-wide circulation.

        5.     Offer for sale on the city’s website or an established website.

        6.     Sell or donate to a non-profit organization or another government agency.

        7.     Scrap, salvage or items to be recycled do not need to be declared surplus by the Council. (Ord. 2008-06)

 

3.09.050 Police evidence—Found and abandoned property.
        Police evidence, found and abandoned property that has come into custody of the Police Department is to be disposed of in accordance with state law and the Police Department’s policy and procedures relating to evidence. (Ord. 2008-06)

 

3.09.060 Employee responsibilities.
        A.    City employees shall not appropriate any city equipment, property, materials or scrap. If city property is determined to have no value, it is to be properly disposed of according to this policy.

        B.     Employees may attend public sales and/or auctions and purchase surplus city property. Employees may not submit bids or purchase items at public auction in which they participated in the decision to surplus such property. (Ord. 2008-06)

 

3.09.070 Records retention.
        A     In accordance with Oregon Administrative Rules (OAR) 166-200-0050(15) all records documenting the disposition of city-owned personal property has a minimum retention of three years after the disposal of the property.

        B.     Real property transaction records documenting acquisitions, dispositions, and relocations of real property and rights-of-way by the city are to be retained for a minimum retention of 10 years (OAR 166-200-0050(20)). (Ord. 2008-06)

Title 4 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Chapter 4.04 ADOPTION OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN

Chapter 4.04 ADOPTION OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN
4.04.010 Title and purpose.
        A.    The City Council shall adopt by resolution and may from time to time amend an Emergency Operations Plan. The Plan shall set out procedures for the City to use in responding to various types of emergencies. The Emergency Management Plan, together with all hazard specific plans, resource lists and call lists and any changes and additions may be referred to as the “Plan.”

        B.     The City Attorney shall review and approve the Plan as to legality.

        C.     The City Manager shall ensure that the Emergency Operations Plan is properly maintained and kept up to date. Significant or substantive changes in the Emergency Operations Plan shall be submitted as needed by the City Manager to the City Council for approval by resolution. (Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 2002-05)

Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES, TAXES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.04 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 5.12 BINGO
Chapter 5.20 SHOW LICENSES
Chapter 5.24 GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSING

Chapter 5.04 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
5.04.010 Adoption of state rules and regulations.
        The rules and regulations of the Oregon Liquor Control Commission as now promulgated or as may hereafter be promulgated or adopted are adopted by the City of Molalla as the rules and regulations of the City of Molalla pertaining to the regulation and control of the operation of such licensee’s premises. (Ord. 237 §1, 1953)

 

5.04.020 Alcoholic beverage business license fee—Violation—Penalty.
        A.    Each premises within the city licensed by the State of Oregon to sell alcoholic beverages shall obtain an alcoholic beverage business permit from the city. This permit shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, a business license. The fee for such permit shall be established by the City Council by resolution.

        B.     Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250.00. Each day’s continuing violation of this section shall be a separate offense. (Ord. 1999-2 §1)

Chapter 5.12 BINGO
5.12.010 Authorized.
        The operation of the lottery commonly known as bingo by charitable, fraternal or religious organizations is authorized within the City of Molalla subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1981-4 §4)

 

5.12.020 Charitable, fraternal and religious organizations defined.
        The terms “charitable, fraternal and religious organizations” shall have the same meaning as provided in Article XV, Section 4(2) of the Oregon Constitution. (Ord. 1981-4 §2)

 

5.12.030 License—Required.
        It is unlawful for any person or organization to operate bingo without first having obtained a license issued by the City of Molalla. (Ord. 1981-4 §3)

 

5.12.040 License—Application—Fee.
        Application shall be made annually to the City of Molalla for a license to operate bingo. No license shall be issued until the applicant has complied with the notification requirements of ORS 465.100(2). An annual fee of $100.00 shall accompany the application for license. (Ord. 1981-4 §4)

 

5.12.050 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person or organization who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or 180 days imprisonment, or both; further, the right to apply for a license to operate bingo may be suspended by the Municipal Court for a period not to exceed one year upon conviction under this chapter. (Ord. 1981-4 §5)

Chapter 5.20 SHOW LICENSES
5.20.010 Application—Required—Contents.
        Any circus, carnival, music festival, concert and other show desiring to locate within the City for public performance or operation shall make written application for a license to the City Recorder at least 20 days prior to the intended date of the first public performance or operation. Such application shall contain, in addition to the proposed time and location of the performance, attraction or operation, such information as the Chief of Police shall reasonably require in order to be assured that the issuance of the requested license will in no respect endanger the public health, peace and safety of the City. (Ord. 1979-1 §1)

 

5.20.020 Application—Insurance policy required.
        The application for the license required in Section 5.20.010 must be accompanied by evidence of an adequate amount of insurance issued by a reputable insurance company, the insurance policy or policies so conditioned as to save the City harmless from any claim or liability for any injury to persons or property caused by the performance or operation of the applicant within the City. The adequacy of such insurance shall be determined by the City Recorder. (Ord. 1979-1 §2)

 

5.20.030 Application—Cash deposit or bond required.
        The application for the license shall be accompanied by a cash deposit or bond sufficient to indemnify the City for any increased cost in City services caused by the performance or operation of the applicant within the City, in order to prevent the public health, peace and safety of the City from being endangered. The amount of such deposit or bond shall be fixed by the City Recorder. Upon completion of the event, the City Recorder shall determine what the actual increased cost of City services were and deduct such amount to the general fund of the City. The license applicant shall agree to pay any excess costs of such services beyond the amount fixed by the deposit or bond, and shall be entitled to the return of any amount deposited in excess of the actual increased cost. (Ord. 1979-1 §3)

 

5.20.040 License—Issuance—Appeal of rejection.
        If the Chief of Police endorses his or her approval of the application for the license required by this chapter, based on the criteria indicated in Section 5.20.010, and the evidence of adequate insurance coverage required by Section 5.20.020 is satisfactory, and the deposit or bond required in Section 5.20.030 is satisfactory, the Recorder shall issue the license as requested upon payment of the fee set forth in Section 5.20.050. In the event that the application is rejected, the applicant may appeal in writing to the City Council. The City Council may, by resolution, waive or modify any of the above conditions of obtaining a license as to a particular applicant when it determines that to do so would be in the best interests of the City. (Ord. 1979-1 §4)

 

5.20.050 License—Fee.
        The license fee for circuses, carnivals, music festivals, concerts and other shows shall be $25.00 per day, or fraction thereof, during which such performance, attraction or operation is open to the public; provided, however, that no license fee shall be required of any circus, carnival, music festival or concert or other show, the entire proceeds of which are devoted to charitable purposes, and no part of which proceeds inure to the benefit of any person. (Ord. 1979-1 §5)

 

5.20.060 Exemptions.
        The provisions of this chapter shall not be taken to apply to motion picture shows at permanently established motion picture theaters or activities sponsored by the local public school district. (Ord. 1979-1 §6)

Chapter 5.24 GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSING
5.24.010 Definitions.
        As used in this chapter of the Molalla Municipal Code, the following words and phrases mean:

        A.    “Business” means an activity carried on by a person predominately for economic profit or livelihood in the city including professions, trades, occupations, and shops. Any person who advertises or otherwise represents themselves to the public as engaged in business is presumed to be so engaged.

        B.     “Garage/yard/estate sale” means a commercial activity, open to the public, conducted at a private residence where personal property is sold, or auctioned to others, provided the number of sale days at a particular residence does not exceed three days, and no more than four occurrences per calendar year.

        C.     “Home occupation” means a business carried on within a dwelling, and which business is incidental to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.

        D.    “License” means the permission granted by the city to engage in a business or activity regulated by this chapter.

        E.     “Licensee” means a person who has a valid license issued pursuant to this chapter.

        F.     “Peddler” means any person who goes from house to house or from place to place in the city, selling or taking orders for, or offering to sell or take orders for goods, wares, merchandise, or any other article for future delivery, for services to be performed in the future, or the making, manufacturing, or repairing of any article or thing whatsoever for future delivery, excepting interstate commerce.

        G.    “Person” includes all natural and legal persons, including, but not limited to, individuals, corporations, associations, partnerships and societies, whether or not engaged in a profit-making endeavor.

        H.    “Valid license” means a license issued pursuant to this chapter, and which license’s effective period has not expired. (Ord. 2018-04 §1; Ord. 2013-07 §1; Ord. 2010-13 §1; Ord. 2008-03 §1)

 

5.24.015 Purpose of business license fee.
        A.    The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted, except as otherwise specified in this section, to provide revenue for municipal purposes including police protection, marketing, tourism promotion, economic development and to provide revenue to pay for the necessary expenses required to issue the license for and regulate the business licensed.

        B.     The fee required by this code shall be in addition to general ad valorem taxes now or hereafter levied pursuant to law, and shall be in addition to license fees prescribed in other parts of this code.

        C.     The levy or collection of a business license fee upon any business shall not be construed to be a license or permit of the City to the person to engage therein in the event such business shall be unlawful, illegal, or prohibited by the laws of the State of Oregon, the United States, or other provisions of this code. (Ord. 2018-04 §1; Ord. 2013-07 §1; Ord. 2010-13 §1; Ord. 2008-03 §1)

 

5.24.019 Contractors’ and subcontractors’ responsibility.
        It shall be the responsibility of all general contractors, utility companies and subcontractors working in the city to obtain a business license. It shall further be the responsibility of all general contractors and utility companies working in the city to provide a list of all names and addresses of subcontractors under their direction. Failure of any subcontractor to obtain a license may result in a stop work order on any project within the city’s jurisdiction.( Ord. 2018-04 §1; Ord. 2013-07 §1)

 

5.24.020 Business license fee imposed.
        A.    A business license fee is hereby imposed upon the business trades, shops, professions, callings, and occupations specified in Section 5.24.010 of this code. No person may transact and carry on any such business in the city without first having obtained a business license therefore for the current calendar year as herein provided or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of this code.

        B.     The fee for business licenses shall be due and payable on the first day of January of each year for the calendar year following and shall be delinquent on and after the following first day of February.

        Any new business which is not in operation on or before the first day of the license year and which desires to conduct business within the city shall make application for the license required by this chapter to the city before starting a business. As a new business, other processes and fees may apply to determine if business is applicable to the zone. If the application is received on or before June 30, the full license fee is required. An application received on or after July 1, will be charged half the fee amount.

        C.     Each branch establishment of business or location of a business conducted by any person shall, for the purposes hereof, be a separate business and subject to the license requirements provided in this code; but warehouses used solely incidental in connection with a business licensed pursuant to the provisions of this code and operated by the person conducting such business shall not be separate places of business or branch establishments.

        D.    The agent or agents of a nonresident proprietor engaged in any business for which a license is required by this code shall be liable for the payment of the fee, and for the penalties for failure to pay the same as provided in Sections 5.24.035 and 5.24.040 of this code, or to otherwise comply with the provisions of this code to the extent and with like effect as if such agent or agents were themselves proprietors. (Ord. 2018-04 §1; Ord. 2013-07 §1; Ord. 2010-13 §1; Ord. 2008-03 §1)

 

5.24.021 Temporary business license.
        Any person conducting a business within the city which is not domiciled nor otherwise permanently located in the city but is conducting business within the city for a period 30 days or less annually shall apply for and receive a temporary business license and shall pay the license fee for such temporary business as may be established by council. (Ord. 2018-04 §1; Ord. 2013-07 §1)

 

5.24.025 Exemptions.
        A.    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

        1.     Any person transacting and carrying on any business within the City which is exempt from taxation or regulation by the City by virtue of the Constitution of the United States, the State of Oregon, or applicable statutes of the United States or the State of Oregon.

        2.     Any person whose income is based solely on an hourly, daily, weekly, monthly, or annual wage or salary, and it is the intention that all registration, taxes and fees will be borne by the employer.

        3.     Any business paying a franchise fee under City ordinances.

        4.     Any business which does not maintain any offices, storage facilities or other facilities, or inventory in the City, and whose sole business involves delivering merchandise or goods to persons or businesses in the City.

        5.     A person whose primary activity consists of delivering goods inside the City for a business located outside the City.

        6.     Nonprofit organizations, civic organizations and clubs wishing to canvass for funds or sell door-to-door to raise funds or conduct fundraising, federally tax-exempt organizations and non-profit religious organizations.

        7.     Persons whose gross receipts from business conducted both within and without the City amount to less than $2,500.00 per calendar year; provided that any such person provide written notice to the City that they are exempt and upon demand by the City provide proof verifying the amount. This exemption does not supersede the applicability of the exemption for garage sales as defined in this chapter.

        8.     Any person operating a business, display or sales space at any special event with a duration of three days or less. A “special event,” as used in this chapter, is deemed to be a City-endorsed activity for the benefit of the community.

        9.     Any person engaged in a garage, yard or estate sale as defined in this chapter.

        10.   Any producer of farm products raised in Oregon, produced by themselves or their immediate families, who sell, vend, or dispose of such projects within the City.

        11.   Any business which is under public contract with the City to design or construct publicly funded projects and who does not do other non-City work within the City limits.

        B.     Any person not subject to the business license fee as set forth under subsection A who receives a notice of business license renewal or application must contact the City in writing to claim an exemption. If no exemption is claimed, an individual or business will be subject to the late fees as set forth under Section 5.24.040(B). (Ord. 2019-10 §1)

 

5.24.030 Amount of business license fee.
        A.    The license fee shall be set by the City Council by resolution.

        B.     All fees are on an annual basis. Each business trade, shop, calling or occupation that has multiple departments may apply for a business license under the classification of “general shopkeeper.”

        C.     If any person be engaged in operating or carrying on in the city more than one trade, shop, profession, occupation, business or calling then such person shall obtain licenses prescribed in this chapter for as many of the trades, shops, professions, occupations, businesses or callings as are carried on by such person. (Ord. 2018-04 §1; Ord. 2013-07 §1; Ord. 2010-13 §1; Ord. 2008-03 §1)

 

5.24.035 Business license certificate.
        All licenses issued in accordance with this chapter shall be openly displayed in a place of business or kept on the person or on the vehicle of the person licensed and shall be immediately produced and delivered for inspection to the Chief of Police and their agents or subordinates when requested by the individuals to do so. Failure to carry the license or produce the same on request shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.

        A.    A business license certificate shall be issued by the City Recorder or designee upon written application therefor.

        B.     The application for such certificate shall contain the following information:

        1.     A description of the trade, shop, business, profession, occupation, or calling to be carried on within the city;

        2.     The name of the applicant, with a statement of all persons having an interest in said business either as proprietors or owners of the business;

        3.     The location of the place where the business is carried on;

        4.     Date of application;

        5.     Amount of money tendered with application;

        6.     Signature of applicant. (Ord. 2018-04 §1; Ord. 2013-07 §1; Ord. 2010-13 §1; Ord. 2008-03 §1)

 

5.24.040 Misleading statements—Nonpayment.
        A.    No person may willfully make any false or misleading statement to the City Recorder for the purpose of securing a business license certificate; or to fail or refuse to pay before that payment becomes delinquent any business license fee or penalty hereby required to be paid by any such person.

        B.     In the event any person required to renew a business license fails to pay the license fee, a late fee, as set by resolution, shall be added to the license fee until paid. This same late fee will apply to those persons receiving notice of a failure to renew a business license who have not notified the City of any applicable exemptions as listed in Section 5.24.025 above. If after March 1st the business license and/or including late fees (unless a payment arrangement has been made in writing) the business shall be cited into Molalla Municipal Court and prosecuted under the general penalty of Molalla Municipal Code as stated in Chapter 1.04. (Ord. 2018-04 §1; Ord. 2013-07 §1; Ord. 2010-13 §1; Ord. 2008-03 §1)

 

5.24.045 Additional remedies.
        A.    The conviction of any person for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall not operate to relieve such person from paying any fee or penalty thereupon for which such person may be liable nor shall the payment of any fee be a bar or prevent any prosecution in the Municipal Court of any complaint for the violation of the provisions of this chapter.

        B.     Any violation of this chapter shall, in addition to any other remedy prescribed by this chapter, be punishable under the general penalty clause of the Molalla Municipal Code. Each day, which a business is operated in violation of this chapter, shall be deemed a separate offense and may be punishable by a separate fine for each day the license is not paid in an amount to be determined by the City and as authorized under Section 1.04.010(B) of the Molalla Municipal Code. (Ord. 2018-04 §1; Ord. 2013-07 §1; Ord. 2010-13 §1; Ord. 2008-03 §1)

 

5.24.050 Period of license.
        Business licenses shall be issued on a calendar year basis and shall expire on December 31st of the year in which they are issued. (Ord. 2018-04 §1; Ord. 2013-07 §1; Ord. 2010-13 §1; Ord. 2008-03 §1; Ord. 1999-15 §2)

 

5.24.055 Renewal of licenses.
        At least 30 days prior to the expiration of any license issued under this section, and upon any change in the ownership of a business licensed under this section, the licensee shall apply for renewal by application containing the same information as required for an initial application, or, in the alternative, a statement of the particulars in which the information furnished with the initial application is changed. On such investigation as the City deems proper, the license shall be renewed. (Ord. 2018-04 §1; Ord. 2013-07 §1; Ord. 2010-13 §1; Ord. 2008-03 §1)

 

5.24.060 License—Grounds for revocation or suspension.
        A.    The City Recorder determines that a licensee is conducting or has conducted an activity, which would provide grounds for denial of an application for a license, and the City Recorder shall notify the licensee in writing that the City is revoking/suspending the license.

        B.     If the City Recorder determines that a licensee or any activity of the licensee presents an immediate danger to persons or property, the City Recorder may suspend/revoke such license by issuing written notice. (Ord. 2018-04 §1; Ord. 2013-07 §1; Ord. 2010-13 §1; Ord. 2008-03 §1)

 

5.24.065 Appeal.
        An applicant whose application has been conditioned, denied, suspended or revoked may file a written notice of appeal with the City Administrator. The notice of appeal must be filed within 10 calendar days after the notice of conditioned, denied, suspended or revoked is mailed or delivered, whichever is earlier. The notice of appeal shall include:

        A.    The name and address of the appellant, and the business owner if different than the appellant;

        B.     The nature of the determination from which an appeal is taken and a copy of the determination;

        C.     The reason or reasons why the determination is alleged to be incorrect; and

        D.    What the correct determination should be.

        When a license has been revoked and the licensee or principal of the licensee reapplies for a license, a bond in the penalty sum deemed necessary under the circumstances, but not to exceed $10,000.00, shall be filed with the City Recorder. This bond shall be required for the term of the license and shall be forfeited to the City if the licensee is convicted of any violation of federal, state or city laws or ordinances for which such license may be revoked. (Ord. 2018-04 §1; Ord. 2013-07 §1; Ord. 2010-13 §1; Ord. 2008-03 §1)

Title 6 ANIMALS
Chapter 6.04 DOGS
Chapter 6.08 FARM ANIMALS

Chapter 6.04 DOGS
6.04.010 Adoption of state provisions.
        The City of Molalla adopts the provisions of ORS 609.015 to 609.115 and 609.990. (Ord. 2009-01 §1)

 

6.04.020 Adopted provisions.
        A.    609.015 Application of ORS 609.030 and 609.035 to 609.110.

        (1)    ORS 609.030 and 609.035 to 609.110 apply in every county except as otherwise provided by county charter or ordinance. ORS 609.030 and 609.035 to 609.110 do not limit the powers of cities and counties to adopt ordinances and regulations relating to the control of dogs.

        (2)    A county dog licensing and control program shall not apply within the limits of a City that has its own dog licensing and control program. [1967 c.496 §3; 1977 c.237 §1; subsection (2) enacted as 1977 c.802 §2; 1999 c.756 §16]

        B.     609.020 Dogs as personal property. Dogs are hereby declared to be personal property.

        C.     609.030 Establishing dog control district; appointment of supervisors; enforcement; county governing body as supervisors; dog control officer.

        (1)    The governing body of any county may declare the county a dog control district.

        (2)    Upon declaration of the dog control district the county governing body may appoint a board of supervisors, and provide for the terms, compensation and other aspects of service by board members, at least two of whom shall be connected directly or indirectly with the livestock industry.

        (3)    The board may issue licenses and enforce all of the county and state laws relating to the control of dogs within the county, including that of making arrests and shall perform such other duties as the county governing body may assign to it.

        (4)    The county governing body may elect to act as the board of supervisors of the dog control district.

        (5)    The county governing body may provide for appointment of a dog control officer and otherwise provide for administration and enforcement of a dog control program. [Amended by 1957 c.79 §1; 1963 c.398 §1; 1975 c.297 §1; 1977 c.189 §9]

        D.    609.035 Definitions for ORS 609.035 to 609.110 and 609.990. As used in ORS 609.035 to 609.110 and 609.990:

        (1)    “Dog control board” means a group of persons whose duties include, but need not be limited to, fulfilling the duties of a dog control district board of supervisors as described in ORS 609.030.

        (2)    “Dog control officer” means a person whose duties include, but need not be limited to, enforcing the dog control laws for a dog control district.

        (3)    “Keeper” means a person who owns, possesses, controls or otherwise has charge of a dog, other than:

        (a)    A licensed business primarily intended to obtain a profit from the kenneling of dogs;

        (b)    A humane society or other nonprofit animal shelter;

        (c)    A facility impounding dogs on behalf of a City or county; or

        (d)    A veterinary facility.

        (4)    “Menaces” means lunging, growling, snarling or other behavior by a dog that would cause a reasonable person to fear for the person’s safety.

        (5)    “Potentially dangerous dog” means a dog that:

        (a)    Without provocation and while not on premises from which the keeper may lawfully exclude others, menaces a person;

        (b)    Without provocation, inflicts physical injury on a person that is less severe than a serious physical injury; or

        (c)    Without provocation and while not on premises from which the keeper may lawfully exclude others, inflicts physical injury on or kills a domestic animal as defined in ORS 167.310.

        (6)    “Running at large” means that a dog is off or outside of the premises from which the keeper of the dog may lawfully exclude others, or is not in the company of and under the control of its keeper, except if the dog is:

        (a)    Being used to legally hunt, chase or tree wildlife while under the supervision of the keeper;

        (b)    Being used to control or protect livestock or for other activities related to agriculture; or

        (c)    Within any part of a vehicle.

        (7)    “Serious physical injury” has the meaning given that term in ORS 161.015. [2005 c.840 §4]

        E.     609.040 Election to determine whether dogs may run at large.

        (1)    When the petition of 100 or more electors of any county is filed with the county clerk 45 days before the general or special election in any year, the county clerk shall cause notice to be given that at the election a vote will be taken for and against permitting dogs to run at large in the county.

        (2)    On the petition of 15 or more electors of an election precinct in any county being filed with the county clerk 45 days before the general or special election in any year, the county clerk shall cause notice to be given that at the election a vote will be taken for and against permitting dogs to run at large in that precinct.

        (3)    On the petition of 20 or more electors of any incorporated City or precinct being filed with the county clerk before the time of giving notice of the general or special election in any year, the county clerk shall cause notice to be given that at the election a vote will be taken for and against permitting dogs to run at large in the City.

        (4)    The provisions of this section shall not apply to areas in the county inside a City that has an established dog licensing program. [Amended by 1977 c.802 §4]

        F.     609.050. [Amended by 1967 c.496 §1; repealed by 1977 c.802 §15]

        G.    609.060 Notice of election result; dogs running at large prohibited; deposit of fees and fines.

        (1)    If a majority of all votes cast in the election provided for by ORS 609.040 is against permitting dogs to run at large, or if the governing body of the county by ordinance prohibits dogs from running at large, the county shall give notice, by publication in some newspaper having a general circulation in the county, and in the election precinct if the prohibition of dogs running at large affects any one precinct only, for three consecutive weeks.

        (2)    After 60 days from the date of the notice, every person keeping a dog shall prevent the dog from running at large in any county, City or precinct where prohibited. A person who is the keeper of a dog is guilty of a violation if the dog runs at large in a county, City or precinct where prohibited.

        (3)    County license fees and the penalty for violation of subsection (2) of this section or ORS 609.100, when collected, shall be paid into the county treasury, and kept in a special fund. [Amended by 1965 c.499 §1; 1977 c.802 §5; 1999 c.658 §5]

        H.    609.070. [Repealed by 1969 c.677 §5]

        I.      609.080. [Amended by 1959 c.618 §2; repealed by 1967 c.495 §4]

        J.      609.090 Impounding certain dogs; procedure for county disposition of impounded dogs; impoundment fees and costs; release of dog.

        (1)    A law enforcement officer or dog control officer may cite a keeper, impound a dog, or both if:

        (a)    The dog is found running at large in violation of ORS 609.060;

        (b)    The dog is a public nuisance as described by ORS 609.095; or

        (c)    The officer has probable cause to believe that the dog is a dangerous dog as defined in ORS 609.098.

        (2)    All dogs impounded under this section and ORS 609.030 shall be held in an adequate and sanitary pound to be provided by the county governing body from the general fund or out of funds obtained from dog licenses and from the redemption of dogs so impounded. However, in lieu of the establishment of a dog pound, the county governing body may contract for the care of the dogs. Unless claimed by its keeper, a dog shall be impounded for at least three days if the dog is without a license or identification tag and for at least five days if it has a license or identification tag. A reasonable effort shall be made to notify the keeper of a dog before the dog is removed from impoundment.

        (3)    Unless the dog control board or county governing body provides otherwise, if the keeper appears and redeems the dog, the keeper shall pay a sum of not less than $10 for the first impoundment and not less than $20 for each subsequent impoundment and also pay the expense of keeping the dog during the time it was impounded. If the dog is unlicensed the keeper shall also purchase a license and pay the applicable penalty for failure to have a license. If the keeper is not the owner of the dog, the keeper may request that a license purchased by the keeper under this subsection be issued in the name of the dog owner.

        (4)    In addition to any payment required pursuant to subsection (3) of this section, a dog control board or county governing body may require as a condition for redeeming the dog that the keeper agree to reasonable restrictions on the keeping of the dog. The keeper must pay the cost of complying with the reasonable restrictions. As used in this subsection, “reasonable restrictions” may include, but is not limited to, sterilization.

        (5)    A keeper of a dog maintains a public nuisance if the keeper fails to comply with reasonable restrictions imposed under subsection (4) of this section or if a keeper fails to provide acceptable proof of compliance to the dog control board or county governing body on or before the 10th day after issuance of the order imposing the restrictions. If the board or governing body finds the proof submitted by the keeper unacceptable, the board or governing body shall send notice of that finding to the keeper no later than five days after the proof is received.

        (6)    If no keeper appears to redeem a dog within the allotted time, the dog may be killed in a humane manner. The dog control board or county governing body may release the dog to a responsible person upon receiving assurance that the person will properly care for the dog and upon payment of a sum established by the county governing body plus cost of keep during its impounding, and purchase of a license if required. The person shall thereafter be the keeper of the dog for purposes of ORS 609.035 to 609.110.

        (7)    If the keeper of a dog is not charged with violating ORS 609.095(2) or (3) or ORS 609.098, and the dog control board or county governing body finds that the dog has menaced or chased a person when on premises other than the premises from which the keeper may lawfully exclude others or has bitten a person, the dog control board or county governing body may order that the dog be killed in a humane manner. Before ordering that the dog be killed, the board or governing body shall consider the factors described in ORS 609.093 and issue written findings on those factors. Notwithstanding ORS 34.030, if the disposition order issued by the board or governing body provides that the dog is to be killed, a petition by the keeper for a writ of review must be filed no later than the 10th day after the dog control board or county governing body sends notice of the order to the keeper. Notwithstanding ORS 19.270, 19.330 and 34.070, the order for the killing of the dog may not be carried out during the period that the order is subject to review or appeal. If the dog is not killed, the board or governing body may impose reasonable restrictions on the keeping of the dog. The keeper must pay the cost of complying with the reasonable restrictions.

        (8)    If the keeper of a dog is charged with violating ORS 609.095(2) or (3) or 609.098, upon conviction of the keeper the court may determine the disposition of the dog as provided under ORS 609.990.

        (9)    Notwithstanding subsections (2), (3), (6), (7) and (8) of this section, any dog impounded for biting a person shall be held for at least 10 days before redemption or destruction to determine if the dog is rabid.

        (10)  Notwithstanding subsections (2) and (3) of this section, if the keeper is charged with violating ORS 609.098, the dog shall be kept in impoundment pending resolution of the charges. A court may order the keeper to post a deposit with the dog control board or county governing body to cover the cost of keeping the dog in impoundment. If the keeper is convicted of violating ORS 609.098, the court may order the deposit forfeited to the board or governing body.

        (11)  A dog control board or county governing body may impose lesser fees or penalties under subsections (3) and (6) of this section for certain senior citizens under certain circumstances. [Amended by 1953 c.571 §2; 1957 c.79 §2; 1963 c.237 §1; 1963 c.585 §1; 1967 c.495 §2; 1969 c.677 §4; 1973 c.655 §3; 1975 c.499 §1; 1977 c.802 §6; 1999 c.658 §§6,6a; 2001 c.636 §7; 2005 c.840 §5]

        K.    609.092. [1977 c.802 §14; repealed by 1999 c.1051 §299]

        L.     609.093. Considerations prior to disposing of chasing, menacing or biting dog.

        In determining whether a dog should be killed as provided under ORS 609.090(7) or 609.990 (6), a dog control board, county governing body or court shall consider the following factors:

        (1)    If the dog has bitten a person, the circumstances and severity of the bite;

        (2)    Whether the keeper has a history of maintaining dogs that are a public nuisance;

        (3)    The impact of keeper actions on the behavior of the dog;

        (4)    The ability and inclination of the keeper to prevent the dog from chasing or menacing another person on premises other than the premises from which the keeper may lawfully exclude others or from biting another person;

        (5)    Whether the dog can be relocated to a secure facility;

        (6)    The effect that a transfer of the keeping of the dog to another person would have on ensuring the health and safety of the public;

        (7)    Behavior by the dog before or since the biting, chasing or menacing; and

        (8)    Any other factors that the board, governing body or court may deem relevant. [1999 c.658 §2; 2001 c.636 §8; 2005 c.840 §6]

        M.    609.095 Dog as public nuisance; public nuisance prohibited; complaint.

        (1)    A dog is a public nuisance if it:

        (a)    Chases persons or vehicles on premises other than premises from which the keeper of the dog may lawfully exclude others;

        (b)    Damages or destroys property of persons other than the keeper of the dog;

        (c)    Scatters garbage on premises other than premises from which the keeper of the dog may lawfully exclude others;

        (d)    Trespasses on private property of persons other than the keeper of the dog;

        (e)    Disturbs any person by frequent or prolonged noises;

        (f)    Is a female in heat and running at large; or

        (g)    Is a potentially dangerous dog, but is not a dangerous dog as defined in ORS 609.098.

        (2)    The keeper of a dog in a county, precinct or City that is subject to ORS 609.030 and 609.035 to 609.110 maintains a public nuisance if the dog commits an act described under subsection (1) of this section. Maintaining a dog that is a public nuisance is a violation.

        (3)    A keeper of a dog maintains a public nuisance if the keeper fails to comply with reasonable restrictions imposed under ORS 609.990 or if a keeper fails to provide acceptable proof of compliance to the court on or before the 10th day after issuance of the order imposing the restrictions. If the court finds the proof submitted by the keeper unacceptable, the court shall send notice of that finding to the keeper no later than five days after the proof is received.

        (4)    Any person who has cause to believe a keeper is maintaining a dog that is a public nuisance may complain, either orally or in writing, to the county, precinct or City. The receipt of any complaint is sufficient cause for the county, precinct or City to investigate the matter and determine whether the keeper of the dog is in violation of subsection (2) or (3) of this section. [1973 c.655 §2; 1977 c.802 §7; 1999 c.658 §8; 1999 c.756 §18; 2001 c.636 §9; 2001 c.926 §15; 2005 c.840 §7]

        N.    609.097. [1975 c.499 §4; 1999 c.658 §9; 2001 c.636 §10; repealed by 2005 c.840 §9]

        O.    609.098 Maintaining dangerous dog.

        (1)    As used in this section, “dangerous dog” means a dog that:

        (a)    Without provocation and in an aggressive manner inflicts serious physical injury, as defined in ORS 161.015, on a person or kills a person;

        (b)    Acts as a potentially dangerous dog, as defined in ORS 609.035, after having previously committed an act as a potentially dangerous dog that resulted in the keeper being found to have violated ORS 609.095; or

        (c)    Is used as a weapon in the commission of a crime.

        (2)    A person commits the crime of maintaining a dangerous dog if the person is the keeper of a dog and the person, with criminal negligence, fails to prevent the dog from engaging in an act described in subsection (1) of this section.

        (3)    Maintaining a dangerous dog is punishable as described in ORS 609.990. [2005 c.840 §2]

        Note: 609.098 was enacted into law by the Legislative Assembly but was not added to or made a part of ORS chapter 609 or any series therein by legislative action. See Preface to Oregon Revised Statutes for further explanation.

        P.     609.100 Dog licenses, tags and fees; exemptions.

        (1)    In a county, precinct or City having a dog control program under ORS 609.030, 609.035 to 609.110 and 609.405, every person keeping a dog that has a set of permanent canine teeth or is six months old, whichever comes first, shall procure a license for the dog. The license must be procured by paying a license fee to the county in which the person resides not later than March 1 of each year or within 30 days after the person becomes keeper of the dog. However, the county governing body may provide for dates other than March 1 for annual payment of fees. The fee for the license shall be determined by the county governing body in such amount as it finds necessary to carry out ORS 609.035 to 609.110. A license fee shall not be less than $25 for each dog, except that the fee shall not be less than $3 for each spayed female or neutered male dog for which a veterinarian’s certificate of operation for the spaying or neutering of the dog is presented to the county. If the person fails to procure a license within the time provided by this section, the county governing body may prescribe a penalty in an additional sum to be set by the governing body.

        (2)    The county shall, at the time of issuing a license, supply the licensee, without charge, with a suitable identification tag, which shall be fastened by the licensee to a collar and kept on the dog at all times when not in the immediate possession of the licensee.

        (3)    The license fees in subsection (1) of this section do not apply to dogs that are kept primarily in kennels and are not permitted to run at large. The county governing body may establish a separate license for dogs that are kept primarily in kennels when the dogs cease to be considered inventory under ORS 307.400, the fee for which shall not exceed $5 per dog.

        (4)    A license fee is not required to be paid for any dog kept by a person who is blind and who uses the dog as a guide. A license shall be issued for such dog upon the filing by the person who is blind of an affidavit with the county showing that the dog qualifies for exemption.

        (5)    The county shall keep a record of dog licenses.

        (6)    Notwithstanding any other provision of this section or ORS 609.015, when the keeper of a dog obtains a license for the dog, that license is valid and is in lieu of a license for the dog required by any other City or county within this state, for the remainder of the license period:

        (a)    If the keeper of the dog changes residence to a City or county other than the City or county in which the license was issued; or

        (b)    If the keeper of the dog transfers the keeping of the dog to a person who resides in a City or county other than the City or county in which the license was issued. [Amended by 1953 c.27 §2; 1959 c.374 §1; 1969 c.677 §1; 1973 c.655 §4; 1977 c.189 §10; 1977 c.802 §8; 1987 c.240 §1; 1999 c.658 §§10,10a; 2001 c.753 §13; 2007 c.70 §280]

        Q.    609.105 Exemption for assistance animals. Notwithstanding ORS 609.015 or 609.100, a county or City shall not charge a fee to license a dog used as an assistance animal as defined in ORS 346.680. [1979 c.366 §1; 1991 c.67 §155; 1999 c.658 §11; 2001 c.104 §238]

        R.     609.110 Dog License Fund. All funds derived under ORS 433.340 to 433.385 and 609.035 to 609.110 shall be turned over to the county treasurer, who shall keep them in a fund to be known as the Dog License Fund, to be expended as provided for by law. At the end of a fiscal year any amount of money in the fund determined by the county governing body to be in excess of the requirements of the Dog License Fund may be placed in the general fund of the county. [Amended by 1963 c.309 §1; 1969 c.677 §2; 1973 c.655 §5; 1977 c.189 §11]

        S.     609.115 Liability for injury or property damage caused by potentially dangerous dog.

        (1)    As used in this section, “keeper” and “potentially dangerous dog” have the meanings given those terms in ORS 609.035.

        (2)    Except as provided in subsection (3) of this section, if a court has determined under ORS 609.990 that a dog is a potentially dangerous dog, and subsequent to that determination the dog causes physical injury to a person or damage to real or personal property, the keeper of the dog is strictly liable to the injured person or property owner for any economic damages resulting from the injury or property damage.

        (3)    Subsection (2) of this section does not apply if a physical injury is to a person provoking the dog or assaulting the dog’s keeper or to a person who trespasses upon premises from which the keeper may lawfully exclude others. [2005 c.840 §1]

        T.     609.990 Penalties for ORS 609.060, 609.095, 609.098, 609.100, 609.169 and 609.405; disposition of dog by court.

        (1)    Violation of ORS 609.060 (2), 609.100 or 609.169 is a Class B violation.

        (2)    Maintaining a public nuisance in violation of ORS 609.095(2) or (3) is punishable by a fine of not more than $250.

        (3)    (a)    Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this subsection, violation of ORS 609.098 is a Class        A misdemeanor.

        (b)    If a dog kills a person, violation of ORS 609.098 is a Class C felony.

        (c)    If a keeper violates ORS 609.098, the court shall order the dangerous dog killed in a humane manner.

        (4)    Violation of ORS 609.405 constitutes a Class C misdemeanor.

        (5)    In addition to any fine or sentence imposed under this section, a court may order a person who violates ORS 609.060(2), 609.095, 609.098, 609.100, 609.169 or 609.405 to pay restitution for any physical injury, death or property damage caused by the dog as a result of the keeper’s violation of ORS 609.060(2), 609.095, 609.098, 609.100, 609.169 or 609.405. The court may also order the person to pay the cost of keeping the dog in impoundment.

        (6)    In addition to any fine imposed or restitution ordered of a keeper for a violation of ORS 609.060(2), 609.095, 609.100, 609.169 or 609.405, the court may impose reasonable restrictions on the keeping of the dog to ensure the safety or health of the public. The keeper must pay the cost of complying with reasonable restrictions. As used in this subsection, “reasonable restrictions” may include, but is not limited to, sterilization. If the dog is a potentially dangerous dog, the court may order the dog killed in a humane manner. In determining whether to have the dog killed, the court shall give consideration to the factors described in ORS 609.093 and issue written findings on those factors.

        (7)    Notwithstanding ORS 19.270 and 19.330, subject to periodic advance payment of the cost of keeping the dog in impoundment, the killing of a dog pursuant to an order under subsection (3) or (6) of this section may not be carried out during the period that the order is subject to the appeal process. Unless otherwise ordered by the Court of Appeals, the dog may be killed during the appeal period if the keeper fails to maintain advance payment of the cost of keeping the dog impounded.

        (8)    If a court orders a dog killed under subsection (6) of this section and the keeper does not make the dog available for that purpose, the court may issue a search warrant for a property upon probable cause to believe that the dog is located at that property. [Amended by 1963 c.237 §2; 1965 c.499 §2; 1967 c.495 §3; 1973 c.655 §6; 1977 c.802 §13; subsection (3) enacted as 1985 c.289 §2(3); 1999 c.658 §§12,12a; 1999 c.1051 §§208,322b; 2001 c.636 §11; 2005 c.840 §8]

(Ord. 2009-01 §1)

Chapter 6.08 FARM ANIMALS
6.08.010 Running at large prohibited.
        No person owning or having possession or control of any chicken, pigeon, duck, turkey, geese or any domestic fowl shall intentionally, knowingly, or negligently allow such fowl to run at large or remain at large upon any street, alley, park, public place, or property, other than that of the owner or lawful possessor of such fowl. (Ord. 1980-11 §1)

 

6.08.020 Keeping within 100 feet of residences prohibited.
        No person shall keep or maintain any horse, mule, cow, sheep, goat, swine or other similar animal within a distance of 100 feet of any residence or dwelling occupied by one or more persons. For the purposes of this section, “any horse” does not include miniature horses. In order to be considered a miniature horse under this provision, a horse’s height (at its last mane hairs) cannot exceed 38 inches. (Ord. 2001-07 §1; Ord. 1980-11 §1)

 

6.08.030 Accumulation of manure or other wastes prohibited.
        Any person owning or keeping a horse, mule, cow, sheep, goat, poultry, domestic fowl, or other animal within the City shall not permit accumulation of manure or other animal wastes upon the premises in such amounts or for such a length of time as to cause an odor noticeable to persons on abutting real property or public streets and rights-of-way. (Ord. 1980-11 §3)

 

6.08.040 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by imprisonment for not more than 30 days or by a fine not to exceed $100.00, or both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1980-11 §4)

Title 7 (RESERVED)

Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 8.03 ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
Chapter 8.04 EXPLOSIVES
Chapter 8.05 NUISANCE ABATEMENT
Chapter 8.06 CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY
Chapter 8.07 GRAFFITI PROPERTY PUBLIC NUISANCE
Chapter 8.08 GARBAGE COLLECTION FRANCHISE
Chapter 8.09 RECYCLING
Chapter 8.10 DUTIES AND LIABILITIES OF ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS REGARDING STREET TREES
Chapter 8.12 ALARM SYSTEMS

Chapter 8.03 ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
8.03.010 Purpose.
        A.    This chapter is to provide a method (cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy(ies) available to the City by law) whereby buildings or structures which from any cause endanger the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the general public or the building’s occupants such that they should be required to be repaired, vacated or demolished.

        B.     This chapter does not create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms hereof. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.015 Scope.
        This chapter shall apply to all “dangerous buildings and structures” as herein defined be they now in existence or which may hereafter become dangerous buildings or dangerous structures in the City. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.020 Alterations, additions and repairs.
        All buildings or structures required to be repaired under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code as it currently exists or may hereafter be amended and adopted by the City. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.025 Administration.
        The Building Official is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Building Official shall have the power to render interpretations of this chapter and to adopt and enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.030 Inspections.
        The Building Official and other government officials such as the Fire Marshal and Clackamas County Health Department officials are authorized to make such inspections and take such other actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including (but not limited to) the issuance of stop work or similar abatement orders. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.035 Right of entry.
        A.    When necessary to make an inspection to enforce the requirements imposed by the terms of this chapter (or when the Building Official has reasonable cause to believe there exists in a building or upon a premises a condition contrary to or in violation of this chapter making the building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous) the Building Official may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this chapter, provided that if such building or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested.

        B.     If such building or premises be unoccupied, the Building Official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person(s) having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the Building Official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.040 Dangerous buildings declared to be public nuisances—Abatement.
        All buildings or portions thereof determined after inspection by the Building Official to be dangerous as defined in this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this chapter. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.045 Violations.
        It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.050 Inspections of work.
        All buildings or structures within the scope of this chapter and all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the Building Official consistent with and in the manner provided by this chapter and the currently adopted Oregon Structural Specialty Code and other relevant provisions of municipal, county or state law. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.055 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in either this chapter or as specified in the Building Code or the Housing Code. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used.

        A.    “Building Official” is the City’s Building Official or such other person as may be designated as such by the Building Official or City Manager, and may include the County Building Official if that person has been designated the City’s Building Official by Intergovernmental Agreement or otherwise.

        B.     “Building Code” has the meaning given by the terms of ORS 455.010 to “State Building Code” and includes all specialty codes as defined in ORS 455.010.

        C.     “City” means the City of Molalla, Oregon.

        D.    “City Manager” means the Molalla City Manager or designate.

        E.     “Dangerous building or dangerous structure” is any building or structure having one or more of the conditions or defects hereinafter described provided that such condition(s) or defect(s) exist to the extent that the Building Official, City Manager or their designate(s) can reasonably believe the life, health, property or safety of the public or the building’s or structure’s occupants are endangered:

        1.     Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.

        2.     Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.

        3.     Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one half times the working stress or stresses allowed in the current applicable structural code as defined in ORS Chapter 455 for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.

        4.     Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the Building Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.

        5.     Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property.

        6.     Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one half of that specified in the Building Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the Building Code for such buildings.

        7.     Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction.

        8.     Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of:

        a.     Dilapidation, deterioration or decay;

        b.     Faulty construction;

        c.     The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building;

        d.     The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or

        e.     Any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.

        9.     Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.

        10.   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one third of the base.

        11.   Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33 percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50 percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings.

        12.   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become:

        a.     An attractive nuisance to children;

        b.     A harbor for vagrants and/or criminals; or

        c.     A place so as to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful acts.

        13.   Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the building regulations of this jurisdiction, (as specified in the appropriately adopted Oregon Building Code) or of any law or ordinance of this state or jurisdiction relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings.

        14.   Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting part, member or portion less than 50 percent, or in any supporting part, member or portion less than 66 percent of the: (a) strength; (b) fire-resisting qualities or characteristics; or (c) weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location.

        15.   Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the health officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease.

        16.   Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the Fire Marshal to be a fire hazard.

        17.   Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence.

        18.   Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.

        19.   Whenever a building or structure is effected by one or more health hazards including, but not limited to, inadequate plumbing and/or sanitation, inadequate light and/or ventilation, chemical hazard, toxins, or is otherwise determined to be unfit for human habitation or use.

        20.   Whenever a building contains a fire hazard as defined in the most current edition of the Oregon Fire Code that creates an immediate threat to life or fire safety.

        21.   Whenever the accumulation of solid and/or putrescible waste creates a structural, life or fire safety, health or other hazard.

        22.   Whenever an environmental hazard exists that poses an immediate danger to the occupants of a building or where the continued use of a building will cause the environmental hazard to worsen.

        23.   Whenever an occupied building lacks an operational, potable water supply.

        24.   Whenever an occupied building lacks a functioning connection to public sewer or an approved and fully operational septic facilities.

        25.   Whenever any other condition exists that creates a significant structural, life or fire safety, health or other hazard that impacts the occupancy or continued use of buildings or structures. In such cases, the health officer or the building official shall cite the specific reason(s) that the building or structure has been determined to be unsafe. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.060 Commencement of proceedings.
        When the Building Official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building and has found and determined that such building is a dangerous building, the Building Official or City Manager has the authority to cause commencement of proceedings to effect the repair, vacation or demolition thereof. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.065 Notice and order.
        When the Building Official or the Building Official’s designate has inspected, caused to be inspected, or received a sufficient amount of verifiable information about any building and has found and determined that such building is a dangerous building, the Building Official or the Building Official’s designate shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation or demolition of the building.

        A.    Notice and Order. The Building Official shall issue a notice and order directed to the record owner of the building. The notice and order shall contain:

        1.     The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the building is located.

        2.     A statement that the Building Official has found the building to be dangerous with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the building dangerous under the provisions of Section 8.03.055 of this chapter.

        3.     A statement of the action required to be taken as determined by the Building Official.

        a.     If the Building Official has determined that the building or structure must be repaired, the order shall require that all required permits must be secured therefor and the work physically commenced within such time (not to exceed 60 days from the date of the order) and completed within such time as the Building Official shall determine is reasonable under all of the circumstances.

        b.     If the Building Official has determined that the building or structure must be vacated, the order shall require that the building or structure shall be vacated within a time certain from the date of the order as determined by the Building Official to be reasonable.

        c.     If the Building Official has determined that the building or structure must be demolished, the order shall require that the building be vacated within such time as the Building Official shall determine is reasonable (not to exceed 60 days from the date of the order); that all required permits be secured therefor within 60 days from the date of the order; and that the demolition be completed within such time as the Building Official shall determine is reasonable.

        4.     Statements advising that if any required repair or demolition work (without vacation also being required) is not commenced within the time specified, the Building Official:

        a.     Will order the building vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed; and

        b.     May proceed to cause the work to be done and charge the costs thereof against the property or its owner.

        5.     Statements Advising.

        a.     That any person having any record title or legal interest in the building may appeal from the notice and order or any action of the Building Official to the Municipal Court provided the appeal is made in writing as provided in this chapter and filed with the Building Official within 14 days from the date of service of such notice and order; and

        b.     That failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all right to a hearing and determination of the matter.

        C.     Method of Service. Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each such person at their address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or as known to the Building Official. If no address of any such person so appears or is known to the Building Official, then a copy of the notice and order shall be so mailed, addressed to such person, at the address of the building involved in the proceedings. The failure of any such person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section. Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of mailing. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.070 Recordation of notice and order.
        A.    Where the Building Official, the City Manager or their designate has determined that a building or structure constitutes an immediate danger to the life, limb, property, or safety of the public, the Building Official may record with the County a certificate describing the property and certifying that:

        1.     The building is a dangerous building; and

        2.     The owner has been so notified.

        B.     If the building or structure does not constitute an immediate danger to the life, limb, property, or safety of the public, and if the property owner does not obtain compliance with the order within the time specified therein, and no appeal has been properly and timely filed, the Building Official may record with the County a certificate describing the property and certifying that:

        1.     The building is a dangerous building; and

        2.     The owner has been so notified.

        C.     Whenever the corrections ordered shall thereafter have been completed or the building demolished so that it no longer exists as a dangerous building on the property described in the certificate, the Building Official shall file a new certificate with the county certifying that the building has been demolished or all required corrections have been made so that the building is no longer dangerous, whichever is appropriate. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.075 Repair, vacation and demolition.
        A.    Any building or structure declared a dangerous building or structure under this chapter shall be made to comply with one of the following:

        1.     The building or structure shall be repaired in accordance with the current State Building Code or other current code applicable to the type of substandard conditions requiring repair; or

        2.     The building or structure shall be demolished consistent with subsection D below.

        B.     If the building or structure does not constitute an immediate danger to the life, limb, property or safety of the public it may be vacated, secured and maintained against entry.

        C.     If the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or the building’s occupants, it shall be ordered vacated, secured and maintained against entry.

        D.    If a building or structure is found to be or becomes dangerous and if (in the opinion of the Building Official) the building or structure is not, under current circumstances likely to be repaired so as to be habitable within 120 days, it may be ordered demolished by the Building Official with the cost thereof borne by the owners. In the event the Building Official determines that a building is to be demolished, the Building Official shall make a written order which includes the circumstances supporting demolition. The order shall be served on all persons entitled to notice under Section 15.08.070 and is subject to a 21-day appeal consistent with the provisions of Section 15.08.100. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.080 Notice to vacate—Posting.
        Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served shall be posted at or upon each exit of the building and shall be in substantially the following form:

 

DO NOT ENTER

UNSAFE TO OCCUPY

It is unlawful to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice.

 

______________________

Building Official

City of Molalla, Oregon

(Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.085 Compliance with notice to vacate.
        A.    Whenever such notice is posted, the Building Official shall include a notification thereof in the notice and order issued under Section 8.03.065 reciting the emergency and specifying the conditions which necessitate the posting.

        B.     No person shall remain in or enter any building which has been so posted except that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such building under permit.

        C.     No person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until the required repairs, demolition or removal have been completed and all lawful requirements been met. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.090 Form of appeal.
        A.    Any person entitled to service under Section 8.03.065 may appeal from any notice and order or any action of the Building Official under this chapter by filing with the Municipal Court a written appeal containing:

        1.     A heading in the words: “Before the Municipal Court of the City of Molalla, Oregon.”

        2.     A listing of the names of all appellants participating in the appeal along with a brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each appellant in the building or the land involved in the notice and order.

        3.     A brief statement concerning the basis for the appeal together with any material fact(s) claimed to support those contentions and why the protested order or action should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside.

        4.     The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official mailing addresses.

        5.     The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at least one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.

        B.     The appeal shall be filed within 14 days of the date of service of the Building Official’s order or action; however if the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or adjacent property and is ordered vacated and is posted in accordance with Section 8.03.080, such appeal shall be filed not later than 10 days from the date of the service of the notice and order of the Building Official. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.095 Scheduling appeal for hearing.
        As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the Municipal Court shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal. Such date shall not be less than 10 nor more than 60 days from the date the appeal was filed. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the Court either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the address shown on the appeal. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.100 Effect of failure to appeal.
        Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.03.090 shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing and adjudication of the notice and order or any portion thereof. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.105 Scope of appeal hearing—Stay of order.
        A.    Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.

        B.     Except for vacation orders made pursuant to Section 8.03.075, enforcement of any notice and order of the Building Official issued under this chapter shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.110 Form of notice of hearing to appellant.
        The notice to the appellant(s) shall be substantially in the following form:

 

“You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before the Molalla Municipal Court on the ___ day of _________, 20___ at the hour ___________ upon the notice and order served upon you for alleged violation(s) of Chapter 8.03 (Dangerous Buildings) of the Molalla Municipal Code. You may be present at the hearing. You may be, but need not be, represented by counsel. You may present relevant evidence and will be given full opportunity to examine all witnesses.”

(Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.115 Record.
        A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape recording or by any other means of permanent recording determined to be appropriate by the court. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.120 Conduct of hearings.
        Hearings need not be conducted according to the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Oral evidence shall be taken on oath or affirmation. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in Oregon. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in Oregon. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.125 Rights of parties.
        The City and the appellant(s) shall be able:

        A.    To call and examine witnesses on matters relevant to the issues of the hearing;

        B.     To introduce documentary and physical evidence;

        C.     To cross-examine opposing witnesses;

        D.    To rebut evidence; and

        E.     To be represented by anyone lawfully permitted to do so. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.130 Official notice.
        In reaching a decision, official notice may be taken (either before or after submission of the case for decision) of any fact which may be judicially noticeable by Oregon courts. Parties present at the hearing shall be informed of the matters to be noticed which is to be noted in the record. Parties present at the hearing shall be given a reasonable opportunity to refute the noticed matters by evidence or by written or oral presentation of authority. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.135 Inspection of the premises.
        The Court may inspect any building or structure involved in an appeal during the course of the hearing provided that: notice of such inspection shall be given the parties before the inspection is made; the parties are given an opportunity to be present during the inspection; and, the judge shall state for the record after said inspection the material facts observed and the conclusions drawn therefrom. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.140 Form of decision—Judicial review.
        With appeals heard by the Municipal Court, the Court shall within a reasonable time (not to exceed 90 days from the date the hearing is closed) prepare a written decision which shall contain findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented and the requirements, if any, to be complied with. The effective date of the decision shall be as stated therein. A copy of the decision shall be delivered to the City and appellant by regular mail, postage prepaid.

        Judicial review of the Court’s decision shall be by any court of competent jurisdiction by way of writ of review as provided for in ORS 34.010 to ORS 34.100. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.145 Enforcement of orders.
        After any order of the Building Official or Municipal Court made pursuant to this chapter has become final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order. If, the person to whom such order is directed fails neglects or refuses to comply with said order, the Building Official may take any and all actions deemed by him or her, in consultation with the City Manager and City Attorney to be appropriate including the filing of supplementary enforcement or compliance action(s) in a court of competent jurisdiction. The City has the right to recover reasonable attorney and expert fees in any such action. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.150 Failure to commence work.
        Whenever the required repair or demolition is not commenced within 30 days after any final notice and order issued under this chapter becomes effective:

        A.    The Building Official shall cause the building described in such notice and order to be vacated by posting at each entrance thereto a notice reading:

 

DANGEROUS BUILDING

DO NOT OCCUPY

It is unlawful to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice.

 

______________________

Building Official

City of Molalla, Oregon

 

        B.     No person shall occupy any building which has been posted as specified in this section. No person shall remove or deface any such notice so posted until the repairs, demolition or removal ordered by the Building Official have been completed and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the Building Code.

        C.     The Building Official may in addition to any other remedy herein provided, cause the building to be repaired to the extent necessary to correct the conditions which render the building dangerous as set forth in the notice and order; or, if the notice and order required demolition, to cause the building to be sold and demolished or demolished and the materials, rubble and debris therefrom removed and the lot cleaned. Any such repair or demolition work shall be accomplished and the cost thereof paid and recovered in the manner provide for the collective of assessment or nuisance liens under state statute or city code. Any surplus realized from the sale of any such building or from the demolition thereof, over and above the cost of demolition, administrative costs and of cleaning the lot shall be paid over to the person or persons lawfully entitled thereto. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.155 Extension of time to perform work.
        Upon receipt of an application from the person required to conform to the order and by agreement of such person to comply with the order if allowed additional time, the Building Official may grant extensions of time, in increments of 60 additional days, within which to complete said repair, rehabilitation or demolition, if the Building Official determines that such an extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property. The Building Official’s authority to extend time is limited to the physical repair, rehabilitation or demolition of the premises and will not in any way affect the time to appeal the notice and order. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.160 Interference with repair or demolition work prohibited.
        No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of this jurisdiction or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any building which has been ordered repaired, vacated or demolished under the provisions of this chapter; or with any person to whom such building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the City, person having an interest or estate in such building or structure, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and repairing, or demolishing any such building, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or in per-forming any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

 

8.03.165 Remedies not exclusive.
        None of the remedies described in this chapter are exclusive and the City may pursue any other remedies available to it including, but not limited to, commencing a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction. The City has the right to recover reasonable attorney and expert fees in any such action. (Ord. 2017-05 §1)

Chapter 8.04 EXPLOSIVES
8.04.010 Keeping within City prohibited.
        It is unlawful to store or keep any dynamite, nitroglycerin, giant powder, or other explosives other than gunpowder within the City of Molalla. (Ord. 160 §1, 1939)

 

8.04.020 Gunpowder—Storage restriction.
        It is unlawful to store or keep gunpowder in excess of one pound within the City of Molalla; provided, that not more than five pounds of gunpowder may be kept in closed metal canisters in a storeroom or wareroom away from artificial heat or light; and, provided further, that not more than 50 pounds of gunpowder may be kept if in a magazine made of fireproof material or of wood covered with sheet iron and mounted on wheels, and kept securely locked, except when necessarily opened for use by authorized persons, and not more than 1,000 blasting caps in a similar but separate magazine. Said magazine shall be conspicuously labeled “EXPLOSIVES” in red letters at least four inches high. (Ord. 160 §2, 1939)

 

8.04.030 Use of fireworks in parade area.
        It is unlawful for any person to ignite, discharge, or permit to be ignited or discharged, any firework as defined in ORS 480.110(l) or any sparkler or other combustible or explosive device prepared for the purpose of providing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation within 50 feet of any route designated by the City as a parade route, within one hour prior to the commencement of said parade and continuing until 30 minutes after the completion of the parade. (Ord. 1995-2 §1)

 

8.04.040 Use of fireworks in parade area—Violation—Penalty.
        Violation of Section 8.04.050 shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250.00. (Ord. 1995-2 §1)

Chapter 8.05 NUISANCE ABATEMENT
8.05.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:

        A.    “City Manager” means the City Manager or designee.

        B.     “Owner” means the person or persons of record having any legal or equitable interest in property.

        C.     “Person in charge of property” means an agent, occupant, lessee, contract purchaser, tenant, or person other than an owner, having possession or control of the property.

        D.    “Person responsible” is the person responsible for abating a nuisance and shall include the owner and the person in charge of property. (Ord. 2007-09B §2)

 

8.05.020 Declaration of nuisances.
        A.    The acts, conditions, or objects specifically described in this chapter are declared to be public nuisances and the City Manager may abate them by the non-exclusive remedies provided in this chapter.

        B.     In addition to the nuisances specifically described in the chapter, every other act, condition, or object that is determined by the City Council to be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the City is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the non-exclusive remedies provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2007-09B §2)

 

8.05.030 Nuisances affecting public health.
        No owner or person in charge of property may permit or cause to occur a nuisance affecting public health. As used in this section, a “nuisance affecting public health” includes the following:

        A.    Air Quality Violations. An Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, Air Quality Division Notice of Noncompliance that coincides with a geographic incidence patters of atypical respiratory health issues experienced by persons within a close vicinity to the property.

        B.     Odor. Premises or substances that are in such a state as to cause an offensive odor or which are in an unsanitary condition.

        C.     Noise. No person shall conduct or maintain any condition, activity, operation or vocation that causes noise offensive to the public under Chapter 9.13 of the Molalla City Code.

        D.    Solid Wastes. Accumulation or storage of solid wastes (as defined by Section 8.08.020(J) of the Molalla Municipal Code) located on private property that are not removed within a reasonable time and that affect the health, safety or welfare of the City.

        E.     Privies. Open vaults or privies constructed and maintained within the City, except those constructed or maintained in connection with construction projects in accordance with appropriate Oregon Department of Human Services, Public Health Division Regulations.

        F.     Stagnant Water. Stagnant water that affords a breeding place for mosquitoes and other insect pests.

        G.    Dust. No person shall conduct or maintain any condition, activity, operation or vocation upon private property that causes dust to visually obscure a public right-of-way with the effect of slowing traffic flow or damage surrounding private property, real or personal.

        H.    Water Pollution. Pollution of a body of water, well, spring, stream or drainage ditch by sewage, industrial waste or other substances placed in or near such water in a manner that will cause harmful material to pollute the water.

        I.      Surface Drainage or Release. Drainage of liquid waste from private premises or drainage or release of impounded rainwater, ice or snow from private premises onto or across a street or sidewalk.

        J.      Building Material. Lumber, wood, sawdust, bricks, sand, gravel and other building materials not stored off the ground or which is stored in a manner so as to invite rats or other rodents to nest therein. To include a residential zone or side yard visible from the public right-of-way.

        K.    Sanitation. A business or residence that is kept or maintained in such a condition as to permit rats, rodents, vermin, or other pests to burrow or live therein. (Ord. 2008-12 §1; Ord. 2007-09B §2)

 

8.05.040 Nuisances affecting public safety.
        No owner or person in charge of property may permit or cause a nuisance affecting public safety. As used in this section, a “nuisance affecting public safety” includes the following:

        A.    Garbage Removal. The person in charge of each business establishment or dwelling unit within the City is responsible for removing refuse, garbage, trash and combustible material from the premises on a not less than weekly basis and before it becomes a hazard, nuisance or causes an unsanitary or offensive condition.

        B.     Creating a Hazard. No person shall create a hazard by:

        1.     Maintaining or leaving in a place accessible to children a container with a door or lid which blocks or fastens automatically when closed and that cannot be easily opened from the inside;

        2.     Being the person responsible for property upon which there is a well, cistern, cesspool, excavation, or other hold of a depth of four feet or more and a top width of 12 inches or more, and failing or refusing to cover or fence it with suitable protective construction; and

        3.     Maintaining filth, rubbish, waste material, and any other substance that may endanger or injure neighboring property, passerby, or the public. All persons must keep the sidewalk and their side of any adjacent street or streets immediately abutting their property free from earth, rock, and other debris and from projecting or overhanging bushes, brush, and dead and decaying trees and limbs that might obstruct or render unsafe the passage of persons or vehicles.

        C.     Outdoor Burning. The City declares outdoor offensive burning to be a nuisance affecting the public safety of the residents of the City of Molalla. It is unlawful for any person to burn, dump, collect, remove or in any other manner accumulate or dispose of garbage upon any street, alley, public place or private property within the City. Wastepaper, rubbish, and debris, brush, grass, wood and cuttings from trees may be burned in furnaces outside fireplaces or incinerators on private property. Such materials may be burned in open fires only upon permit issuance from the Fire Chief. Paper, cardboard, and wood containers in commercial quantities may not be burned. It shall always be unlawful to burn within the City any wet garbage or other substance which creates fowl or obnoxious odors.

        D.    Attractive Nuisances. No owner or person in charge of property may permit:

        1.     Unguarded machinery, equipment or other devices on the property that is attractive, dangerous and accessible to children.

        2.     Lumber, logs or pilings placed or stored on the property in a manner that is attractive, dangerous and accessible to children.

        3.     An open pit, quarry, cistern or other excavation without erecting appropriate safeguards or barriers to prevent the places from being used by children.

        4.     This section does to apply to permitted construction projects if safeguards are maintained designed to prevent injury or death to children.

        E.     Open Storage of Junk. No owner, tenant, person in possession, or person in charge of or having the care of any real property, may deposit, store, maintain or keep on any real property within the City, (outside a site-obscuring enclosure, building or garbage receptacle) any of the following:

        1.     Inoperable, unusable, partially dismantled automobiles, cars, trucks, trailers and other vehicular equipment or parts thereof in a state of disrepair for more than 10 days as to any one automobile, car, truck, trailer or piece of vehicular equipment.

        2.     Used or dismantled household appliances, furniture or parts thereof, or discards, garbage, debris, rubbish, junk, trash or refuse for more than five days.

        3.     This section does not apply to junk kept in a duly licensed recycling facility or automobile wrecking business, or to a business offering new or used vehicles for sale or offering vehicle repair service, or to those materials reasonably necessary during a reasonable time on construction sites.

        F.     Rubbish. No person shall throw, dump or deposit upon public or private property injurious or offensive substance(s) or any rubbish, trash, debris, refuse or substance(s) that may mar the appearance, create a stench, detract from the cleanliness or safety of the property, or would be likely to injure an animal, damage a vehicle or harm a person traveling on a public way.

        G.    Noxious Vegetation. An owner or person in charge of property shall cut down, remove or destroy noxious vegetation from their property and extending halfway into the public way abutting the property as often as needed to prevent it from becoming a health or fire hazard, or in the case of weeds or other noxious vegetation, from maturing or from going to seed. For purposes of this section, “noxious vegetation” means:

        1.     Vegetation that is, or is likely to become:

        a.     A health hazard;

        b.     A fire hazard;

        c.     A traffic hazard, because it impairs the view of the public thoroughfare, or otherwise makes use of the thoroughfare hazardous.

        2.     Poison oak (Toxicodendron diversiloba).

        3.     Poison ivy (Toxicodendron radicans).

        4.     Blackberry bushes extending into a public way, pathway frequented by pedestrians, or cross a property line.

        5.     Grass or weeds more than six inches high.

        6.     Scotch broom (Cytisus scoparius), Himalayan blackberry (Rubus procerus), hogwood (Heracleum mantegazzianum), knotweed (Polygonum cuspidatum) and purple loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria).

        7.     All other vegetation included in the Oregon Department of Agriculture Noxious Weed Control Policy and Classification System, found at Oregon Administrative Rule 603-052-1200. (Ord. 2007-09B §2)

 

8.05.050 Abatement notice.
        A.    Upon a determination by the City Manager that a nuisance defined by this chapter or any City ordinance exists, or upon a determination by the City Council that a general nuisance exists, the City Manager may cause a notice to be posted on the premises where the nuisance exists, directing the person responsible to abate the nuisance. The notice will be in substantially the following form:

 

NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE

To the owner, person responsible, and person in charge of the following described real property: ______________________________, in the City of Molalla, Oregon: You are given notice to abate the nuisance existing on the described property within 10 days from the date of this notice. The nuisance consists of: ___________________________________. Alternatively, within 10 days from the date of this notice, you may protest this order by filing written notice with the City of Molalla Administrator stating why you believe that no nuisance exists. If you fail to abate this nuisance within the 10 days, you will be subject to fine and the City of Molalla will abate the nuisance. The fine and costs of such removal or abatement will be charged to the property owner, and may become a lien on the property.

DATED: __________

City Manager

 

        B.     The City Manager or designee shall mail a copy of the abatement notice by first class mail and certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person responsible, directed to the address of such person responsible as is shown in the property records of Clackamas County, and if not the same, also to the address of the property stating that the cost of abatement not paid by the person responsible may be assessed to and become a lien on the property.

        C.     The City Manager shall refer a protest notice to the Municipal Court Judge not later than 30 days after receipt thereof. Notice of the time and place of the Court’s consideration of the matter shall be given to the person filing the notice of protest not less than five days prior to said consideration. At the time set, the person protesting may appear and be heard and the Court will determine whether a nuisance exists. The determination will be entered in the Court’s records.

        D.    If the court determines that a nuisance exists, the person responsible must abate the nuisance within 10 days after such determination. (Ord. 2007-09B §2)

 

8.05.060 Abatement by person responsible.
        A.    Within 10 days after the latter of either the posting or mailing or publishing of the notice as provided in Section 8.05.050, the person responsible shall abate the nuisance or show that no nuisance exists or is likely to reoccur.

        B.     A person responsible who protests that no nuisance exists must file with that protest a written statement stating the basis for protesting the existence of the nuisance not later than 10 days of the date of the mailing of the notice.

        C.     The City Manager shall refer a protest notice to the Municipal Court Judge not later than 30 days after receipt thereof. Notice of the time and place of the Court’s consideration of the matter shall be given to the person filing the notice of protest not less than five days prior to said consideration. At the time set, the person protesting may appear and be heard and the Court will determine whether a nuisance exists. The determination will be entered in the Court’s records.

        D.    If the court determines that a nuisance exists, the person responsible must abate the nuisance within 10 days after such determination. (Ord. 2007-09B §2)

 

8.05.070 Abatement by City.
        A.    If, within the 10 days (or such further time as the City Manager or Municipal Court Judge deem appropriate) the nuisance has not been abated, the City may, through the offices of the City Manager, cause the nuisance to be abated or removed, and the costs reasonably incurred (including costs for staff, contractor, and consultant time) thereby may be charged as an assessment lien upon the property.

        B.     The person charged with removal or abatement of the nuisance has the right at reasonable times to enter into or upon property to investigate or cause the removal of a nuisance, and shall have the authority to dispose of all seized property in any manner deemed suitable and shall, if practical, attempt to obtain salvage value for material which item has a fair market value in excess of $25.00 as determined by said person.

        C.     The City Manager will keep an accurate record of the expenses incurred by the City in abating the nuisance and an additional charge of 20% for administrative overhead. After the removal or abatement of the nuisance, City staff, consultant(s) or other person charged with the abatement on behalf of the City will file a statement of all abatement expenses with the City Manager. (Ord. 2007-09B §2)

 

8.05.080 Assessment of abatement costs.
        A.    Upon receipt of the statement referred to in Section 8.05.070, the City Manager will send, by first class mail and certified mail, return receipt requested, the person responsible a notice stating:

        1.     The total expense of abatement, including the administrative overhead and other costs and materials minus any salvage value pursuant to Section 8.05.070(B).

        2.     That the total expense as stated will be assessed to and become a lien against the property unless paid with 30 days from the date of mailing the notice.

        3.     That for the period until the 30-day notice has lapsed, the City Manager shall temporarily enter the cost of abatement in the City’s lien docket.

        4.     That if the person responsible wants to object to the costs of the abatement as stated, a written statement of objection must be filed with the City Manager not more than 10 days from the date of mailing the notice, setting out in reasonable specificity the basis for any objection to the abatement. If a statement of objection is received, the City Manager shall set the matter for review by the Municipal Court.

        B.     In the event that the certified mail and regular first class mail, postage prepaid, is returned to the City by the postal service, then the code enforcement officer shall post the notice on the property in question or publish the notice two times in a newspaper of general circulation.

        C.     Not later than 60 days from the City Manager’s receipt of an objection, the Municipal Court will hear and determine the objections to the expenses to be assessed. The decision of the Municipal Court on the objections will be final.

        D.    If the costs of the abatement are not paid within 30 days from the date of the notice, or the date the notice was posted or published, whichever is later, or if objections were filed and a hearing by the Municipal Court had, not later than 30 days from the date of the Court’s hearing, an assessment of the costs as stated or as determined by the City Manager or Municipal Court, whichever is appropriate, will be made by resolution of the City Council and entered in the docket of City liens. When the entry is made, the assessment will become an assessment lien upon the property from which the nuisance was removed or abated.

        E.     The lien shall be enforced and collected in the same manner as liens for street improvements, and bear simple interest at the rate of 12% per annum. The interest will begin to run from the date of the entry of the lien in the lien docket.

        F.     An error in the name of the person responsible will not void the assessment, nor will a failure to receive the notice of the proposed assessment render the assessment void. The assessment will remain a valid lien against the property. (Ord. 2007-09B §2)

 

8.05.090 Abatement—Joint responsibility.
        If more than one person is responsible, they shall be jointly and severally liable for abating the nuisance or for the costs incurred by the City in abating the nuisance. (Ord. 2007-09B §2)

 

8.05.100 Abatement—Noxious vegetation.
        Whenever procedures are instituted to abate a nuisance defined under Section 8.05.040(F), the required mailings of notice may be performed by use of ordinary mail. The notice may be supplemented with a statement that the City, for a given fee, will cut the noxious vegetation at the written request of the person responsible. (Ord. 2007-09B §2)

 

8.05.110 Other methods of collection of costs.
        The costs assessed for abatement of a nuisance may be collected pursuant to ORS 30.310 or ORS 30.315. (Ord. 2007-09B §2)

 

8.05.120 Summary abatement.
        A.    The procedures provided by Sections 8.05.050 to 8.05.080 are not exclusive. In addition, the City Manager, Fire Chief, any City police officer, or the City Building Inspector may summarily abate a nuisance that creates an imminent danger to human life or property, after determining that the summary abatement is the only adequate method to reduce or eliminate the danger.

        B.     A person responsible for the nuisance condition shall pay the cost of summary abatement incurred by the City and the property shall be subject to an assessment and placement of a lien in accordance with this chapter.

        C.     When summary abatement is used, notice to the person responsible prior to abatement is not required. Following summary abatement, the City Manager will post upon the property liable for the abatement of the nuisance a notice describing the action taken to abate the nuisance and send a copy of said posted notice by certified mail, return receipt requested to the owner of record of the property as shown by the property records of Clackamas County.

        D.    The term “summary abatement” as used in this chapter means abatement of a nuisance by the City by any act(s) necessary and without prior notice of said abatement to the person responsible.

        E.     When pre-abatement notice cannot be given due to the nature of the nuisance and the necessity for the use of a summary abatement, a person responsible may file a request for a post-abatement protest under Section 8.05.060. (Ord. 2007-09B §2)

 

8.05.130 Civil violation.
        A.    The abatement procedures provided herein are not exclusive, and the Council may authorize the City Attorney to institute and prosecute, on behalf of the City and in its name, an appropriate legal action to enjoin and abate the creation, maintenance of continuance of any nuisance. Such action will seek recover of all City costs and reasonable attorney fees as may be allowed by the court and appellate court.

        B.     Any person affected by a violation of the terms of this chapter may, after giving not less than 10 days written notice by first class and certified mail, return receipt requested to the person responsible or business alleged to be in violation of said provision(s), bring an action to enforce the terms of this chapter in a court of competent jurisdiction. Any person bringing an action to enforce the terms of this chapter may, in the court’s discretion, be entitled to the award of their reasonable attorneys fees and such injunctive or other relief (including damages) as the court deems fair, appropriate, just and equitable. (Ord. 2007-09B §2)

 

8.05.140 Penalties.
        A.    A violation of any provision of this chapter is punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $500.00.

        B.     Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.

        C.     The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for a violation of this chapter, but is an additional remedy. Furthermore, imposition of a penalty under this chapter does not relieve a person of the duty to abate a nuisance. (Ord. 2007-09B §2)

 

8.05.150 Severability.
        If any provision of this chapter, or its application to any person or circumstance, is held to be invalid for any reason, the remainder of the chapter, or the application of its provisions to other persons or circumstances, shall not in any way be affected. (Ord. 2007-09B §2)

Chapter 8.06 CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY
8.06.010 Definitions.
        A.    “Chronic nuisance property” means:

        1.     Property on which three or more nuisance activities exist or have occurred during any 30-day period; or

        2.     Property on which or within 300 feet of which any person associated with the property has engaged in three or more nuisance activities during any 30-day period; or

        3.     Property, that upon request for execution of a search warrant, has been the subject of a determination by a court that there is probable cause that possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses as defined in ORS 167.203, 475.005 through 475.285 and/or 475.940 through 475.995 has occurred within the previous 30 days, and the Chief of Police has determined that the search warrant was based on evidence of continuous or repeated nuisance activities at the property; or

        4.     Property on which continuous or repeated nuisance activities exist or have occurred.

        B.     “Control” means any ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern property or conduct that occurs on a property.

        C.     “Nuisance activities” are defined as any of the following activities, behaviors or conduct:

        1.     “Harassment” as defined in ORS 166.065(1)(a).

        2.     “Intimidation” as defined in ORS 166.155 through 166.165.

        3.     “Disorderly conduct” as defined in ORS 166.025.

        4.     “Assault” or “menacing” as defined in ORS 163.160 through ORS 163.190.

        5.     “Sexual abuse,” “contributing to the delinquency of a minor,” or “sexual misconduct” as defined in ORS 163.415 through ORS 163.445.

        6.     “Public indecency” as defined in ORS 163.265.

        7.     “Prostitution or related offenses” as defined in ORS 167.007 through ORS 167.017.

        8.     “Alcoholic liquor violations” as defined in ORS Chapter 471.105 through 471.482.

        9.     “Offensive littering” as defined in ORS 164.805.

        10.   “Criminal trespass” as defined in ORS 164.243 through 164.265.

        11.   “Theft” as defined in ORS 164.043 through 164.140.

        12.   “Arson or related offenses” as defined in ORS 164.315 through 164.335.

        13.   “Possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses” as defined in ORS 167.203, ORS 475.005, through 475.285, and/or 475.940 through 475.995.

        14.   “Illegal gambling” as defined in ORS 167.117, and/or ORS 167.122 through ORS 167.127.

        15.   “Criminal mischief” as defined in ORS 164.345 through 164.365.

        16.   Any “attempt to commit” (as defined in ORS 161.405), and/or “conspiracy to commit” (as defined in ORS 161.450), any of the above activities, behaviors or conduct.

        17.   “Discharge of a weapon” as defined in Chapter 9.12.

        18.   “Offenses against public peace” as defined in Title 9.

        D.    “Person” means any natural person, agent, association, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity capable of owning, occupying or using property in the City of Molalla.

        E.     “Person associated with” means any person who, on the occasion of a nuisance activity, has entered, patronized, visited, or attempted to enter, patronize or visit, or waited to enter, patronize or visit a property or person present on a property, including without limitation any officer, director, customer, agent, employee, or any independent contractor of a property, person in charge, or owner of a property.

        F.     “Person in charge” means any person, in actual or constructive possession of a property, including but not limited to an owner or occupant of property under his or her ownership or control.

        G.    “Property” means any property, including land and that which is affixed, incidental or appurtenant to land, including but not limited to any business or residence, parking area, loading area, landscaping, building or structure or any separate part, unit or portion thereof, or any business equipment, whether or not permanent. For property consisting of more than one unit, property may be limited to the unit or the portion of the property on which any nuisance activity has occurred or is occurring, but includes areas of the property used in common by all units of property including without limitation other structures erected on the property and areas used for parking, loading and landscaping. (Ord. 2004-01 §1)

 

8.06.020 Violation.
        A.    Any property determined by the Chief of Police to be chronic nuisance property is in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies.

        B.     Any person in charge of property determined by the Chief of Police to be a chronic nuisance property is in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies. (Ord. 2004-01 §1)

 

8.06.030 Procedure.
        A.    When the Chief of Police receives two or more police reports documenting the occurrence of nuisance activities on or within 300 feet of a property, the Chief of Police shall independently review such reports to determine whether they describe the activities, behaviors or conduct enumerated under Section 8.06.010(C)(1)—(18). Upon such a finding, the Chief of Police may notify the person in charge in writing that the property is in danger of becoming chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following information:

        1.     The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the property.

        2.     A statement that the Chief of Police has information that the property may be chronic nuisance property, with a concise description of the nuisance activities that exist, or that have occurred. The Chief of Police shall offer the person in charge an opportunity to propose a course of action that the Chief of Police agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation.

        3.     Demand that the person in charge respond to the Chief of Police within 10 days to discuss the nuisance activities.

        B.     When the Chief of Police receives a police report documenting the occurrence of additional nuisance activity on or within 300 feet of a property after notification as provided by Section 8.06.030(A); or, in the case of chronic nuisance property, as defined in Section 8.06.010(A)(3) or (4), for which notice under Section 8.06.030(A) is not required, the Chief of Police shall notify the person in charge in writing that the property has been determined to be a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following information:

        1.     The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the property.

        2.     A statement that the Chief of Police has determined the property to be chronic nuisance property with a concise description of the nuisance activities leading to his/her determination.

        3.     Demand that the person in charge respond within 10 days to the Chief of Police and propose a course of action that the Chief of Police agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation.

        4.     Service shall be made either personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the person in charge at the address of the property determined to be a chronic nuisance property, or such other place which is likely to give the person in charge notice of the determination by the Chief of Police.

        5.     A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner at the address shown on the tax rolls of the county in which the property is located, and/or the occupant at the address of the property, if these persons are different than the person in charge, and shall be made either personally or by certified first class mail, postage prepaid.

        6.     The Chief of Police or his/her delegate shall prepare an affidavit of mailing of notice required under this subsection.

        C.     If the person in charge fails to respond as required by Section 8.06.030(B)(3), the Chief of Police may refer the matter to the City Attorney. Prior to referring the matter to the City Attorney, the notice required by Section 8.06.030(B) shall also be posted at the property.

        D.    If the person in charge responds as required by Section 8.06.030(B)(3) and agrees to abate nuisance activities giving rise to the violation, the Chief of Police may postpone referring the matter to the City Attorney. If an agreed course of action does not result in the abatement of the nuisance activities within 60 days, or, if no agreement concerning abatement is reached within 60 days, the Chief of Police may refer the matter to the City Attorney.

        E.     When a person in charge makes a response to the Chief of Police as required by Section 8.06.030(A)(3) or (B)(3), any conduct or statements made in connection with the furnishing of that response shall not constitute an admission that any nuisance activities have occurred or are occurring. This subsection does not require the exclusion of any evidence that is otherwise admissible or offered for any other purpose.

        F.     The failure of any person to receive notice as provided by Section 8.06.030(A) or (B) shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the proceedings under this chapter. (Ord. 2004-01 §1)

 

8.06.040 Commencement of action—Remedies—Burden of proof.
        A.    The City Attorney may commence legal proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction, including the Molalla Municipal Court or the Clackamas County Circuit Court to abate a chronic nuisance property and to seek closure, the imposition of civil penalties against any or all of the persons in charge thereof, and, any other relief deemed appropriate.

        B.     If the Court determines property to be chronic nuisance property, the Court shall order that the property be closed and secured against all unauthorized access, use and occupancy for a period of not less than six months, no more than one year. The order shall be entered as part of the final judgment. The Court shall retain jurisdiction during any period of closure.

        C.     If the Court determines a property to be chronic nuisance property, the Court may impose a civil penalty of up to $200.00 per day for each day nuisance activities occurred on the property, following notice pursuant to Section 8.06.030(B); or, the cost to the City to abate the nuisance activities at the property, whichever is greater. The amount of the civil penalty shall be assessed against the person in charge and/or the property and may be included in the City’s money judgment.

        D.    If satisfied by the good faith of the person in charge, the Court shall not award civil penalties if the Court finds that the person in charge at all material times could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had become chronic nuisance property.

        E.     In establishing the amount of any civil penalty, the Court may consider any of the following factors and shall cite those found applicable:

        1.     The actions taken by the person in charge to mitigate or correct the nuisance activities at the property;

        2.     The financial condition of the person in charge;

        3.     Repeated or continuous nature of the problem;

        4.     The magnitude or gravity of the problem;

        5.     The cooperation of the person in charge with the City;

        6.     The cost to the City of investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the nuisance activities;

        7.     Any other factor deemed relevant by the Court.

        F.     The City shall have the initial burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the property is chronic nuisance property.

        G.    Evidence of a property’s general reputation and/or the reputation of persons residing in or frequenting it shall be admissible. (Ord. 2004-01 §1)

 

8.06.050 Summary closure.
        Any summary closure proceeding shall be based on evidence showing that nuisance activities exist or have occurred on the property and that emergency action is necessary to avoid an immediate threat to public welfare and safety. Proceedings to obtain an order of summary closure shall be governed by the provisions of ORCP 79 for obtaining temporary restraining orders. In the event of summary closure, the City is not required to comply with the notification procedures set forth in Section 8.06.030(A) and (B). (Ord. 2004-01 §1)

 

8.06.060 Enforcement.
        A.    The Court may authorize the City to physically secure the property against all unauthorized access, use or occupancy in the event that the person in charge fails to do so within the time specified by the Court. In the event the Court authorizes the City to secure the property, the City shall recover all costs reasonably incurred by the City to physically secure the property as provided by this section. The City shall prepare a statement of costs incurred in physically securing the property and the City shall thereafter submit that statement to the Court for its review as provided by ORCP 68.

        B.     The person in charge shall pay reasonable relocation costs of a tenant as defined by ORS 90.100(39), if, without actual notice, the tenant moved into the property after either:

        1.     A person in charge received notice of the determination of the Chief of Police pursuant to Section 8.06.030(B); or

        2.     A person in charge received notice of an action brought pursuant to Section 8.06.050.

        C.     A lien shall be created against the property for the amount of the City’s money judgment. In addition, any person who is assessed penalties under Section 8.06.040(C) and/or costs under Section 8.06.060(A) shall be personally liable for payment thereof to the City. Judgments imposed by this chapter shall bear interest at the statutory rate. (Ord. 2004-01 §1)

 

8.06.070 Attorney fees.
        The Court may, in its discretion, award attorneys’ fees to the prevailing party. (Ord. 2004-01 §1)

Chapter 8.07 GRAFFITI PROPERTY PUBLIC NUISANCE
8.07.010 Definitions.
        The following terms shall mean:

        A.    “Authorized officer” means the Molalla Police Department, Molalla Code Enforcement or any other person expressly authorized by the City Manager.

        B.     “Emergency” means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage demanding immediate attention.

        C.     “Graffiti” means any inscription, word, figure or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted on any real or personal property that is not authorized by persons responsible for the property.

        D.    “Graffiti nuisance property” means property upon which graffiti has been applied, if the graffiti is visible from any public right-of-way or premises open to the public, and if the graffiti has not been removed within 72 hours of its appearance.

        E.     “Person responsible” means the person responsible for abating a nuisance and shall include the owner and the person in charge of property. (Ord. 2008-16 §1)

 

8.07.020 Graffiti prohibited.
        A.    Any person who causes or assists in creating graffiti commits a misdemeanor.

        B.     In addition to penalties provided herein, any person who causes or assists in creating graffiti shall be accountable for actual damages to persons or property in connection with the removal of graffiti and the costs and assessments for City abatement of the nuisance.

        C.     Any persons owning or controlling property that becomes a graffiti nuisance shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies.

        D.    Where graffiti is applied by an un-emancipated minor, the parent, guardian or other person having the legal custody of the minor shall be accountable for actual damages to persons or property in connection with the removal of graffiti and the costs and assessments for City abatement of the nuisance.

        E.     The City Manager is authorized to suspend or postpone enforcement actions provided herein upon a showing by persons subject to subsection C of this section of good cause for failing to remove graffiti in a timely manner due to illness or disability, inclement weather or other extenuating circumstances.

        F.     Persons owning or controlling property shall remove any graffiti from that property within 72 hours of its appearance. (Ord. 2008-16 §1)

 

8.07.030 Abatement.
        Abatement of graffiti nuisances shall be as provided in Sections 8.05.050, 8.05.060, 8.05.070, 8.05.080, 8.05.090 and 8.05.130 of this code. (Ord. 2008-16 §1)

 

8.07.040 Severability.
        In the event any provisions of this chapter shall be held invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not invalidate or render unenforceable any other provision. (Ord. 2008-16 §1)

 

8.07.050 Penalties.
        A.    Violation of Section 8.07.020(A) of this chapter is punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.04, General Penalty.

        B.     Violation of Section 8.07.020(C) is punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $500.00.

        C.     Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.

        D.    The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for a violation of this chapter, but is an additional remedy. Furthermore, imposition of a penalty under this chapter does not relieve a person of the duty to abate a nuisance. (Ord. 2008-16 §1)

Chapter 8.08 GARBAGE COLLECTION FRANCHISE
8.08.010 Purpose.
        It is declared to be the public policy of the City of Molalla to regulate solid waste management and thereby to:

        A.    Protect the public health, safety and welfare.

        B.     Provide comprehensive solid waste service with rates that are reasonable, but adequate to provide necessary public service, and to prohibit rate preferences and other discriminatory practices.

        C.     Provide for resource recovery through franchisee and permit franchisee to cooperate in a county-wide program or any other area-wide program with others franchised by Clackamas County, other cities in the County or by other governmental entities in the Portland metropolitan area to provide solid waste service. (Ord. 2007-01 §1)

 

8.08.020 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter:

        A.    “City” means the City of Molalla, Oregon.

        B.     “Council” means the Molalla City Council.

        C.     “Compensation” means and includes:

        1.     Any type of consideration paid for service, including, but not limited to, rent, and proceeds from resource recovery or recycling and any direct or indirect provision for payment of money, goods, services or benefits by tenants, lessees, occupants or similar persons;

        2.     The exchange of services between persons, including the hauling of solid waste;

        3.     The flow of consideration from the person owning or possessing the solid waste to the person providing service.

        D.    “Franchisee” means Molalla Sanitary Service, Inc.

        E.     “Person” includes, without limitation an individual, partnership, association (incorporated or otherwise), corporation, trust, firm, estate or other legal entity.

        F.     “Recycling” which means any process by which solid waste materials are transformed into new products in such manner that the original products may lose their identity. The process includes collection, transportation, storage and transfer of solid waste and placing the solid waste in the stream of commerce for resource recovery.

        G.    “Resource recovery” means the process of obtaining useful material or energy resources from solid waste. Except as limited by state law this includes:

        1.     “Energy recovery” which means recovery in which all or a part of the solid waste materials are processed to utilize the heat content, or other forms of energy, of or from the material.

        2.     “Material recovery” which means any process of obtaining from solid waste, by pre-segregation or otherwise, materials which still have useful physical or chemical properties after serving a specific purpose and can, therefore, be reused or recycled for the same or other purpose.

        H.    “Reuse” which means the return of a commodity into the economic stream for use in the same kind of application as before without change in its identity. Nothing in this definition shall authorize a use not in conformity with the comprehensive plan zoning ordinance or development regulations of the City.

        I.      “Service” means the collection, transportation, storage, transfer, disposal of or resource recovery of solid waste, including solid waste management.

        J.      “Solid waste” means:

        1.     All useless and discarded putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, as defined by ORS 459.005(24) (2005), including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, refuse, ashes, waste paper, cardboard, grass clippings, compost, scrap metal, glass, storage pallets, equipment and furniture, demolition and construction debris, inoperative vehicles, vehicle parts, except (as excluded below) inoperative home or industrial appliances or machinery (or parts thereof), manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes or infectious wastes as defined in ORS 459.386(4) (2005), but the term does not include:

        a.     Hazardous wastes as defined in ORS 466.005(7)(2005);

        b.     Sewer sludge and septic tank and cesspool pumping, chemical toilet waste and other sludge;

        c.     Beverage containers defined in ORS 459A.700(2) (2005);

        d.     Material used for fertilizer or for other productive agricultural operations in growing or harvesting crops and the raising of fowls or animals;

        e.     Lead-acid batteries, as defined and regulated by ORS 459.420 through 459.437 (2005);

        f.      Waste tires, as defined and regulated by ORS 459.705 through 459.790 (2005);

        g.     Articles kept in a storage area maintained so as to not constitute a safety, health, or fire hazard and screened from public view by means of a solid fence, trees, shrubbery or other appropriate means;

        h.     Vehicles kept on the premises of a business lawfully engaged in wrecking and junking of vehicles.

        2.     The fact that materials that would otherwise come within the definition of “solid waste” may from time to time have value and thus be used or usable does not preclude such materials from this definition.

        K.    “Solid waste management” means the prevention or reduction of solid waste; management of the storage, transfer, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing and final disposal of solid waste; resource recovery from solid waste; and facilities used for those activities.

        L.     “Source separation” means the separation or setting aside of waste, by the source generator or producer of the waste, for recycling or reuse.

        M.    “Total source separation” means the complete separation by the source generator or producer of the waste by type or kind of waste from all other types or kinds of waste. Total source separation requires each type or kind of recyclable material (such as newsprint, computer paper, cardboard, glass, ferrous cans and aluminum cans) to be distinctly separated into a separate package, container or stack in preparation for collection. For example, newspaper, cardboard, glass, ferrous cans and waste wood are each placed in a separate container and no two or more recyclables are mixed in the same container.

        N.    “Waste” means material that is no longer wanted or usable by the source, the source generator or producer of the material and the material is to be disposed of or resource-recovered by another person and includes both source-separated material and non-source-separated materials. (Ord. 2007-01 §1)

 

8.08.030 Franchise authority.
        A.    Pursuant to ORS 459A.085 (2005), the City hereby exercises its franchise authority over the provision of service and solid waste management within its boundaries. The franchise shall be the exclusive right, privilege and franchise to provide service (as that term is defined above) within the City. For purposes of the franchise, franchisee shall have the exclusive right to use the public rights-of-way of the City. Except as otherwise provided elsewhere in this chapter, no other person shall provide, offer to provide, or advertise for the performance of service for any person on any property in the City.

        B.     The exclusive right, privilege and franchise to provide service within the City limits of the City is granted to Molalla Sanitary Service, Inc., the terms and conditions of which are set out in this chapter.

        C.     Except as provided in Section 8.08.040, no person other than franchisee shall:

        1.     Collect, reload, process, compact, sort or transport solid waste generated within the City;

        2.     Take, process, sort, transfer, compact or remove (whether for recycling, reuse or otherwise) waste or solid waste materials place out for collection;

        3.     Enter or interfere with any solid waste container or remove any such container or its contents from the location where the same has been placed by the person producing the contents of container. (Ord. 2007-01 §1)

 

8.08.040 Franchise exceptions.
        The exclusive right, privilege, and franchise for service granted under Section 8.08.030 is subject to the following exceptions:

        A.    A person may engage in the collection of source-separated materials for recycling or resource recovery but only for the purpose of raising funds for a charitable, civic or benevolent activity under the following conditions:

        1.     Such activity shall be conducted in accordance with the terms and under the conditions contained in this chapter, regulations adopted hereunder, and with notice submitted to the City as required.

        2.     Prior written notice of such activity shall be prepared and signed by the person intending to engage in such activity (or an authorized representative) and delivered to the City Manager (with a copy to the franchisee) which notice shall specify the geographic areas and times in which such activities are intended to take place.

        3.     Regulations may be adopted to administer these provisions.

        B.     A person may transport solid waste, which such person produces, directly to an authorized disposal site or recycling or resource recovery facility. However, the solid waste produced by a tenant, licensee, occupant or person other than the owner of the leased, occupied or licensed premises shall be considered produced by the tenant, licensee, occupant or person and not produced by the landlord or property owner. Therefore, except as provided in this chapter, no person shall provide service for compensation to any tenant, lessee or occupant of any property of such person, and the landlord or property owner shall provide service through the franchisee.

        C.     A person may contract with the state or a federal agency to provide service to such agency under a written contract with such agency.

        D.    A person may engage in the practice of towing or otherwise removing damaged, discarded or abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, so long as such activity is conducted in compliance with applicable state and local laws.

        E.     A person may engage in the practice of pumping, transporting, and disposal of septic tank and cesspool pumpings or other sludge, provided such activity is conducted in compliance with applicable state law.

        F.     A person who engages in an occupation (such as gardener, landscaper, groundskeeper or construction contractor) for a property owner or tenant in the City and who thereby produces as a result of such work small volumes of solid waste may transport such solid waste in such person’s own equipment where the solid waste produced is incidental to the particular job the person is performing.

        G.    A person may collect and dispose of tires if that person has been issued a waste tire carrier permit by DEQ pursuant to ORS 459.705 through 459.790, disposes of tires at a licensed repository as set forth in ORS 459.710(2) and otherwise complies with all legal requirements relating to collection and disposal of tires, DEQ regulations and City and county ordinances. (Ord. 2007-01 §1)

 

8.08.050 Franchise—Term.
        A.    Unless grounds exist for suspension, modification or revocation of the solid waste collection franchise under Section 8.08.090, the franchisee shall be considered as a continuing 10-year term. Beginning January 1st of each year, the franchise will be considered renewed for an additional 10-year term unless at least 30 days prior to January 1st of any year, the City notifies franchisee of its intent to terminate the continuing franchise system. Upon the giving of such notice by the City, the franchisee will have a franchise which will be deemed to terminate on the January 1st which is 10 years from the date of the last renewal prior to the notice of termination, unless otherwise mutually agreed upon in writing by franchisee and the City.

        B.     Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City may initiate proceeding for suspension, modification, or revocation of the franchise under Section 8.08.080 at any time. (Ord. 2007-01 §1)

 

8.08.060 Franchisee’s obligations.
        A.    Franchisee shall:

        1.     Provide service throughout the City. All disposal of solid waste shall be at a site in compliance with ORS Chapters 459 and 459A (2005) together with any regulations promulgated there under. Franchisee shall observe and comply with all applicable federal, state, county and City laws.

        2.     Maintain commercial general and automobile liability insurance policy for protection of franchisee, the City, its councilors, employees and agents insuring said parties against liability for damages because of injury or death of any person or damage to property (including loss of use thereof) in any way related to franchisee’s operations, provision of service or this franchise with insurance of not less than $1,000,000.00 combined single limit, per occurrence, for injury or death to any person or damage to property.

        a.     Insurance coverage shall (either by provision in the policy or by special endorsement) insure the City, its councilors, employees and agents as additional named insured. Such policies shall contain an agreement waiving the right of such insurers to subrogation against the City, its councilors, officer’s employees and agents.

        b.     Franchisee shall, on or before the first day of the term hereof, furnish the City such policy or policies of insurance (or certificates) evidencing the insurance coverage required herein. Said policies or certificates shall provide that coverage may not be canceled, reduced or terminated without at least 30 days prior written notice to City and shall not be invalidated or abrogated by any act, or neglect or breach of contract by franchisee.

        3.     Provide the City Manager (upon request) with details concerning the day of the week and approximate hour of service to the various areas of the City.

        4.     Provide sufficient collection vehicles, containers, facilities, personnel and finances to provide all types of necessary service and solid waste management service or subcontract with others to provide such service pursuant to Section 8.08.120.

        5.     Provide that all vehicles used in the collection or transportation of solid waste be equipped with a leak-proof body of the compactor type. If franchisee uses a specially designed, motorized local collection vehicle for transporting solid waste over short distances from residential or commercial stops to waiting trucks, the container portion of such vehicle shall be equipped with a cover, adequate to prevent scattering of any load. If any pickup truck or open-bed truck is used by the franchisee, the load shall be covered with an adequate cover to prevent scattering of the load. All vehicles shall be operated in conformity with all state and local laws (including licensure and registration) and be equipped in compliance with the motor vehicle laws of the state.

        6.     Provide reasonable and timely response to any written complaint about service.

        7.     Provide the “opportunity to recycle” as said term is defined by ORS 459A.005 (2005).

        8.     Comply with any and all rules and regulations adopted by the Department of Environmental Quality relating to recycling.

        9.     Provide that all substances which may be putrid, spoiled or in a decayed or decaying condition or which emit an odor deleterious to the health or the sense of smell shall be transferred into covered containers;

        10.   Provide that franchisee and its employees shall not engage in any unnecessary trespassing, and that due care shall be exercised to prevent damage to private property, including flowers, shrubs and other plantings by using the regular walks as nearly as practicable while on private property. Care shall also be taken to prevent damage to containers of customers;

        11.   Provide service to City facilities, including City Hall, Molalla Library, Waste Water Treatment Plant, Molalla Senior Center, Molalla Library, Molalla City Shops, Clarke, Long and Fox Parks, BMX Track and Sheets Field at no cost to the City.

        12.   Provide service to the City (at the request of the City Manager) to assist the City in the abatement of any accumulated solid waste nuisances.

        a.     Franchisee shall act as an agent of the City for this purpose and follow the City’s specific instructions as to the location, nature, extent, and procedure for abating nuisance.

        b.     The City shall, to the extent permitted by law, indemnify and hold franchisee harmless from any claim or liability (other than liability arising from franchisee’s fault) arising from franchisee’s actions under this subsection while following City’s specific instructions. Franchisee shall be paid its established rate for providing any service hereunder.

        B.     Franchisee shall not:

        1.     Insofar as possible, give any rate preference to any person, locality or type of solid waste stored, collected, transported, disposed of or resource-recovered. Franchisee may have various classes of rates based upon length of haul, type or quantity of solid waste handled, equipment and manpower necessary to perform the service and location of customers provided the rates are reasonably comparable.

        2.     Transfer this franchise or any portion thereof to other persons without the prior written authorization (in the form of a resolution) of the Council. Such authorization shall not be unreasonably withheld. (Ord. 2007-01 §1)

 

8.08.070 Supervision by City Manager.
        Service provided under this franchise shall be under the supervision of the City Manager. Franchisee shall, at reasonable time, permit inspection of its equipment, facilities, personnel and records as they relate to solid waste management service to the City Manager or designate. (Ord. 2007-01 §1)

 

8.08.080 Franchise—Suspension, modification or revocation.
        A.    If the franchisee refuses to provide adequate service or otherwise comply with the provisions of this chapter (after written notification and a reasonable opportunity to cure is provided by the City) the franchise granted herein may be suspended, modified or revoked by the City consistent with the provisions of subsection B below.

        B.     After written notice from the Council specifying the nature and details of the grounds believed to form the basis for the suspension, modification or revocation, franchisee shall have not less than 60 days from the date of the notice to bring about such change as the Council directs or to show cause why the Council’s belief about the inadequacy of the service is misplaced. If the latter, franchisee may request, in writing, a public hearing before the Council or such other body or person which the Council believes will provide a full and fair hearing and is delegated in writing authority to hold the hearing. At such hearing, the franchisee and other interested persons shall have opportunity to present oral, written or documentary evidence. The Council (or other body or person conducting the hearing) shall have the hearing’s proceedings recorded and any decision as to the modification, suspension or revocation of the franchise shall be based upon the evidence and record presented at the hearing. The decision of the Council (or other body or person conducting the hearing) shall be subject to review solely as provided by ORS 34.010 to 34.100 (2005) and not otherwise. (Ord. 2007-01 §1)

 

8.08.090 Interruption of service.
        In the event Council determines that a failure of service or threatened failure of service by franchisee results in an immediate and serious health hazard and/or threat to the public’s health, safety and welfare, the Council may, after a minimum of 24 hours prior written notice to franchisee and a public hearing (if franchisee so requests) in front of the Council, authorize another person to temporarily provide service as necessary for compensation or to use and operate the land, facilities or equipment of the franchisee. The Council shall return any seized property and business upon abatement of the actual or threatened interruption of service. (Ord. 2007-01 §1)

 

8.08.100 Termination of service.
        Franchisee shall not terminate service to all or a portion of its customers, except:

        A.    When temporary weather conditions render providing service unduly hazardous to franchisee’s employees providing service or when termination is due to accidents or casualties caused by an act of God or a public enemy;

        B.     When street or road access is blocked and there is no readily available alternate route to serve all or a portion of its customers;

        C.     When a customer has not paid for service provided after a regular billing and after a minimum of seven days’ written notice to pay;

        D.    After 30 days’ written notice is given to the Council and to affected customers and approval is obtained from the Council; or

        E.     Upon expiration of the franchise granted franchisee. (Ord. 2007-01 §1)

 

8.08.110 Subcontracts.
        Franchisee may subcontract with others to provide a portion of the services when the franchisee does not have the necessary equipment for such service. Such subcontract shall not relieve franchisee of responsibility for providing and maintaining service or from otherwise complying with this chapter. (Ord. 2007-01 §1)

 

8.08.120 Rates.
        A.    The rates for service under the franchise shall be the rates currently in effect upon adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The rates shall remain in effect until a change in rates is approved by resolution of Council.

        B.     The Council has the authority to and shall establish and change rates for service as considered necessary from time to time or as may be requested by franchisee. The change of rate(s) shall be done by resolution.

        C.     In determining the appropriate rate(s) to be charged by the franchisee for service, the Council shall consider all relevant factors, including the following:

        1.     The cost of providing service by franchisee;

        2.     The anticipated increase in the cost of providing service;

        3.     The need for equipment replacement or the need for additional equipment to meet service needs;

        4.     To effect compliance with federal, state or local law;

        5.     To respond to technological change;

        6.     The investment of franchisee (including the value of the business and the necessity that franchisee have a reasonable rate of return);

        7.     The rates charged in other cities of the county or metropolitan area for similar service;

        8.     The public interest in assuring reasonable rates to enable franchisee’s provision of efficient and beneficial service to residents and other users of the service;

        9.     Local wage scales, cost of management facilities and disposal fees or charges; and

        10.   Profit or cost savings resulting from recycling, and any additional costs resulting from recycling. (Ord. 2007-01 §1)

 

8.08.130 Public responsibility.
        A.    The following requirements shall pertain to service under this chapter:

        1.     Garbage, yard debris and recycling receptacles shall be of standard industry design, convenient for use by the customers and shall comply with applicable federal and state occupational health, safety and other requirements. Sunken refuse cans or containers are prohibited.

        2.     Cans shall be rigid and composed of materials that resist splitting or cracking from changes in weather conditions.

        3.     Customers shall provide safe access to the pickup point to not jeopardize persons or equipment supplying service or the motoring public.

        B.     Residential customers shall place any container to be emptied at curbside (including recycling containers and yard debris containers) within five feet from the location designated by franchisee at the edge of the street, alleyway or other roadway used by franchisee to collect solid waste.

        C.     Notwithstanding the foregoing, franchisee shall collect solid waste from a side or back yard (to which franchisee has been given unobstructed and safe access) of those residential customers who qualify as elderly, disabled or handicapped as designated by City or whom agree to pay a higher rate for non-curbside collection.

        D.    Stationary compactors for handling solid waste shall comply with applicable federal and state safety regulations. No such compactor shall be loaded so as to exceed the safe loading design limit or operation limit of the collection vehicles used by franchisee. A person who wishes services for a compactor shall inquire of franchisee as to compatibility with franchisee’s equipment or equipment which the franchisee is willing to acquire prior to acquisition of any compactor.

        E.     Putrescible solid waste shall be removed from a customer’s premises at regular intervals consistent with OAR 340-093-210 (2007).

        F.     Except as otherwise expressly provided herein, any person who receives service shall be responsible for payment of such service. The property owner of a leased premises shall be responsible for payment of such service if the tenant receiving the service does not or fails to pay for the service. In its discretion, franchisee shall be entitled to adopt a uniform and reasonable policy to require a cash deposit or advance payment for any service to property occupied by non-owners.

        G.    In the event of termination for nonpayment, the franchisee may require advance payment in the future before beginning service to that customer. (Ord. 2007-01 §1)

 

8.08.140 Construction.
        Any finding by any court of competent jurisdiction that any portion of this chapter is unconstitutional or invalid shall not invalidate any other provision of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-01 §1)

 

8.08.150 Prohibited actions.
        No person shall:

        A.    Place or dump or unreasonably accumulate solid waste or waste on private property or upon any of the streets, alleys or public property belonging to the City.

        B.     Unless otherwise provided by this chapter no person other than franchisee shall:

        1.     Do business in the collection, reloading, processing, compacting, sorting or transport of solid waste generated within the City;

        2.     Take, process, sort, transfer, compact or remove (whether for recycling, reuse or otherwise) waste or solid waste materials place out for collection; or

        3.     Enter or interfere with any solid waste container or remove any such container or its contents from the location where the same has been placed by the person producing the contents of container, without first obtaining written consent from franchisee.

        C.     Remove any recyclable material from a container, box, collection vehicle, depot or other receptacle for the accumulation or storage of recyclable materials without permission of the owner of the receptacle and franchisee.

        D.    Mix source-separated recyclable material with solid waste in any vehicle, box, container, or receptacle used in solid waste collection or disposal, except as permitted by the City or the franchisee or in accordance with federal law. (Ord. 2007-01 §1)

 

8.08.160 Enforcement.
        A.    The City may enforce the provisions of this chapter by administrative or civil action as it may deem necessary to obtain compliance with this chapter.

        B.     Franchisee shall (in addition to all other legal rights and remedies it may otherwise possess) have a cause of action for violations of this franchise in any court of competent jurisdiction, including injunctive relief.

        C.     The prevailing party in an action brought under this section shall be entitled to recover their costs (including attorney fees and expert witness fees) at trial and on appeal. (Ord. 2007-01 §1)

 

8.08.170 Reserved.
 

8.08.180 Additional requirements.
        A.    The franchisee, the City and the public shall comply with the provisions of state law, including but not limited to ORS Chapters 459 and 459A, ORS Chapter 654 (Employment Safety and Health), and ORS Chapter 656 (Workers’ Compensation) as well as the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto by the Department of Environmental Quality, the Workers’ Compensation Department, and the State Accident Insurance Fund. The rules for the administration of the Oregon Safe Employment Act and the Oregon Occupational Safety and Health Code shall be complied with.

        B.     The following requirements shall pertain to service under the franchise authorized in this chapter:

        1.     Garbage, yard debris and recycling receptacles shall be of standard industry design, convenient for use by the customers and comply with applicable federal and state occupational health, safety and other requirements. Sunken refuse cans or containers shall be prohibited.

        2.     To protect against injury to employees of the franchisee and to protect against rodent and fire danger, cans shall be rigid and composed of materials that resist splitting or cracking from changes in weather conditions.

        3.     The customer shall provide safe access to the pickup point so as not to jeopardize the persons or equipment supplying service or the motoring public.

        4.     Residential customers shall place the container to be at curbside. For purposes of this section, “curbside” shall mean the placement of refuse containers, including recycling bins and yard debris containers, within five feet from the location designated by the franchisee at the edge of the street, alleyway, or other roadway regularly used by the franchisee to collect solid waste. Notwithstanding this requirement, the franchisee shall collect solid waste from the side, or back yard, to which residential customers shall give the franchisee unobstructed and safe access, of those residential customers who qualify as elderly, disabled or handicapped as defined by the City, or who agree to pay a higher rate for non-curbside collection.

        5.     Stationary compactors for handling solid waste shall comply with applicable federal and state safety regulations. No such compactor shall be loaded so as to exceed the safe loading design limit or operation limit of the collection vehicles used by the franchisee. A person who wishes services for a compactor shall, prior to acquisition of such compactor, inquire of the franchisee as to compatibility with franchisee’s equipment or equipment which the franchisee is willing to acquire.

        6.     Putrescible solid waste shall be removed from the premises of a customer at regular intervals not to exceed seven days in accordance with Oregon Administrative Rules 340-61-070.

        7.     Except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, any person who receives service shall be responsible for payment of said service.

        8.     The franchisee shall be entitled to require a cash deposit or advance payment for any service to property occupied by non-owners.

        9.     In the event of termination for non-payment, the franchisee may require advance payment in the future before beginning service to that customer.

        10.   It shall be unlawful for any person to store solid wastes or wastes, except yard debris, upon any private property for more than seven days. Food and putrescible wastes must be held in rodent-proof containers. (Ord. 2007-09 §3; Ord. 2000-09B §1)

Chapter 8.09 RECYCLING
8.09.010 Definitions.
        A.    “Business” means any entity of one or more persons, corporate or otherwise, engaged in commercial, professional, charitable, political, industrial, educational, or other activity that is nonresidential in nature, including public bodies.

        B.     “Source-separated” or “source-separate” means that the person who last uses recyclable material separates the recyclable material from other solid waste.

        C.     “Recyclable materials” shall include glass, paper, cardboard, plastic bottles and jars, metal cans, scrap metal, cooking oil and motor oil and such other materials as may be so identified by applicable law or regulation in the future. (Ord. 2009-02 §1)

 

8.09.020 Business recycling requirement.
        All businesses within the City shall comply with recycling requirements as set forth in this chapter.

        A.    Businesses shall ensure that recyclable materials are source-separated as follows in separate containers in internal and/or external maintenance or work areas where recyclable materials are collected, stored, or both for regular collection and recycling by the City’s franchised solid waste service provider.

        1.     Glass.

        2.     Co-mingled recyclable paper, cardboard, and plastic bottles and jars, and metal cans.

        B.     Businesses shall post accurate signs that:

        1.     Describe and identify the location where recyclable materials are collected, stored, or both;

        2.     Identify the materials the business must source-separate for reuse or recycling; and

        3.     Provide recycling instructions.

        C.     These requirements do not prohibit businesses from using any recycling service providers to recycle waste oil, grease, or electronic devices such as television sets, printers and computers or other exempted materials as described in Section 8.08.020. (Ord. 2009-02 §1)

 

8.09.030 Assistance and enforcement.
        The City of Molalla shall adopt an intergovernmental agreement assigning responsibility to Clackamas County to provide assistance and tools to businesses to allow them to take full advantages of the integrated solid waste services available to them, and to enforce the provisions of this ordinance within the City of Molalla. (Ord. 2009-02 §1)

Chapter 8.10 DUTIES AND LIABILITIES OF ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS REGARDING STREET TREES
8.10.010 Abutting property owner’s duties regarding street trees.
        A.    Any owner of property that abuts or includes a portion of a public right-of-way shall trim or prune and maintain any tree, bush or similar vegetation planted on the property or right-of-way so that:

        1.     No portion of the tree or bush is less than 14 feet above any roadway or less than eight  feet above any sidewalk or bike path;

        2.     No portion of the tree or bush lies on or in any roadway, sidewalk or bike path;

        3.     No portion of the tree or bush obscures traffic or similar signs planted in the right-of-way;

        4.     No portion of the tree or bush comes into contact or interferes with any telephone, power or similar wires or fixtures.

        B.     No property owner shall allow to stand dead, decaying, or hazardous trees, bushes or limbs thereof that would pose a danger to any person or property within the right-of-way.

        C.     Every property owner shall:

        1.     Maintain the tree or bush in a healthy condition;

        2.     Inspect the tree or bush for insects, disease, defect or hazard;

        3.     Treat or repair the tree or bush, as needed;

        4.     Remove or dispose of the tree or bush, if appropriate;

        5.     Replace the tree as may be required by the City.

        D.    No property owner shall allow the roots of any tree to interfere with sewer or water pipes, or so damage the curb or sidewalk as to cause a hazard. In the event of any of the above, the owner shall bear the expense of repairing the damage, which may include, at the City’s discretion, removal of the tree. (Ord. 1997-1 §1)

 

8.10.020 Abutting property owner’s liabilities regarding street trees.
        A.    Every property owner shall be liable to any person who is injured or otherwise suffers damage by reason of the property owner’s failure to satisfy the obligations of Section 8.10.010. Furthermore, every property owner shall indemnify the City of Molalla for all expenses, including attorney fees, incurred by the City in defense of, or paid by the City in settlement or satisfaction of, any claim, demand, action or suit brought by reason of the property owner’s failure to satisfy the obligations of Section 8.10.010.

        B.     Any act or omission in violation of Section 8.10.010 shall be deemed a nuisance. The violation of any provision of Section 8.10.010 shall constitute a civil infraction, subject to the enforcement procedures of this code. (Ord. 1997-1 §1)

 

8.10.030 Immunity of City.
        No recourse whatsoever shall be had against the City, its Council, employees or agents for damage or loss to person or property arising out of property owner’s negligent or otherwise wrongful maintenance, inspection, treatment, repair, removal, replacement, trimming or pruning of any street tree or bush, or for any act or omission in violation of this ordinance. Nothing in this ordinance shall impose liability upon the City. (Ord. 1997-1 §1)

 

8.10.040 Other remedies of City.
        The City may act to correct a violation of Section 8.10.010, where the property owner is unable or unwilling to correct the violation in a timely and appropriate manner. The City’s employees or agents are authorized to enter the premises to remedy the violation. The City may recover from the property owner the costs of the City’s remedial efforts under this section. (Ord. 1997-1 §1)

Chapter 8.12 ALARM SYSTEMS
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ord. 2002-07.

 

8.12.010 Purpose and scope.
        A.    The majority of alarms to which the Police Department responds are false alarms, which are reported to the police by alarm companies.

        B.     Most false alarms are the result of improper maintenance or improper or careless use of an alarm system.

        C.     The public and police officers can be subjected to needless danger when the Officers are called to respond to false alarms.

        D.    Officers responding to false alarms are not immediately available to carry out other police duties.

        E.     In the interest of using limited police resources most effectively and efficiently, the number of false alarms can and must be reduced.

        F.     The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the potential dangers and inefficiencies associated with false alarms and to encourage alarm companies and property owners to maintain the operational reliability, properly use alarm systems, and to reduce or eliminate false alarm dispatch requests.

        G.    This chapter governs systems intended to summon a police response, establishes fees, fines, establishes a system of administration, sets conditions for the suspension of a police response and establishes a public education and training program. (Ord. 2018-09 §1)

 

8.12.020 Definitions.
        For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

        “Alarm administrator” means the person or persons designated by the Police Department to administer the provisions of this chapter.

        “Alarm agreement” means the legal contract or agreement by and between the alarm installation company and/or monitoring company and the alarm user.

        “Alarm agreement holding company” means the alarm installation company or monitoring company that holds the alarm agreement with the alarm user.

        “Alarm dispatch request” means a notification to the Police Department that an alarm, either manual or automatic, has been activated at a particular alarm site.

        “Alarm installation company” means a person in the business of selling, providing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing an alarm system at an alarm site for compensation, and includes individuals or firms that install and service alarm systems used in a private business or proprietary facility.

        “Alarm registration” means a registration and unique number issued by the alarm administrator to an alarm user, which authorizes the operation of an alarm system.

        “Alarm response manager (ARM)” means a person designated by an alarm installation company and monitoring company to handle alarm issues for the company and act as the primary point of contact for the City’s alarm administrator.

        “Alarm site” means a location served by one or more alarm systems. In a multi-unit building or complex, each unit shall be considered a separate alarm site if served by a separate alarm system. In a single unit building that houses two or more separate businesses with separate alarm systems, each business will be considered a separate alarm site.

        “Alarm system” means a device or series of devices, which emit or transmit an audible or remote visual or electronic alarm signal, which is intended to summon police response. The term includes hardwired systems, surveillance cameras and systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such as cellular or private radio signals, and includes local alarm systems, but does not include an alarm installed in a motor vehicle or a system which will not emit a signal either audible or visible from the outside of the building, residence or beyond, but is designed solely to alert the occupants of a building or residence.

        “Alarm user” means any person who has contracted for monitoring, repair, installation or maintenance service for an alarm system from an alarm installation company or monitoring company, or who owns or operates an alarm system which is not monitored, maintained or repaired under agreement.

        “Alarm user awareness class” means a class conducted for the purpose of educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms.

        “Alarm user list” means a list provided by the alarm user’s alarm installation company or if no alarm agreement exists between the alarm user and an alarm installation company, the alarm user’s monitoring company.

        “Arming station” means a device that controls an alarm system.

        “Automatic voice dialer” means any electronic, mechanical, or other device which, when activated, is capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded voice message to the Police Department or City requesting an officer dispatch to an alarm site.

        “Burglar alarm” means an alarm intended to identify the presence of an intruder in either a business or residence.

        “Business license” means a business license issued by the City of Molalla business license division to an alarm installation company or monitoring company to conduct business in the City.

        “Cancellation” means the termination of a police response to an alarm site after an alarm dispatch request is made but before an officer’s arrival at the alarm site.

        “City” means City of Molalla.

        “Conversion of alarm user” means the transaction or process by which one alarm installation company or monitoring company begins the servicing or monitoring of a previously unmonitored alarm system or an alarm system that was previously serviced or monitored by another alarm company.

        “Duress alarm” means a silent alarm system signal generated by the entry of a designated code into an arming station in order to signal that the alarm user is being forced to turn off the system and requires an officer response.

        “Enhanced call confirmation (ECC)” means an attempt by the monitoring company, or its representative, to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user and/or the alarm user’s designated representatives by telephone and/or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting a police burglar alarm dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. For the purpose of this chapter, telephone confirmation shall require, as a minimum that a second call be made to a different number, if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting an officer dispatch. Names and numbers or those contacted or attempted to contact, shall be provided when requested.

        “False alarm” means an alarm dispatch request to the Police Department, which results in the responding officer finding no evidence of a criminal offense or attempted criminal offense after completing an investigation of the alarm site, or, in the alternative, the same officer finding by a preponderance of evidence a blatant misuse or error of the alarm system.

        “Fee” means a sum of money imposed or charged.

        “Fines” means a sum of money imposed as a penalty for an offense or dereliction.

        “Holdup alarm” means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress.

        “Local alarm system” means an unmonitored alarm system that annunciates an alarm only at the alarm site or is a self-monitored alarm site.

        “Monitoring” means the process by which a monitoring company receives signals from an alarm system and relays an alarm dispatch request to the Police Department.

        “Monitoring company” means a person in the business of providing monitoring services.

        “One plus duress alarm” means the manual activation of a silent alarm signal by entering a code that adds one number to the last digit of the normal arm/disarm code (e.g., normal code = 1234, one plus duress code = 1235).

        “Panic alarm” means an alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation requiring an officer response.

        “Penalties” means a loss, or forfeiture as a sum of money.

        “Person” means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, organization or similar entity as defined by Oregon law.

        “Police Department” means the Molalla Police Department.

        “Protective or reactive alarm system” means an alarm system that produces a temporary disability or sensory deprivation through use of chemical, electrical, sonic or other means, including use of devices that obscure or disable a person’s vision.

        “Registration number” means a unique individual number assigned to an alarm user as part of alarm registration issued by the Police Department.

        “Responsible party” means a person capable of appearing at the alarm site upon request who has access to the alarm site, the code to the alarm system and the authority to approve repairs to the alarm system.

        “Robbery alarm” means an alarm signal generated by the manual or automatic activation of a device, or any system, device or mechanism on or near the premises intended to signal that a robbery is in progress and that a person needs immediate police assistance in order to avoid bodily harm, injury or death. The term has the same general meaning as “holdup alarm or duress alarm.”

        “SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01” means the ANSI – American National Standard Institute-approved Security Industry Association – SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design features for security system control panels and their associated arming and disarming devices to reduce the incidence of false alarms. Control panels built and tested to this standard by Underwriters Laboratory (UL), or other nationally recognized testing organizations are marked as follows: “Design evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard Features for False Alarm Reduction.”

        “Suspensions” means a stoppage of service or fee.

        “Takeover” means the transaction or process by which an alarm user takes over control of an existing alarm system that was previously controlled by another alarm user.

        “Zones” mean a division of devices into which an alarm system is divided to indicate the general location from which an alarm system signal is transmitted. (Ord. 2018-09 §1)

 

8.12.030 Administration—Funding—Increases in fees and fines—Annual evaluation.
        A.    Responsibility for administration of this chapter is vested with the Police Department.

        B.     The Police Department may designate an alarm administrator to carry out the duties and functions described in this chapter.

        C.     Monies generated by fees and fines assessed pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited into the City’s general fund.

        D.    The amount of the fees and fines set forth in this section shall be specified in the City fee schedule, which may only be revised by a duly-adopted resolution of the City Council. For purposes of this subsection, “fees” include any type or class of fee and includes late charges.

        E.     The alarm administrator shall conduct an annual evaluation and analysis of the effectiveness of this chapter and identify and implement system improvements as warranted. (Ord. 2018-09 §1)

 

8.12.040 Alarm registrations required—Terms—Fees and fee collection.
        A.    An alarm user shall not operate, or cause to be operated, any alarm system without a valid alarm registration. A separate alarm registration is required for each alarm site having a distinct address or business name. A registration fee including a completed alarm registration application shall be received and approved by the alarm administrator prior to any alarm system activation. A 30-day grace period shall be granted from the date of all new alarm installations or takeovers between two alarm users, to accommodate the registration application process. There may be reduced residential registration fees for senior citizens, low-income and disabled persons, or governmental entities. The City Council shall establish such classes of persons by resolution.

        B.     Owners of local alarm systems are required to adhere to all sections of this chapter and are subject to all fees, fines, suspensions, penalties or other requirements that are applicable.

        C.     The fee for a new initial alarm registration and the alarm registration renewal fee shall be collected by the alarm administrator.

        D.    Existing Alarm Systems.

        1.     The alarm agreement holding company shall provide within 40 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, an alarm user list of existing alarm users in the City, in a format approved by the alarm administrator, including name, address, billing address and telephone number to the alarm administrator.

        a.     Any alarm system that has been installed before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be registered and a registration fee collected by the alarm administrator. There will be a 30-day grace period provided to the alarm user.

        b.     The alarm agreement holding company may apply to the alarm administrator for an extension of the time limit in subsection (D)(1) based on extenuating circumstances.

        2.     The alarm agreement holding company may, through a mutual written agreement, have another alarm company provide the alarm user’s list.

        E.     New Alarm Systems.

        1.     Any alarm installation company that installs an alarm system on premises located within the City of Molalla shall notify the alarm administrator within 20 days that an alarm system has been installed and send the alarm administrator the required information.

        2.     In the case of self-installed alarm systems that are to be monitored by a monitoring company, the monitoring company shall act as the alarm installation company regarding the duties to notify the alarm administrator.

        3.     Failure of an alarm installation company to notify the alarm administrator of a new alarm system installation within 20 days of installation shall result in a fine as established by resolution of the City Council to be imposed on the alarm installation company.

        4.     The initial alarm registration fee shall be collected by the alarm administrator. Failure of the alarm user to submit an application and registration fee within the 30 days after notice shall result in the alarm system being classified as non-registered and late charges being assessed.

        F.     Alarm Registration and Renewal Fees.

        1.     An alarm registration shall expire one year from the date of issuance, and must be renewed annually by the alarm user. The alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user of the need to renew their registration 30 days prior to the expiration of the registration. It is the responsibility of the alarm user to submit the updated information and renewal fees prior to the registration expiration date. Failure to renew shall be classified as use of a non-registered alarm system and subject the alarm site to a suspension and late charge.

        2.     Registration fees shall be collected annually based on a one-year registration period. The amount of the registration and renewal fees required are established by resolution of the City Council.

        G.    Late Charge. Alarm users who fail to make payment for an alarm registration prior to the registration’s expiration date will be assessed a late charge as established by resolution of the City Council.

        H.    Refunds. No refund of a registration fee or registration renewal fee will be made.

        I.      Upon receipt of a completed alarm registration application form and the alarm registration fee, the alarm administrator shall issue a registration number or alarm registration renewal to the applicant unless:

        1.     The applicant has failed to pay any fee or fine assessed under this chapter; or

        2.     An alarm registration for the alarm site has been suspended, and the condition causing the suspension has not been corrected; or

        3.     The alarm installation company and/or the monitoring company listed on the registration application are not in possession of current valid state licensing; or

        4.     Any false statement of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm registration shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue an alarm registration.

        J.      Exceptions.

        1.     Government entities, including, but not necessarily limited to, the City, County, State, Federal and School Districts, must obtain alarm registrations for all alarm systems on property under their control within the boundaries of Molalla, but may be subject to reduced or waived payment of alarm registration and renewal fees.

        2.     All registration-fee-exempted alarm sites or reduced fee sites are required to obtain and maintain a valid alarm registration for a police response and are subjected to all other fees, fines and suspension enforcements, except when this action is prohibited by statute or through a court ruling. (Ord. 2018-09 §1)

 

8.12.050 Registration application—Contents.
        An application for an alarm registration must be in a format provided by the Police Department. The information required on such forms shall be determined by the alarm administrator. Registration applicants acknowledge that the police response may be influenced by factors, including, but not limited to, the availability of officers, priority of calls, traffic conditions, weather conditions, emergency conditions, prior alarm history, administrative actions and staffing levels. (Ord. 2018-09 §1)

 

8.12.060 Transfer of registration prohibited.
        A.    An alarm registration cannot be transferred to another person or alarm site. An alarm user shall inform the alarm administrator and their alarm company of any change to the information listed on the alarm registration application within 10 business days after such change.

        B.     Exceptions may be made in the discretion of the alarm administrator when the transfer proposed is among members of the family of the original registration holder or successors in interest to the property for which the alarm registration has been issued. (Ord. 2018-09 §1)

 

8.12.070 Duties of alarm users.
        A.    An alarm user shall:

        1.     Maintain the alarm site and the alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarms;

        2.     Make every reasonable effort to arrive at (or cause a designated, responsible person to arrive at) the alarm system’s location within 30 minutes after being requested by the monitoring company or Police Department in order to:

        a.     Deactivate an alarm system,

        b.     Provide access to the alarm site, and/or

        c.     Provide alternative security for the alarm site;

        3.     Provide his, her, or its monitoring company with the updated names and telephone numbers of at least two individuals who are able and have agreed to:

        a.     Receive notification of an alarm system activation at any time,

        b.     Respond to the alarm site at any time, and

        c.     Provide access to the alarm site and deactivate the alarm system, if necessary;

        4.     Not activate an alarm system for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report;

        5.     Notify his, her, or its monitoring company of any suspension of police response (as provided for under this chapter) and request that the monitoring company not make a burglar alarm dispatch request.

        B.     No person shall operate or cause to be operated any automatic voice dialer which, when activated, uses a telephone device or attachment to automatically dial a telephone line leading into the Police Department or the City and then transmit any pre-recorded message or signal.

        C.     An alarm user shall keep a set of written operating instructions for each alarm system at each alarm site. (Ord. 2018-09 §1)

 

8.12.080 Audible alarms—Restriction, abatement of malfunctioning alarm.
        A.    No alarm system shall emit a sound resembling an emergency vehicle siren or civil defense warning. The Chief of Police shall make the final determination regarding any question of an audible alarm within this section.

        B.     After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter no one shall install, modify or repair an alarm system in the City of Molalla that has a siren, bell or other signal that is audible from any property adjacent to the alarm site that sounds for longer than 15 consecutive minutes after the alarm is activated, or that repeats the 15 minute audible cycle more than two consecutive times during a single armed period.

        C.     In the event that an audible alarm is activated and fails to reset itself or continues to activate for more than 60 minutes and the responsible person listed on the alarm registration or other responsible person cannot or will not respond and silence the alarm, and the continued activation of the alarm is creating a disturbance, the Police Department may cause the alarm to be silenced in a manner determined appropriate for the circumstances. The alarm user shall be held responsible for the actual costs involved to abate the malfunctioning alarm. The City, its employees or agents shall not be responsible or liable for damage resulting from such disconnection. (Ord. 2018-09 §1)

 

8.12.090 Registration and duties of alarm installation companies and monitoring companies.
        A.    Registration.

        1.     No alarm company operator or alarm agent, as defined by the Business and Professions Code, shall install, maintain, or repair any alarm system within the City unless the alarm company operator or alarm agent has, prior to performing such work, obtained a City business license.

        2.     Each alarm installation company and alarm monitoring company must designate one individual as the alarm response manager (ARM) for the company. The individual designated as the ARM must be knowledgeable of the provisions of this chapter, as well as have the knowledge and authority to deal with false alarm issues and respond to requests from the alarm administrator. The name, contact number, and email address of the ARM shall be provided to the alarm administrator. Failure to comply within 30 days after being notified in writing from the alarm administrator may result in the suspension of Police Department response to alarm dispatch requests from the non-complying alarm installation company or monitoring company.

        3.     Each alarm installation company shall provide the name, address and phone number of any monitoring company it is using to monitor its alarm sites within the City, and monitoring companies shall do the same for alarm installation companies that use their monitoring services within the City.

        B.     Alarm installation companies shall:

        1.     Upon the installation or activation of an alarm system, distribute to the alarm user information summarizing:

        a.     The applicable law relating to false alarms, including the registration fee and the potential for fines and suspension of an alarm registration;

        b.     How to prevent false alarms; and

        c.     How to operate the alarm system.

        2.     After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, not program alarm systems so that they are capable of sending one plus duress alarms. Monitoring companies may continue to report one plus duress alarms received from alarm systems programmed with one plus duress alarms installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

        3.     After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, not install, modify or repair “single action” devices for the activation of holdup, robbery or panic alarms. New devices shall require two actions or an activation time delay to provide more positive assurance that the user intends to activate the device.

        4.     90 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, on new installations, use only alarm control panel(s) which as listed as ANSI/SIA CP-01—Control Panel Standard—Features for False Alarm Reduction.

        5.     Not use an automatic voice dialer for any alarm system which, when activated, uses a telephone device or attachment to automatically dial a telephone line leading into the Police Department or the City and then transmit any pre-recorded message or signal.

        6.     Ensure that alarm users of alarm systems equipped with a duress, robbery, holdup or panic alarm has been provided adequate training as to the proper use of the alarm system’s operation and function.

        7.     All alarm systems shall be supplied with an uninterrupted power supply in such a manner that the failure or interruption of the normal electric utility service for a period of up to four hours will not activate the alarm system.

        8.     All audible alarm systems shall include a device which will limit the duration of the audible alarm to a period of not more than 15 minutes per activation.

        C.     A monitoring company shall:

        1.     Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers or procedures designated by the alarm administrator or other approved communication processes.

        2.     Employ enhanced call confirmation procedures on all burglar alarm dispatch requests. The Molalla Police Department may refuse to accept an alarm dispatch request from a monitoring company that has failed to comply with the procedures required by enhanced call confirmation. This subsection becomes effective 90 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

        3.     Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the Police Department in a manner and form determined by the alarm administrator.

        4.     Communicate cancellations to the Police Department in a manner and form determined by the alarm administrator.

        5.     Communicate all available zone activations information (north, south, front, back, door, window etc.) about the location of an alarm signal(s) as part of an alarm dispatch request.

        6.     Communicate the type of alarm activation (silent or audible, interior or perimeter), if available, on any alarm dispatch request.

        7.     Notify communications (dispatch) of any alarm site that it knows, or reasonably should know has guard dog(s), pets or is fitted with a protective-reactive alarm system. During any alarm at such a site, a responsible party must be contacted and confirm that he or she will respond to the alarm site to disarm the device or take control of the guard dog(s).

        8.     After an alarm dispatch request, promptly advise the Police Department if the monitoring company knows that the alarm user or a responsible party is on the way to the alarm site;

        9.     Each monitoring company must maintain, for a period of at least one year after the date of an alarm dispatch request, all records relating to the alarm dispatch request. Records must include the name, address and telephone number of the alarm user, each alarm system zone activated, the time of alarm dispatch request and evidence of all attempts to verify. The alarm administrator may request copies of such records for any individual alarm user. If the request is made within 60 days after an alarm dispatch request, the monitoring company shall furnish requested records within three business days after receiving the request. If the records are requested between 60 days and one year after an alarm dispatch request, the monitoring company shall furnish the requested records within 30 days after receiving the request.

        10.   Each monitoring company shall, upon request, immediately provide the Police Department with the names and phone numbers of the alarm user’s emergency contacts at the time of each alarm dispatch request.

        D.    Conversion of Alarm Users. An alarm installation company or monitoring company that converts the servicing of any alarm system account from another company shall notify the alarm administrator of such conversion and shall make a reasonable effort to provide to the alarm administrator, within 60 days from the date of conversion, an alarm user list of the converted accounts, in a format acceptable to the alarm administrator. (Ord. 2018-09 §1)

 

8.12.100 Duties and authority of the alarm administrator.
        A.    The alarm administrator shall:

        1.     Designate the manner and form of alarm dispatch requests and the telephone numbers and/or communication process that are to be used for such requests; and

        2.     Establish a procedure to accept cancellation of alarm dispatch requests;

        3.     Establish a procedure to acquire and record information on alarm dispatch requests;

        4.     Establish and implement a procedure to notify the alarm user of a false alarm. The notice shall include the following:

        a.     The date and time of an officer’s response to the false alarm, and

        b.     Any false alarm fine incurred.

        B.     The alarm administrator may require that a conference be held with an alarm user and the alarm installation company or monitoring company responsible for repairing or monitoring of the alarm system to review the circumstances of each false alarm. The conference may be held in person or through a conference telephone call, at the alarm administrator’s discretion. Failure to participate may result in suspension of the alarm registration, as indicated by the facts of the case.

        C.     The alarm administrator may establish an alarm user awareness class. The alarm administrator may request the assistance of associations, alarm companies and law enforcement agencies in developing and implementing the class. The class shall inform alarm users of the alarm ordinance; problems created by false alarms and teach alarm users how to avoid creating false alarms.

        D.    If a false robbery, holdup or panic alarm has occurred and the alarm was triggered using a single action, non-recessed device, the alarm administrator may consider a waiver or partial waiver of the false alarm fine, if action is taken by the alarm user to remove or replace the single action, non-recessed device.

        E.     The alarm administrator shall make a copy of this chapter and/or an ordinance summary sheet available to each alarm user.

        F.     The alarm administrator may use electronic means to communicate with alarm users, alarm installation companies and monitoring companies when applicable or when requested by the recipient and at the alarm administrators discretion. (Ord. 2018-09 §1)

 

8.12.110 False alarm fines—Fees—Late charges.
        A.    The alarm administrator may assess the alarm user a fine for a false alarm occurring at that alarm user’s alarm site. The amount of said fines for the listed categories shall be established by City Council and may be subsequently amended by resolution of the City Council.

        B.     If a false alarm fine is not paid within 30 days after the invoice is mailed, a late charge as established by resolution of the City Council shall be imposed.

        C.     Fines for false alarms from non-registered alarm systems. For person(s) operating a non-registered alarm system incurring a false alarm, fines shall be imposed as established by resolution of the City Council.

        D.    Any monitoring company after five business days of receiving notice from the alarm administrator that an alarm user’s registration status is that of non-registered shall not make a burglar alarm dispatch request from that alarm user.

        E.     If cancellation of a police response occurs prior to the officer’s arrival at the alarm site, the response is not considered a false alarm and no false alarm fine will be assessed.

        F.     The alarm installation company shall be assessed a fine in an amount established by resolution of the City Council if the officer responding to a false alarm determines that an on-site employee of the alarm installation company directly caused the false alarm. Such false alarms are not included in the total number of false alarms for the alarm user, nor is the alarm user to be held liable for any false alarm fine resulting from such alarm activation.

        G.    A fine in an amount established by resolution of the City Council shall be imposed against any monitoring company that fails to verify alarm system signals as required in Section 8.12.090(C)(2) of this chapter.

        H.    Notice of the right of appeal under this ordinance will be included with notice of any fine.

        I.      All registration fees, renewal registration fees or fines assessed under this section are due within 30 days of written notice unless otherwise noted. A late charge in an amount established by resolution of the City Council shall be imposed for each individual fee or fine due that is not paid within 30 days.

        J.      The alarm administrator may waive the false alarm fine for the first chargeable false alarm during the alarm user’s one-year registration period, pending the successful completion of the online alarm user awareness class available through the alarm administrator. In order to have the fine waived, the alarm user shall have successfully completed the class within 30 days of the fine notice. Alarm users without online access may request the online school and test be mailed to them. Reasonable additional time to complete the alarm user awareness class shall be allowed for mail delivery. (Ord. 2018-09 §1)

 

8.12.120 Notice to alarm users of false alarms and suspension of a police response.
        A.    The alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user in writing or by other electronic means after each false alarm. The notice shall include the amount of the fine for the false alarm, the fact that police response to further alarms may be suspended after the fourth false alarm during the alarm user’s one-year alarm registration period, (excluding duress, robbery, holdup and panic alarms), and that the alarm user has the right to appeal.

        B.     The alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user in writing 30 days beforehand that a Police Department response to further alarms is to be suspended. The right of appeal under this chapter shall be included with the notice. The notice of suspension shall also include the amount of any fees and/or fines due and a description of the reinstatement process. (Ord. 2018-09 §1)

 

8.12.130 Alarm registration suspension, fees, fines, violation to make alarm dispatch request for suspended alarm site.
        A.    The alarm administrator shall notify the Police Department of each alarm user whose alarm registration qualifies for suspension under this section. The alarm administrator may suspend an alarm registration if it is determined that:

        1.     There is a false statement of a material fact in the registration application; or

        2.     The alarm user has had four or more false burglar alarms within the one-year registration period, except that the alarm administrator may waive a suspension of a registration upon receipt of documented work orders showing reasonable attempts to repair the alarm system prior to the notice of suspension; or

        3.     The alarm user fails or refuses to pay an alarm registration or alarm registration renewal fee, false alarm fine, late charge, or any other fee, fine, or charge assessed under this section.

        B.     It is a violation of this section for a person to operate a burglar alarm system during the period in which the alarm registration is suspended. It is a violation of this chapter for a monitoring company to make an alarm dispatch request to a burglar alarm site after the monitoring company’s alarm response manager (ARM) has been notified by electronic mail by the alarm administrator that the registration for that alarm site has been suspended. A grace period of five business days after the Arm’s notification shall be granted the monitoring company to comply. The alarm monitoring company shall be assessed a fine in an amount established by resolution of the City Council for requesting a burglar alarm dispatch request on a suspended alarm site.

        C.     False Alarm Fines Under Suspension Status. In addition to the fines set forth in Section 8.12.110(A), a supplemental fine is hereby imposed upon any person operating a suspended burglar alarm system. The amount of said fines shall be established by resolution of the City Council.

        D.    It shall be the responsibility of the alarm user to notify their respective alarm monitoring company of their suspension status. An alarm user shall be held financially accountable for all false alarm fines incurred.

        E.     Unless there is a separate indication that there is a crime in progress, the Police Department may or may not dispatch an officer to an alarm site for which an alarm registration is suspended. (Ord. 2018-09 §1)

 

8.12.140 Appeals of determinations regarding alarm registrations, fees and fines.
        A.    If the alarm administrator assesses a fee or fine, suspends an alarm registration or denies the issuance, renewal or reinstatement of an alarm registration, the alarm administrator shall send notice of the action and a statement of the right to appeal to the affected applicant, alarm user, alarm installation company or alarm monitoring company.

        B.     The applicant, alarm user, alarm installation company or alarm monitoring company may appeal any action described in subsection A to the Police Chief (or designee) by setting forth in writing the reasons for the appeal and delivering the appeal to the Police Chief (or designee) within 20 days after receipt of notice of the action. Failure to deliver the appeal within that time period is a waiver of the right to appeal.

        C.     The procedure for an appeal to the Police Chief (or designee) is as follows:

        1.     The applicant, alarm user, alarm installation company or monitoring company may file a written request for appeal by paying an appeal fee and setting forth the reasons for the appeal. The appeal must be entitled “Appeal from Alarm Administrator’s Action.” The appeal fee shall be in an amount established by resolution of the City Council and will be returned to the appealing party if the appeal is successful.

        2.     The Police Chief (or designee) shall conduct a hearing on the appeal within 30 days after the Police Department’s receipt of the request for appeal and appeal fee and shall consider the evidence submitted by the appealing party and the alarm administrator. The Police Chief (or designee) must base the decision on the preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing and must render a decision within 15 days after the date of the hearing. The decision shall affirm or reverse the decision or action taken by the alarm administrator. The decision of the Police Chief or designee shall be the final decision in the matter.

        3.     Filing of an appeal stays any action by the alarm administrator to suspend an alarm registration or require the payment of a fee or fine until the appeal process has been exhausted. This provision applies only to the action of the alarm administrator that is the subject of the appeal. This provision does not operate as a bar to enforcement action on violations of this section that occur thereafter.

        D.    The alarm administrator or the Police Chief, or their respective designees, may adjust the count of false alarms or assessed fees based on:

        1.     Evidence that a false alarm was caused by action of a communications services provider (i.e., telephone, cellular, cable company);

        2.     Evidence that a false alarm was caused by a power outage of more than four hours or severe weather such as a tornado, earthquake, or excessive winds (35 m.p.h. or above as measured by a local, recognized weather monitoring station);

        3.     Evidence that an alarm dispatch request was not a false alarm; or

        4.     The occurrence of multiple alarms within a 24-hour period, which may be considered as one false alarm if the alarm user has taken corrective action, unless the false alarms are directly caused by the alarm user.

        E.     The alarm administrator may waive all or part of a false alarm fine due to extenuating circumstances or to encourage corrective action with supervisor approval. (Ord. 2018-09 §1)

 

8.12.150 Reinstatement of suspended alarm registrations.
        A.    On the suspension of an alarm registration, a person whose alarm registration has been suspended may obtain reinstatement of the registration by the alarm administrator if the person:

        1.     Pays a reinstatement fee as established by resolution of the City Council;

        2.     Pays, or otherwise resolves, all outstanding fees, fines, and other charges;

        3.     Submits a written notice from an alarm installation company stating that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) by the alarm installation company;

        4.     The alarm user successfully completes an alarm user awareness class and test.

        B.     The Police Department shall reinstate its response to an alarm site as soon as is practicable after receiving notice of reinstatement from the alarm administrator. The alarm user and monitoring company shall take notice that the alarm site has been officially reinstated only after receiving notice from the alarm administrator of that fact. It shall be the responsibility of the alarm user to verify that his, her, or its registration status and future police response has been properly restored. (Ord. 2018-09 §1)

 

8.12.160 Suspension of police response to dispatch requests from certain alarm installation companies and monitoring companies.
        A.    The Police Chief or designee may suspend police response to an alarm dispatch request from an alarm installation company or monitoring company if it is determined that:

        1.     There is a violation of this chapter by the alarm installation company or monitoring company and the condition causing the violation has not been corrected and/or;

        2.     The alarm installation company or monitoring company has failed to pay any fee, fine, or other charge assessed under this section, more than 60 days after the fee, fine, or other charge is due.

        B.     The Police Department may not respond to any alarm dispatch request where the alarm installation company or monitoring company who installed or monitors that alarm has failed to comply with any licensing requirements or failed to maintain a valid copy of any required alarm company operators license.

        C.     A suspension of police response made pursuant to this subsection is subject to the appeal process provided for within this chapter. In addition, the alarm administrator has the ability to accept a workable solution from the affected party prior to an appeal. The affected party has 60 days after the written notice of suspension before police response is suspended to its alarm customers.

        D.    The alarm administrator shall notify all known alarm users subscribing to an alarm installation company or an alarm monitoring company that the Police Department has suspended response to the company’s alarm dispatch requests.

        E.     The City shall assess the alarm installation company or monitoring company a reinstatement fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. In addition, if the alarm administrator has incurred costs in notifying alarm users by mail of the suspension of their alarm installation company or monitoring company, reimbursement to the City of those costs shall be a condition of reinstatement. (Ord. 2018-09 §1)

 

8.12.170 Police Department response.
        A.    Subject to the suspension provisions in Section 8.12.130 and the discretion discussed in Section 8.12.190, the Police Department at its discretion will respond to all “in progress” robbery, panic or burglar alarms as promptly as possible, taking into account pending calls for service and any policy establishing priority of dispatched calls following notification of the receipt of the alarm from the monitoring company. police supervisors may, in their discretion, cancel a police response to any or all alarms based on weather or other factors affecting police service needs.

        B.     The Police Chief or designee may re-prioritize assignment of burglar alarms and response time at any time during a 24-hour period as may be necessary due to the service needs of the community. (Ord. 2018-09 §1)

 

8.12.180 Confidentiality of alarm information.
        All information contained in documents gathered through alarm registrations, the submission of customer lists, the alarm appeal process and records relating to alarm dispatch requests must be held in confidence by all employees of the alarm administrator, City of Molalla and any third-party alarm administrator. Such information is proprietary and is hereby declared confidential and not a public record. Absent special circumstances, such information must not be released to the public or any person other than a law enforcement agency, third party administrator or the applicable alarm user, alarm installation company or alarm monitoring company except pursuant to court order or applicable public records law. (Ord. 2018-09 §1)

 

8.12.190 Scope of police duty—Immunities preserved.
        The issuance of alarm registrations does not create a contract between the Police Department and/or the City of Molalla and any alarm user, alarm installation company or monitoring company, nor does it create a duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, on the Police Department to respond to any alarm. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure of the Police Department to respond to an alarm dispatch request is hereby disclaimed and full governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By applying for an alarm registration, the alarm user acknowledges that the Police Department response is influenced by the availability of officers, priority of calls, traffic conditions, weather conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels, prior response history and administrative actions. (Ord. 2018-09 §1)

Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Chapter 9.04 LEAVING CHILDREN IN VEHICLES
Chapter 9.08 CURFEW FOR MINORS
Chapter 9.10 SITING OF RESIDENTIAL CHILD-CARING FACILITIES
Chapter 9.12 GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter 9.13 NOISE CONTROL
Chapter 9.14 EXCLUSION PROCESS FROM CITY PROPERTY
Chapter 9.16 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND DECENCY
Chapter 9.32 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA

Chapter 9.04 LEAVING CHILDREN IN VEHICLES
9.04.010 Prohibited.
        It is unlawful for any person in charge of, or who has under his or her control or guidance, any minor child under the age of eight years, to at any time lock or confine or suffer to be locked or confined or left unattended even though not locked or confined in such auto, bus or any other vehicle upon a public street, alley, or public parking facility or other public or private property where parking or drive-in facilities are offered to the public within the City, for a period of time exceeding 15 minutes. A child is unattended within the meaning of this chapter if the oldest person with the child is a person under the age of 13 years. (Ord. 1967-2 §1)

 

9.04.020 Entry of vehicle by police officer.
        It is lawful for any police officer finding a child so confined to enter such vehicle using such force as may be necessary. (Ord. 1967-2 §2)

 

9.04.030 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $200.00. Charges under this chapter shall be tried as violations, to the Court, as provided by ORS 153.505 and 153.575. (Ord. 1977-10 §§1, 2; Ord. 1967-2 §3)

Chapter 9.08 CURFEW FOR MINORS
9.08.010 Children on street at night.
        It is unlawful for any child under the age of 18 to be in, or remain in, or upon any street, alley, park or other public place between the hours specified in Section 9.08.020, unless such child is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other proper companion of the age of 21 years, or more, specially chosen by the parent, or guardian to escort the child on the occasion in question, or by a person over 21 years of age having the care and custody of such child or, unless such child is then engaged in an entertainment, or night school, or going to, or from, an employment or night school which makes it necessary to be in, or upon, such street, alley, park, or other public place, during the nighttime between such specified hours. (Ord. 516 §1, 1963)

 

9.08.015 Providing premises for the consumption of alcohol by minors prohibited.
        No person who owns or is in control of premises shall knowingly allow a minor to consume alcoholic liquor on the premises except as provided in ORS Chapter 471 as now enacted or later amended. (Ord. 1993-10 §1)

 

9.08.020 Hours.
        For the purpose of this chapter the applicable hours shall be: As to children under 14 years of age who have not begun high school, between 9:15 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following morning except that during the months of June, July and August, the hours shall be between 10:15 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following morning; as to children 14 years of age or over or who have begun high school, the hours shall be between 10:15 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday, and 6:00 a.m. of the following morning and between twelve midnight (12:00 a.m.) on Friday or Saturday, or any day prior to a legal holiday when no school is scheduled for said legal holiday, and 6:00 a.m. of the following morning. (Ord. 516 §1, 1963)

 

9.08.030 Children employed in selling, delivering or wrapping newspapers.
        Any child under the age of 18 years employed in selling, delivering or wrapping newspapers shall obtain from the newspaper employer and the employer shall issue to the child employed a card showing such employment. A child failing to carry, and produce, such card shall not be deemed to be within the protection of Sections 9.08.010 and 9.08.020. (Ord. 516 §1, 1963)

 

9.08.040 Violation by parents.
        It is unlawful for any parent or guardian, or the person having the care or custody of any child under the age of 18 years, to permit, or by inefficient control to allow such child to be in or remain in or upon any street, alley, park or other public place between the hours set forth in Section 9.08.020, contrary to the provisions of this chapter. Proof that such child was on any street, alley, park or other public place at a time prohibited shall, prima facie, be sufficient evidence to sustain a conviction of a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 516 Art. 1 §2, 1963)

 

9.08.050 Duties of officers.
        All peace officers, juvenile department counselors, state or county welfare department employees or any other person authorized by the Juvenile Court of the county in which the child resides or is found, may take into temporary custody any child violating any of the provisions of this chapter, and, for the first violation, shall as soon as practicable thereafter, notify the child’s parent, guardian or other person responsible for the child of the violation and shall take or send such child home and release the child to the custody of his or her parent or other responsible person in this state, except where the Juvenile Court otherwise orders. In case any child under the age of 18 years shall again violate any of the provisions of this chapter, such child may be apprehended and taken into temporary custody as a juvenile offender and delinquent and may be brought before the Juvenile Court of the county in which such child resides or is found. (Ord. 516 §3, 1963)

Chapter 9.10 SITING OF RESIDENTIAL CHILD-CARING FACILITIES
9.10.010 Purpose.
        A.    The City of Molalla intends for this chapter to implement state law with regard to the siting of certain residential child-caring facilities.

        B.     This chapter is intended to regulate the siting of child-caring facilities that are comprehensive in nature. Such facilities may include, but are not limited to, those that provide 24-hour care, those that provide rehabilitation or counseling services, or those that provide care or other instruction to youths committed to the custody of the facility by a court, including a juvenile court, or by the Oregon Youth Authority.

        C.     This chapter is not intended to regulate the siting of day care facilities, whose general purpose is to supervise children in a parent’s absence on a less than 24-hour basis, and most typically during work hours, and whose substantial purpose is not providing rehabilitation, counseling, or other similar services to youths.

        D.    This chapter only allows for the siting of facilities that are fully authorized by this chapter. This chapter shall not be construed to authorize the siting of a facility that is not specifically prohibited herein. (Ord. 2004-04 §1)

 

9.10.020 Definitions.
        A.    “Agency” means any person or organization providing substitute residential care for an average daily population of eight or fewer children. “Agency” includes, but is not limited to:

        1.     Child-caring agencies licensed by the Department of Human Services under ORS 418.205 to 418.325;

        2.     Foster homes as defined in ORS 418.625 providing care for more than four children; and

        3.     Youth care centers as defined in ORS 420.855.

        B.     “Average daily population” means the sum of days in residence of all children residing in a child-caring facility during a certain period divided by the number of days in the period.

        C.     “Child-caring facility” means a residence or building used by an agency to provide substitute residential care for children in conformance with this chapter.

        D.    “Operator” as used in this chapter means the person or persons responsible for the day-to-day operation of a child-caring facility. (Ord. 2004-04 §1)

 

9.10.030 Applicability.
        As required by state law, these standards shall apply to all areas within the City’s jurisdiction, including single-family residential zones. (Ord. 2004-04 §1)

 

9.10.040 Application.
        A.    In order to request the siting of a child-caring facility, an agency shall submit an application to the City Manager or designee. An application shall contain the following information, materials and items:

        1.     An application fee in the amount of $500.00. This amount may be modified from time to time by City Council resolution.

        2.     A narrative detailing the nature of the proposed facility, including but not limited to the following information:

        a.     The number of residents proposed to occupy the facility at one time;

        b.     The length of time each resident will stay at the proposed facility;

        c.     The average daily population of the proposed facility’s residents, based on the above definition;

        d.     The age range of the residents that will occupy the proposed facility;

        e.     The reason or reasons that the residents will occupy the proposed facility, and whether any or all residents are under the jurisdiction of a court, including a juvenile court;

        f.      The number of employees expected to work at the facility and the ratio of employees to residents;

        g.     The hours that the proposed facility intends to operate.

        3.     A response addressing each of this chapter’s standards, described below at Section 9.10.050, including an explanation demonstrating how compliance with each standard will be achieved.

        4.     A resume of the proposed facility’s operator(s) that includes:

        a.     The operator’s name, address, telephone number and email address;

        b.     The operator’s educational and professional background;

        c.     Professional references who may be contacted regarding the operator’s experience.

        5.     A copy of the agency’s application for state certification of the facility.

        6.     Any other information deemed necessary by the City Manager or designee. (Ord. 2004-04 §1)

 

9.10.050 Standards.
        A.    A facility shall comply with all applicable structural, fire and health and safety code requirements.

        B.     A facility shall not be located closer than 1,000 feet from any other facility or any school, library, or public park or public recreation area.

        C.     Security.

        1.     A facility must have and maintain adequate security measures for the safety of its residents and the surrounding community. Such measures shall include:

        a.     A monitoring system whereby no person may enter or leave the facility without express permission of the operator or its designee;

        b.     Entrances and exits that are controlled and are under the supervision of the operator or its designee;

        c.     Windows that use appropriate non-shattering composite material instead of glass, and that cannot be used as a means of exiting or entering the facility;

        d.     A resident-to-employee ratio of no less than two to one, to be maintained at all times.

        e.     Other reasonable security procedures or devices that the City finds necessary to ensure the safety of the facility’s residents or the surrounding community.

        D.    Conditions of Approval.

        1.     The City may attach appropriate conditions of approval to an application for a child-caring facility. If an application is approved, the City shall attach the following conditions of approval:

        a.     The agency shall enter into an agreement with the Molalla Police department that will reimburse the department for all of its actual costs incurred in responding to excessive incidents occurring at or involving the facility. The agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the City Attorney.

        b.     The agency shall enter into an agreement with the Molalla Fire District that will reimburse the District for all of its actual costs incurred in responding to excessive incidents occurring at or involving the facility. The agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the City Attorney and to the attorney for the District.

        c.     The agency shall apply for conditional use review in the facility’s underlying zone, and receive conditional use approval from the City.

        E.     Final occupancy shall not be granted until the agency demonstrates that its application to operate the facility has been approved by the state. (Ord. 2004-04 §1)

 

9.10.060 Procedure.
        A.    After an application is submitted proposing to site a child-caring facility, the City Manager or designee shall review the application for conformance with this chapter. The City Manager or designee may reject any application that does not contain all of the information required by Section 9.10.040.

        B.     After receiving an application that contains all of the information required by Section 9.10.040, the City Manager shall schedule a hearing before the City Council. The purpose of the hearing shall be to review a report prepared by the City Manager or designee that evaluates the application and recommends whether the application should be approved or denied.

        C.     At least 15 days before the City Council hearing date, property owners within 500 feet of the proposed facility shall be mailed a notice of the City Council hearing. The notice shall at least contain a brief description of what is being proposed, the date, time and location of the City Council hearing, and an invitation for those receiving notice to submit testimony, either orally or in writing, at the hearing.

        D.    Within 90 days of the date the City receives an application that contains all of the information required by Section 9.10.040, the City Council shall issue a decision on the application. The 90-day period may be extended by mutual agreement of the City and the agency applying to site a facility.

        E.     If the City Council denies an application, it shall adopt findings describing how the application does not conform to this chapter. (Ord. 2004-04 §1)

Chapter 9.12 GENERAL OFFENSES
9.12.010 Discharge of weapons.
        A.    No person other than an authorized peace officer acting within the course and scope of his or her duties may fire or discharge a gun or other weapon, including spring or air-activated pellet or BB guns, or weapon which propels a projectile by use of gunpowder or other jet, explosive or rocket propulsion.

        B.     The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the firing or discharging of a weapon by any person in the defense or protection of his or her property, person or family, or at a firing range authorized and approved by the Chief of Police.

        C.     Firearms loaded only with black powder blank rounds may be discharged within the city limits only within the Buckeroo Rodeo grounds for mounted cowboy shooting practices or competitions between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. or until dusk, as determined by the City Manager, on such dates as may be approved by the City Manager.

        D.    The number of dates during which mounted cowboy shooting practices or competitions may be permitted shall not exceed 15 days per year.

        E.     Firearms loaded only with blank rounds may be discharged within the city limits for military and law enforcement funerals and memorial services only when fired by a military or law enforcement officer or rifle squad and the number of volleys may not exceed 21 total rounds. (Ord. 2012-04 §1; Ord. 2009-03 §1; Ord. 2008-08 §1; Ord. 2008-07 §1; Ord. 1988-5 §1)

 

9.12.020 Conformity with State Criminal Code.
        A.    Violation of provisions in Oregon Revised Statutes Chapters 162 through 167, inclusive, 471 and 475, inclusive, as now constituted or as hereafter amended, shall be deemed an offense against the City of Molalla.

        B.     If an ordinance, or provision thereof, of the city is in conflict with the Oregon Criminal Code, the Oregon Criminal Code shall prevail. (Ord. 1994-10 §1; Ord. 1992-4 §2)

 

9.12.030 Conformity with state criminal procedures.
        A.    The City of Molalla adopts by reference Oregon Revised Statutes Chapters 131, 133, 135 through 137, inclusive, 153, 156 through 157, inclusive, and Chapter 161, as now constituted or hereafter amended.

        B.     If any ordinance, or provision thereof, of the city is in conflict with the provisions of the Oregon Criminal Procedure Code cited above, the Oregon Criminal Procedure Code shall prevail. (Ord. 1994-10 §2; Ord. 1992-4 §2)

 
Chapter 9.13 NOISE CONTROL
9.13.010 Declaration of purpose.
        The City Council has determined that excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health, welfare and the quality of life and it shall be the policy of the City of Molalla to prevent excessive sound which may jeopardize the health, welfare and safety to citizens or degrade the quality of life. (Ord. 2003-02 §1)

 

9.13.020 Scope.
        This chapter shall apply to the regulation of all sounds originating within the city limits of the City of Molalla. (Ord. 2003-02 §1)

 

9.13.030 Definitions.
        A.    Amplifying Equipment. Public address systems, musical instruments, and other similar devices which are electronically amplified.

        B.     City. The City of Molalla, Oregon or the area within the territorial city limits of the City of Molalla, Oregon.

        C.     Construction. Any and all activity necessary or incidental to the erection, demolition, assembling, altering, installing, repair or equipping of buildings, roadways and utilities. It shall include land clearing, grading, excavating and filling before, during or following such activity.

        D.    Emergency Work. Work made necessary to restore property to a safe conditional following severe inclement weather and natural disasters, work required to restore public utilities or work required to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger.

        E.     Noise Sensitive Area. Areas or land uses where excessive or prolonged noise could reasonably be expected to cause annoyance or alarm, including, but not limited to, residential areas, schools, churches, hospitals, offices, care centers and nursing homes.

        F.     Off-Road Recreational Vehicle. Any self-propelled land vehicle designed for, or capable of traversing over natural terrain, including, but not limited to, racing vehicles, mini bikes, motorcycles, go karts, and dune buggies, when operated off the public right-of-way for non-commercial purposes.

        G.    Persons. A person, persons, firm, association, co-partnership, joint venture, corporation, or any entity public or private in nature.

        H.    Plainly Audible. Unambiguously communicated sounds which disturb the comfort, repose or health of the listener. Plainly audible sounds include, but are not limited to, understandable musical rhythms, understandable spoken words, and vocal sounds other than speech which are distinguishable as raised or above normal.

        I.      Power Tools. Any mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool, or similar device.

        J.      Powered Model Vehicle. Any self-propelled airborne, waterborne, or landborne plane, vessel or vehicle, which is not designed to carry persons, including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car, or rocket, except those operated by electric motors.

        K.    Off-Road Recreational Park. A facility open to the public for the operation of off-road recreation vehicles.

        L.     Unreasonable Noise. Sound or noise which because of its loudness, frequency or duration could reasonably be expected to cause annoyance or alarm to another person, including, but not limited to, the following:

        1.     Radios, Phonographs, Tape Players, Television Sets, Stereo Systems. The playing, using or operating of any radio, tape player, television set or stereo system, including those installed in a vehicle, in such a manner so as to be plainly audible at any time between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.: (a) within a noise sensitive area which is not the source of the sound, or (b) at a distance of 100 feet or more from the source of the sound.

        2.     Revving Engines. Operating any motor vehicle engine above idling speed off the public right-of-way so as to create excessive or unnecessary sounds within a noise sensitive area.

        3.     Compression Braking Devices. Using unmuffled compression brakes, commonly referred to as “jake brakes,” on any motor vehicle, except to avoid imminent danger to persons or property.

        4.     Exhausts. Discharging into the open air the exhaust of any internal combustion engine or any mechanical device operated by compressed air or steam without a muffler, or with a sound control device less effective than that provided on the original engine or mechanical device.

        5.     Idling Engines on Motor Vehicles. Idling more than 15 consecutive minutes between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. any motor vehicle with a Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR) of 8,000 pounds or greater when audible within a noise sensitive area.

        6.     Vehicle Tires. Squealing tires by excessive speed or acceleration on or off public right-of-way except when necessary to avoid imminent danger to persons or property.

        7.     Motorcycles, Go Karts, Dune Buggies. Operating motorcycles, go karts, dune buggies and other off-road recreational vehicles off the public right-of-way on property not designated as an off-road recreational park.

        8.     Powered Model Vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of powered model vehicles, with the exception of vehicles, gliders and aircraft propelled by electric motors, in areas not designated by the City Manager or City Council for such use.

        9.     Explosives. The discharge of illegal fireworks or other explosive devices without any necessary governmental or regulatory permits.

        10.   Animals. Permitting any animal to cause unreasonable annoyance, alarm or noise disturbance at any time of the day or night by repeated barking, whining, screeching, howling, braying or other like sounds which may be heard beyond the boundary of the keeper’s property, except when the animal is being provoked or protecting property from trespassers.

        11.   Steam Whistles. Blowing any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work.

        12.   Horns. The sounding of a horn or signaling device on a vehicle on a street, or public or private place, except as a necessary warning of danger.

        13.   Compressed Air Devices. The use of a mechanical device operated by compressed air, steam or otherwise, unless the noise thereby created is effectively muffled.

        14.   Warning Devices. Audible devices used to protect persons or property from imminent danger, including, but not limited to fire alarms, burglar alarms, civil defense warning systems, and safety alarms required by law. (Ord. 2003-02 §1)

 

9.13.040 Prohibited acts.
        No person shall cause or permit any unreasonable noise. (Ord. 2003-02 §1)

 

9.13.050 Exceptions.
        A.    Exceptions. The following sounds are exempted from provisions of this ordinance:

        1.     Sounds caused by the performance of emergency work, emergency vehicles and emergency equipment.

        2.     Aircraft operations in compliance with applicable federal laws or regulations.

        3.     Railroad activities as conducted with all applicable rules and regulations, including Subpart A, Part 201 of Title 40, CFR of the Environmental Protection Agency’s railroad emission standards.

        4.     Sounds produced at authorized activities sponsored by Molalla River School District, City of Molalla or at the Molalla Buckeroo Grounds between 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight.

        5.     Sounds created by a City street sweeping or solid waste franchisee during authorized refuse or recycling pickup operations during the period of time between 5:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.

        6.     Sounds created by power tools during the period of time between 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., provided such tools and any sound dissipating devices are maintained in good repair, excepting home occupations (refer to Section 17.08.100(D)).

        7.     Commercial/industrial operations located within commercial/industrial zones.

        8.     Sounds made by warning devices operating continuously for 15 minutes or less.

        9.     Construction activities during the period of time between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., provided equipment is maintained in good repair and any sound dissipating devices are maintained in good working order. (Ord. 2003-02 §1)

 

9.13.060 Chapter additional to other law.
        The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative and non-exclusive and shall not affect any other claim, cause of action or remedy. (Ord. 2003-02 §1)

 

9.13.070 Penalties—Injunctive relief.
        A.    A violation of any provision of this ordinance is a Class A infraction, punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more than $1,000.00. Each and every incident during which any provision of this chapter is violated shall constitute a separate offense.

        B.     The City may maintain an action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or retrain by injunction the violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-02 §1)

 

9.13.080 Severability.
        If any provision of this chapter, or its application to any person or circumstances, is held to be invalid, the remainder of this chapter, or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected. (Ord. 2003-02 §1)

Chapter 9.14 EXCLUSION PROCESS FROM CITY PROPERTY
9.14.010 Use regulations.
        The provisions of this chapter apply to all city property. For the purposes of this chapter, the term “city property” includes all land owned or leased by the city and buildings under city ownership, control or authority. (Ord. 2013-05 §1)

 

9.14.020 Exclusion from city property.
        A.    In addition to any other remedy or penalty provided by law, a peace officer or other person specifically authorized by the City Manager may exclude a person who violates a provision of state or local law from that city property for a period of up to 90 days. Where conduct and circumstances elevate to the level of creating a clear compromise to the safety and well-being of citizens or staff, the City Manager may extend the exclusion from city property to up to one year. Such extensions must be done in writing and occur within 10 days of the issuance of the original exclusion order.

        B.     A person excluded pursuant to subsection A may not enter or remain upon that city property during the exclusion period. If the exclusion is from City Hall or other city building and it is necessary for the excluded subject to file documents, pay a debt, or otherwise conduct necessary business, the transaction must be conducted by telephone, mail or e-mail if possible. If the excluded party is required to appear in a municipal court proceeding or must appear in person to conduct business, the excluded party will notify the City Manager at least 24 hours in advance of the pending appearance in municipal court or on city property.

        C.     A person will be given a warning and an opportunity to comply with the law or rule before an exclusion notice is issued unless the exclusion is based on:

        1.     Conduct punishable as a felony;

        2.     Controlled substances or alcoholic beverages;

        3.     Actions actually or likely to result in personal injury or property damage; or

        4.     The person having been previously warned or excluded for the same conduct in a separate situation.

        D.    An exclusion notice will not be issued if the person promptly complies with the warning under subsection C.

        E.     An exclusion notice will be written and include:

        1.     The signature of the issuing party and date of issuance;

        2.     The effective dates of the exclusion period;

        3.     The places from which the person is excluded;

        4.     The provisions of law violated;

        5.     A brief description of the offending conduct;

        6.     A statement of the consequences for failure to comply; and

        7.     The appropriate municipal court procedures.

        F.     The code does not authorize exclusion of a person lawfully exercising free speech rights or other rights protected by state or federal law. (Ord. 2013-05 §1)

 

9.14.030 Rules of conduct.
        While on or about city property:

        A.    No person shall violate any federal, state, or city law.

        B.     No person shall enter or remain on any city property for purposes other than to conduct legitimate business with the city or to use that property lawfully under the laws and rules that apply.

        C.     No person shall enter or attempt to enter any secure portion of any city property that is not open to members of the general public without authorization from the City Manager or a designee.

        D.    No person shall deface, damage, or destroy city property.

        E.     No person shall engage in conduct that degrades the appearance of city property, including, but not limited to, depositing trash, defacing property, or spitting.

        F.     No person shall engage in conduct that disrupts or interferes with operations of the city government, including, but not limited to, conduct that creates unreasonable noise or consists of loud or boisterous physical behavior that actually disrupts the operations of city government.

        G.    No person shall refuse to obey any lawful direction of a city employee.

        H.    No person shall violate any provisions posted on any city parking facility. (Ord. 2013-05 §1)

 

9.14.040 Appeal of exclusion.
        A.    A person receiving an exclusion notice may appeal to the municipal court and seek to have the exclusion reversed or the exclusion period shortened.

        B.     An appeal of an exclusion notice must be filed with the city within 10 calendar days of receipt of the notice, unless extended by the municipal court.

        C.     An appeal of an exclusion notice automatically stays the exclusion period until a decision on appeal is issued by the municipal court, unless the reason for the exclusion was an immediate exclusion based on public safety risks.

        D.    The municipal court will decide all appeals within 10 days of their filing unless the hearing date is extended by court order. (Ord. 2013-05 §1)

 

9.14.050 Violation—Penalty.
        Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine up to $500.00. (Ord. 2013-05 §1)

Chapter 9.16 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND DECENCY
9.16.010 Drinking in public places.
        It is unlawful to drink or consume any alcoholic beverage or have in one’s possession any bottle, can or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, while in or upon any public street, alley, park or other public grounds, school grounds or municipal buildings; provided that the city council may permit the service and consumption of alcoholic beverages within designated publicly owned or controlled areas on such terms and conditions as the council may provide, including, but not limited to, compliance with applicable Oregon Liquor Control Commission rules and regulations. (Ord. 2016-04 §1)

 

9.16.020 Unlawful camping.
        A.    For purposes of this section, the term “camp” means to set up, or to remain in or at a campsite, for the purpose of establishing or maintaining a temporary place to live. The term “campsite” means any place where any bedding, sleeping bag, or other sleeping matter, or any stove or fire is placed, established, or maintained, whether or not such place incorporates the use of any tent, lean-to, shack, or any other structure, or any vehicle or part thereof.

        B.     It is unlawful for a person to camp in or upon private property without the express written permission of the owner or person lawfully in charge of such property.

        C.     It is unlawful for any person to camp in or upon any public property or public right-of-way, unless otherwise specifically authorized by this code or by declaration by the City Manager in emergency circumstances.

        D.    No owner or person in charge of private property shall permit camping on such property unless such activity occurs in accordance with all applicable provisions of the city’s development code and the property owner or person in charge has given written permission to the individuals camping on such property. Unless otherwise permitted by Chapter 15.08 of this code, no owner or person in charge of private property may permit another individual to camp on such property for more than 72 hours in any 30-day period. Exceptions may be granted under emergency conditions as declared by the City Manager. (Ord. 2016-04 §1)

 

9.16.030 Unlawful urination and defecation.
        It is unlawful for any person to urinate, defecate, or expose any intimate part with the intent to expel human excrement, on a premises open to the public or in the public view. For the purposes of this section, the term “intimate part” means uncovered human genitals, pubic areas, or buttocks. (Ord. 2016-04 §1)

 

9.16.040 Offensive littering by an animal.
        Any person in control of an animal which defecates upon a premises open to the public or on the property of another without permission of the property owner commits the offense of permitting offensive littering by an animal if said person fails to promptly remove and properly dispose of the animal waste. (Ord. 2016-04 §1)

 

9.16.050 Obstructing passageways.
        It is unlawful, except as otherwise allowed by ordinance or special permit, to obstruct, cause to obstruct or assist in obstructing, with the intent to interfere with free passage, pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any public way or premises open to the public. (Ord. 2016-04 §1)

 

9.16.060 Penalties.
        A violation of any provision of this chapter is a Class C misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction by a fine, fixed by the court, not exceeding $1,250 and a maximum term of imprisonment of not more than 30 days. (Ord. 2016-04 §1)

 

9.16.070 Severability.
        The sections, subsections, paragraphs and clauses of this chapter are severable. The invalidity of one section, subsection, paragraph, or clause does not affect the validity of the remaining sections, subsections, paragraphs or clauses. (Ord. 2016-04 §1)

Chapter 9.32 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
9.32.010 Purpose.
        The City Council finds that certain items designed or marketed for use with illegal drugs enhance the appeal of and contribute to the illegal use of controlled substances among its young people. It therefore desires to ban the sale and display of these items and to limit the distribution of illegal drug paraphernalia to individuals for the health, safety and welfare of the City and its residents. (Ord. 2006-03 §2)

 

9.32.020 Definitions.
        A.    “Controlled substance”: as defined by ORS 475.005(6).

        B.     “Deliver” or “delivery”: as defined by ORS 475.005(8).

        C.     “Drug paraphernalia”: as defined by ORS 475.525(2).

        D.    “Marijuana”: as defined by ORS 475.005(16).

        E.     “Medical practitioner”: “Licensed pharmacists” as well as “any practitioners” as defined by ORS 475.005(18). (Ord. 2006-03 §2)

 

9.32.030 Determination of objects as drug paraphernalia.
        In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court of competent jurisdiction or other proper authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following:

        A.    Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use;

        B.     Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any municipal, state, or federal law relating to any controlled substance;

        C.     The proximity of the object to controlled substances;

        D.    The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;

        E.     Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she knows intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of municipal, state or federal law; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a violation of this law or state law shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;

        F.     Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use;

        G.    Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use;

        H.    National and local advertising concerning its use;

        I.      The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;

        J.      Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.

        K.    Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;

        L.     The existence and scope of the legitimate uses for the object in the community; and

        M.    Expert testimony concerning its use. (Ord. 2006-03 §2)

 

9.32.040 Offenses and penalties.
        A.    Possession of Drug Paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance.

        B.     Manufacture or Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing or under circumstances where one reasonably should know that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance. (Ord. 2006-03 §2)

 

9.32.050 Exemption.
        Medical practitioners and agents acting under their supervision in the course of a professional practice are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-03 §2)

 

9.32.060 Nuisance.
        A.    Drug paraphernalia are declared to be public nuisances. Any peace officer may seize any such paraphernalia and it shall be held subject to the order of a court of competent jurisdiction as to its disposition.

        B.     Whenever it appears to such court that drug paraphernalia has been possessed in violation of this chapter, the court shall order the Chief of Police to destroy the paraphernalia. (Ord. 2006-03 §2)

 

9.32.070 Infraction procedure.
        A violation of subsections 9.32.040(A) or (B) shall be punishable under the general penalty provisions of Chapter 1.04 of the Molalla Municipal Code. Citations shall be issued and court procedures followed consistent with ORS 153.030 through 153.121. (Ord. 2006-03 §2)

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Division I. General Provisions
Division II. Traffic
Division III. Parking
Division IV. Vehicles
Division I. General Provisions
Chapter 10.08 DEFINITIONS
10.08.010 Generally.
In addition to those definitions contained in the adopted section of the Motor Vehicle Laws of Oregon, the following words or phrases, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, shall have the meanings set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 517 §2, 1970)

 

10.08.020 Alley.
“Alley” means a narrow street through the interior of a block. (Ord. 517 §2(l), 1970)

 

10.08.030 Bicycle.
“Bicycle” means every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is over 15 inches in diameter. (Ord. 517 §2(2), 1970)

 

10.08.040 Bus stand.
“Bus stand” means a fixed area in the roadway adjacent to the curb to be occupied, exclusively by buses for layover in operating schedules or waiting for passengers. (Ord. 517 §2(3), 1970)

 

10.08.050 City Recorder.
“City Recorder” means the City Recorder or authorized representative. (Ord. 517 §2(4), 1970)

 

10.08.060 Curb.
“Curb” means the extreme edge of the roadway. (Ord. 517 §2(5), 1970)

 

10.08.070 Holidays.
“Holidays” means, where used in this title or on signs or other devices erected in accordance with this title, Sundays and legal holidays. (Ord. 517 §2(6), 1970)

 

10.08.080 Loading zone.
“Loading zone” means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of materials or freight. (Ord. 517 §2(7), 1970)

 

10.08.090 Park or parking.
“Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when a vehicle is temporarily standing for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading. (Ord. 517 §2(8), 1970)

 

10.08.100 Parkway.
“Parkway” means that portion of a street not used as a roadway or as a sidewalk. (Ord. 517 §2(9), 1970)

 

10.08.110 Passenger loading zone.
“Passenger loading zone” means a loading zone reserved only for the loading or unloading of passengers and their luggage. (Ord. 517 §2(10), 1970)

 

10.08.120 Pedestrian.
“Pedestrian” means any person afoot. (Ord. 517 §2(11), 1970)

 

10.08.130 Person.
“Person” means every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation. (Ord. 517 §2(12), 1970)

 

10.08.140 Stop.
“Stop” means complete cessation of movement. (Ord. 517 §2(13), 1970)

 

10.08.150 Taxicab stand.
“Taxicab stand” means a fixed area in the roadway adjacent to the curb set aside for taxicabs to stand or wait for passengers. (Ord. 517 §2(14), 1970)

 

10.08.160 Traffic lane.
“Traffic lane” means that portion of the roadway used for the movement of a single line of vehicles. (Ord. 517 §2(15), 1970)

 

10.08.170 Vehicle, inoperable.
For purposes of this title, “inoperable motor vehicle” is defined as any vehicle which is unregistered or unlicensed, or in a wrecked, abandoned and/or junked condition, or which cannot be moved without being repaired or dismantled, or which is no longer safely useable for the purposes for which it was manufactured. The term “inoperable motor vehicle” includes major parts of vehicles, including, but not limited to, bodies, panels, fenders, engines, running gear and transmissions. (Ord. 2019-03 §1)

 

Chapter 10.12 ADMINISTRATION
10.12.010 City Council—Authority to designate traffic controls.
        After approval by the State Highway Commission where such approval is required by the Motor Vehicle Laws of Oregon and for the best use of the streets in the public interest, the Council shall designate by resolution the following traffic-controls which shall become effective upon installation of appropriate traffic signs, signals, markings or devices:

        A.    Parking meter zones, denomination of coins for deposit in parking meters, the parking time permitted for the deposit of the coin and the hours during which the deposit of coin is required;

        B.     Through streets;

        C.     One-way streets;

        D.    Truck routes;

        E.     Streets where trucks, machinery or any other large or heavy vehicles exceeding specified weights are prohibited, except for delivering or picking up materials or merchandise but then only by entering such streets at the intersection nearest the destination of the vehicle and leaving by the shortest routes. (Ord. 517 §3(l), 1970)

 

10.12.020 City Council—Authority to prohibit, remove or alter traffic controls.
        Except when contrary to state law, if it appears that public safety or welfare does not require the installation or maintenance of a traffic sign, signal, marking or device, or will be better served by the removal or alteration thereof, the Council may, by resolution forbid the installation or order the removal or alteration of any traffic sign, signal, marking or device that is proposed or installed under Sections 10.12.030 through 10.12.040 and 10.12.060. Such traffic controls shall become inoperative only when removed or altered. (Ord. 517 §3(2), 1970)

 

10.12.030 City Manager—Authority to provide minor traffic regulations.
        In making the best use of streets and sidewalks for vehicle traffic and parking and pedestrian traffic, the City Manager or designee is authorized to provide appropriate and reasonable regulation of the classes of traffic, signs, signals, markings and devices described in Section 10.12.040 for the streets, sidewalks, and other public property of the City as are found appropriate by the State Highway Commission where such approval is required by the Motor Vehicle Laws of Oregon, the City Manager shall base his or her determination only upon:

        A.    Traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations;

        B.     Standards, limitations and rules promulgated by the State Highway Commission; and

        C.     Other recognized traffic control standards. (Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 517 §4(l), 1970)

 

10.12.040 City Manager—Establishment, removal or alteration of classes of traffic control.
        Pursuant to Section 10.12.030, the City Manager or designee may establish, maintain, remove or alter the following classes of traffic controls:

        A.    Street areas and City-owned or leased land upon which parking may be entirely prohibited or prohibited during certain hours and the angle of such parking;

        B.     Parking meters within the zone provided for parking meters;

        C.     The location and the time of operation of traffic control signals;

        D.    Bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common carrier vehicles;

        E.     The location of passenger loading zones for use in connection with a hotel, auditorium, theater, church, school or public building;

        F.     Loading zones for commercial purposes;

        G.    Intersections or areas where drivers of vehicles shall not make right, left or U-turns and the time when the prohibition applies;

        H.    Crosswalks, safety zones, parking spaces, traffic lanes and other symbols;

        I.      Traffic-control signs;

        J.      All other signs, signals, markings and devices required to implement traffic and parking controls enacted by the Council or required by state law or regulations. (Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 517 §4(2), 1970)

 

10.12.050 City Manager—Experimental or emergency regulations.
        Pursuant to Section 10.12.030, the City Manager or designee may provide for experimental or emergency traffic regulation of a temporary nature that shall not remain in effect more than 30 days. No experimental or emergency regulation is effective until adequate traffic signs, signals, markings or devices are erected. (Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 517 §4(3), 1970)

 

10.12.060 City Manager—Action contrary to state law prohibited.
        The City Manager or designee shall not remove or alter a traffic sign, signal, marking or device if his or her act would be contrary to state law or ordinance. If a traffic sign, signal, marking, or device is installed under authority of a resolution of the Council, the Council shall first approve any change or alteration by the City Manager. (Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 517 §4(4), 1970)

 

10.12.070 Authority of police and fire officers.
        A.    It shall be the duty of the Molalla Police Department through its officers to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

        B.     In the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Molalla Police Department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of this title.

        C.     When at the scene of a fire, members of the fire department may direct or assist the police in directing traffic. (Ord. 517 §5, 1970)

 

Chapter 10.16 ACCIDENTS
10.16.010 Removing glass and debris.
        Any party to a collision or other vehicle accident or any other person causing glass or other material or substance likely to injure any person, animal, or vehicle to be upon any street in this City shall as soon as possible remove or cause to be removed from such street all such glass or other material or substance. (Ord. 517 §46, 1970)

 

Chapter 10.20 VIOLATIONS AND CITATIONS
10.20.010 Citation issuance.
        For the violation of any provisions of this title, the Molalla Police Department may issue a citation which shall be in the form required by law. (Ord. 517 §61, 1970)

 

10.20.020 When warrant to be issued.
        If any person fails to comply with the terms of a traffic citation, the Court may issue a warrant for the arrest of such person. (Ord. 1977-10 §3; Ord. 517 §62, 1970)

 

10.20.030 Illegal, cancellation of traffic citations.
        No person shall cancel or solicit the cancellation of any traffic citation in any manner except where approved by the Municipal Court Judge. (Ord. 517 §60, 1970)

Division II. Traffic
Chapter 10.28 DRIVING AND RIDING GENERALLY
10.28.010 Damaging sidewalks and curbs.
        Any person who damages or causes to be damaged any public improvement within the street by driving a vehicle upon or within any sidewalk or parkway area shall be liable for such damage. (Ord. 517 §44(2), 1970)

 

10.28.020 Obstructing streets.
        Except as provided by this title or any other ordinance of the City, no person shall place, park, deposit, or leave upon any street or other public way, sidewalk, or curb any article or thing or material which in any way prevents, interrupts, or obstructs the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or obstructs a driver’s view of traffic or official traffic signs and signals. (Ord. 517 §45, 1970)

 

Chapter 10.32 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
10.32.010 Permits required for parades.
        No procession or parade, except a funeral procession, the forces of the United States armed forces and the military forces of this state, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police. Such permit may be granted where it is found that such parade is not held for any unlawful purpose and will not in any manner tend to a breach of the peace, cause damage, or unreasonably interfere with the public use of the streets, or the peace and quiet of the inhabitants of this City. (Ord. 517 §25, 1970)

 

10.32.015 Application for permit—Fees.
        Parade permits shall be applied for no later than 30 days before the day of the parade, on forms which shall be available at City Hall. The Council may set the amount of any parade permit fees by resolution, and may waive the fee for good cause. (Ord. 1993-1 §1)

 

10.32.020 Funeral procession.
        Vehicles in a funeral procession may be escorted by at least one person authorized by the Chief of Police to direct traffic for such purposes and shall follow routes established by the Chief of Police. (Ord. 517 §26, 1970)

 

10.32.030 Drivers in procession.
        Except when approaching a left turn, each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive along the right-hand traffic lane and shall follow the vehicle ahead as closely as is practical and safe. (Ord. 517 §27, 1970)

 

10.32.040 Driving through procession.
        No driver of a vehicle shall cross through a procession except where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or when so directed by a police officer. This provision shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. (Ord. 517 §28, 1970)

 

Chapter 10.36 PEDESTRIANS
10.36.010 Use of sidewalks.
        Pedestrians shall not use any roadway for travel when abutting sidewalks are available. (Ord. 517 §24, 1970)

 

Chapter 10.38 SKATEBOARDS
10.38.010 Definition.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the word “skateboard” means a board of any material, natural or synthetic, with wheels affixed to the underside, designed to be ridden by a person. (Ord. 1989-7 §1)

 

10.38.020 Designation of no skateboarding zones.
The City Council may by resolution designate the entirety or any portion of any street, sidewalk, alley, parkway or City-owned property as a no skateboarding zone. Such zones shall be marked by appropriate signs. (Ord. 1989-7 §1)

 

10.38.030 Violation—Penalty.
        No person shall use a skateboard within any no skateboarding zone designated as provided by this chapter. The penalty for violation of this chapter shall be a fine of not more than $100.00. (Ord. 1989-7 §1)

 

Chapter 10.40 ADOPTED TRUCK ROUTES AND RESTRICTIONS
10.40.010 Definitions.
        “Motor truck” means a motor vehicle that is primarily designed or used for carrying loads other than passengers and that has either: (A) three or more axles; or (B) a registration weight exceeding 20,000 pounds. The term “motor truck” includes a combination vehicle consisting of a truck tractor and one or more truck trailers.

        “Registration Weight” means the loaded weight required under ORS 803.430 to be declared and established as the maximum loaded weight at which certain vehicles may be operated on public roads. (Ord. 2020-12 §1)

 

10.40.020 Truck operation on designated routes.
        Except as provided in Section 10.40.030, no person shall operate any motor truck upon any street within the City unless designated as a truck route under Section 10.40.040. (Ord. 2020-12 §1)

 

10.40.030 Exemptions and defenses.
        A.    Section 10.40.020 shall not apply to:

        1.     Motor trucks owned by a Federal, State, or local government while being used for a public purpose.

        2.     Motor trucks operated as emergency vehicles, as defined in ORS 801.260.

        3.     Motor trucks operated on a detour approved by the City.

        4.     Motor trucks operated in conjunction with a capital improvement project funded by the City.

        5.     Motor trucks operated in conjunction with a private development project along routes approved by the City.

        6.     City franchise utility providing garbage and waste disposal services provided the vehicle has not exceeded its registration weight.

        7.     Motor truck performing pickup or delivery, performing or receiving a service, or store the motor truck and could not reach the destination by using a truck route, but had used a truck route to reach the intersection closest to the destination.

        B.     It is a defense to a charge of violation of Section 10.40.020 if the person so charged can establish any of the following:

        1.     That the person was going to a destination to make a pickup or delivery, performing or receiving a service, or store the motor truck and could not reach the destination by using a truck route, but had used a truck route to reach the intersection closest to the destination.

        2.     That the person was coming from a destination described in subsection (B)(1) of this section and was directly headed to the closest truck route from the destination.

        3.     That the person was coming from a destination described in subsection (B)(1) of this section and was directly headed to another destination to make a pickup or delivery, perform a service, or store the motor truck, and that the second destination was located closer to the first destination than the first destination was located to the closest truck route. (Ord. 2020-12 §1)

 

10.40.040 Adopted truck routes.
        The following roadways and portions of roadways within the City limits are hereby designated as truck routes:

        A.    State Highway 211 (Main Street) from the westerly City limits to the easterly City limits.

        B.     State Highway 213 from the northerly City limits to the southerly City limits.

        C.     Molalla Avenue from the northerly City limits to Heintz Street and southerly City limits to Section Street.

        D.    Heintz Street from Molalla Avenue to Grange Avenue.

        E      Grange Avenue from East Heintz Street to State Highway 211 (Main Street).

        F.     Section Street from Molalla Avenue to Shaver Avenue.

        G.    Shaver Avenue from Section Street to State Highway 211 (Main Street).

        H.    Mathias Road from the southerly City limits to State Highway 211 (Main Street).

        I.      Molalla Forest Road from Ona Way to State Highway 211 (Main Street). (Ord. 2020-12 §1)

 

10.40.050 Truck restrictions.
        The following roadways are hereby designated as restricted to truck traffic except as identified in Section 10.20.030 and shall be posted at each end and at intersections where truck routes cross the restricted section of roadway:

        Molalla Avenue from Heintz Street to Section Street. (Ord. 2020-12 §1)

 

10.40.060 Signage.
        Pursuant to ORS 810.040(3) and (4), the City shall erect and maintain signs in a conspicuous manner placed at each end of a street or section of street where a designation or prohibition is imposed by this chapter to give notice of the prohibitions or the designations imposed, and shall erect signs at such other places as may be necessary to inform the public. A prohibition or designation imposed under this chapter is effective when signs giving notice thereof are posted in accordance with this section. (Ord. 2020-12 §1)

 

10.40.070 Weigh-in.
        Any peace officer may require a person moving or driving a truck on a road other than a truck route to proceed to any available public or private scale for the purpose of weighing the truck. (Ord. 2020-12 §1)

 

10.20.080 Penalty and liability.
        A.    A violation of this chapter is a Class B traffic violation under the Molalla Municipal Code and ORS 811.450.

        B.     In addition to any penalty that may be imposed under this ordinance, the owner and driver of a motor truck using a road in violation of this chapter shall be jointly and severally liable to the City for all damages done as a result of the violation. (Ord. 2020-12 §1)

Division III. Parking
Chapter 10.41 PARKING, STANDING AND STOPPING
10.41.010 Parking standards.
        A.    Whenever any motor vehicle is parked upon any street in the city it shall be headed as though proceeding upon the right side of the street.

        B.     Where parking space markings are placed on a street, in a parking lot or in a parking structure, no person shall stand or park a vehicle other than in the indicated direction, other than in a marked space and, unless the size or shape of the vehicle makes compliance impossible, other than within a single marked space.

        C.     Where no mode of parking is indicated by a painted stripe or other marking, any and all vehicles parked in any unmarked area shall be parked parallel with the street curb and with the tires or wheels on the right-hand side of such vehicle, within 12 inches of the curb.

        D.    Whenever the operator of a vehicle discovers that his or her vehicle is parked close to a building to which the fire department or ambulance service has been summoned, the operator shall immediately remove the vehicle from the area unless otherwise directed by police, ambulance or fire personnel. (Ord. 1995-10 §2)

 

10.41.020 Parking time limits.
        A.    The lawful time allowed for parking vehicles other than motor trucks engaged in the actual loading or unloading of freight or merchandise shall, in any section of any street, be as indicated by lettering upon the face of painted signs placed at the top of standards placed along the curb line of any section of any street, or by parking meters. Such time limits and the indication thereof may be changed from time to time by resolution. The time limits shall mean the continuous aggregate of time of all parking of any one vehicle within any one block or any blocks adjacent thereto within the daily time limits. This shall not prohibit removing a vehicle from the above designated area and returning the vehicle to said area after expiration of one hour.

        B.     Time limits shall be applicable between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Such time limits shall not apply on Sundays, New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, July 4th, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, Christmas, Veterans Day or Martin Luther King Day.

        C.     It is unlawful to erase, remove or obliterate any marking that has been placed on a vehicle for the purpose of monitoring parking time limits.

        D.    A separate violation occurs upon the expiration of each successive maximum period of the designated time limit.

        E.     It is unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked, any truck, truck trailer or large commercial vehicle in or on any street, alley, sidewalk or parking strip in areas where no mode of parking is indicated by signs or markings for a longer period of time than three hours at any one time unless said equipment is being used for some purpose in connection with the property immediately in front of which the vehicle is parked. (Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 1995-10 §2)

 

10.41.030 Signs and markings.
        Subject to the approval of the City Council by resolution, the City Manager or designee may:

        A.    Designate stop streets;

        B.     Designate crosswalks, safety zones and traffic lanes;

        C.     Designate areas in which no parking shall be permitted and areas in which the time of parking is to be limited, and shall install additional parking meters as required;

        D.    Direct the placing and maintenance of such traffic signs, markers and signals as may be reasonable or necessary to carry the above powers into effect and for the regulation and safety of traffic;

        E.     Exercise a general supervision over the administration and enforcement of all traffic regulations;

        F.     Require the pruning or trimming of trees and shrubs along streets and highways so that they will not obstruct the view for traffic, and order the removal or alteration of any signs, fences or other objects along streets and highways that are an obstruction of the view for traffic. (Ord. 1995-10 §2)

 

10.41.040 Registered owner presumption.
        In a prosecution of a vehicle owner charging a violation of a restriction on parking, proof that the vehicle at the time of the violation was registered to the defendant shall constitute a presumption that the defendant was then the owner in fact. (Ord. 1995-10 §2)

 

10.41.050 Prohibited parking—Fines and bail.
        A.    No operator shall stand or park a vehicle and no owner shall allow a vehicle to stand or park on a street, city property, property controlled by the city or property for which the city is contracted to enforce parking regulations when there is $40.00 or more in unpaid bail, fines, costs, or a combination of bail, fines and costs for parking violation(s) in this code and the time for appearing or posting bail in Municipal Court specified on the citation(s) or the time for payment of the fine has passed.

        B.     When a vehicle is standing or parked in violation of subsection A of this section, the parking control officer or police officer shall immobilize the vehicle. (Ord. 1995-10 §2)

 

10.41.090 Prohibited stopping, standing and parking.
        A.    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in such a manner or location that it constitutes a hazard to public safety or an obstruction to vehicle, bicycle or pedestrian traffic on the street, which shall include, but not be limited to, stopping, standing or parking:

        1.     On a sidewalk;

        2.     Within an intersection;

        3.     On a crosswalk;

        4.     Alongside or opposite a street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;

        5.     On any railroad tracks or within seven and one-half feet of the nearest rail at a time when the parking of vehicles would conflict with railroad operations or repair of the railroad tracks;

        6.     Any place where official signs or markings prohibit stopping, standing or parking.

        B.     Except to momentarily pick up or discharge a passenger, no person shall stand or park a vehicle in such a manner or location that it constitutes a hazard to public safety or an obstruction to vehicle, bicycle or pedestrian traffic on the street, which shall include but not be limited to, standing or parking:

        1.     On the roadway side of a vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;

        2.     In front of a public or private driveway;

        3.     In front of and 10 feet on either side of a delivery mailbox, between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sunday and official postal holidays;

        4.     Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant;

        5.     Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;

        6.     Within 50 feet upon the approach to an official flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of the street if the standing or parking of the vehicle obstructs the view of the official traffic-control device located at the side of the street;

        7.     Within 15 feet of the driveway entrance to a fire station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to the fire station within 75 feet of the entrance;

        8.     Within an area marked by yellow paint on the street or on the curb;

        9.     On a street or portion thereof designated by official signs as a “tow-away zone”;

        10.   Other than a motorbus in a bus stop which has been designated by official signs or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand which has been designated by official signs, or at any time in interference with any motorbus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the officially designated space;

        11.   A motorbus or taxicab on a street in a business district at a place other than a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively.

        C.     In the event a vehicle has been found standing or parked in violation of subsections A and B of this section, in addition to and after issuance of a citation for violation, the vehicle may be removed and impounded, and a hearing and sale provided for, as provided in Chapter 10.70 of this code. (Ord. 2013-06 §1; Ord. 1995-10 §2)

 

10.41.100 Impoundment.
        A.    When this code or state law provides for impounding a vehicle, it shall be given a citation and may be removed by or under the direction of a police officer or parking control officer of the city; taken to the city facilities for storing vehicles or to some reputable vehicle storage facility; and kept there until it is redeemed or sold.

        B.     Unless otherwise stated in this code or state law, removal, impoundment and sale of vehicles shall be as provided in Chapter 10.70.

        C.     This section shall not apply to vehicles impounded under the direction of a police officer for:

        1.     Criminal investigative purposes; or

        2.     For safekeeping when the operator or other occupants thereof of the vehicle are unable to safely and lawfully park or operate the vehicle. (Ord. 1995-10 §2)

 

10.41.110 Impoundment—Owner’s responsibility.
        The owner of a vehicle shall be responsible for the cost of towing and storage of the vehicle impounded plus the costs of notice and sale as provided in Sections 10.41.090 and 10.41.100. (Ord. 1995-10 §2)

 

10.41.120 Violation—Penalty.
        Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00 for each violation. (Ord. 1995-10 §2)

 

10.41.130 Exemptions and exceptions.
        Any vehicle licensed to the City of Molalla, Clackamas County, Molalla Fire District or State of Oregon, while being operated by an authorized government employee during the course of performing the employee’s official duties under emergency or urgent circumstances, may park in a non-parking or restricted parking area, zone or space, except for parking areas designated for disabled persons. (Ord. 2010-05 §1)

 

Chapter 10.42 OVERNIGHT PARKING IN CITY-OWNED PARKING LOTS
10.42.010 Overnight parking in city parking lots prohibited without permit.
        No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle or trailer on city parking lots overnight, except as permitted herein. (Ord. 2008-09)

 

10.42.015 Exception.
        The provisions of the above section shall not apply to emergency vehicles or to vehicles for which an overnight parking permit has been issued and is in effect. City employees who are working for the city during these hours are also exempt. It is within the discretion of the City Manager to waive overnight parking permits fees for residential tenants of buildings abutting city-owned lots and other guests or visitors upon a determination that it is in the best interests of the city. (Ord. 2008-09)

 

10.42.020 Parking permit.
        Any person intending to stop, stand or park a vehicle or trailer on city-owned parking lots overnight on any day may apply to the City Recorder for a permit in accordance with administrative procedures established by the City Manager or designee. Denial by the city of a parking permit application may be appealed to the City Manager or City Council. (Ord. 2008-09)

 

10.42.025 Fees.
        Fees for overnight parking permits will be established by resolution by the City Council and maintained in the city administrative list of fees. (Ord. 2008-09)

 

10.42.030 Overnight parking permits.
        A.    An overnight parking permit will be issued once the overnight parking application has been received and the fee is paid.

        B.     An overnight parking permit may be purchased on a per night, per week, per month or annual basis, as determined by the City Manager or designee.

        C.     Overnight parking permits must be displayed by parked vehicles so as to be easily visible from outside the vehicle. (Ord. 2008-09)

 

10.42.035 Penalties.
        A.    Vehicles or trailers parked in a city-owned lot overnight without a permit are subject to a citation as provided in Section 10.41.120.

        B.     Vehicles or trailers parked in a city-owned lot for 72 hours or more without a permit are subject to being towed and impounded at the owner’s expense, as provided in Sections 10.41.100 and 10.41.110. (Ord. 2008-09)

 

10.42.040 Notification.
        The City Manager shall ensure that signage is posted in city-owned parking lots sufficient to inform motorists of overnight parking restrictions. (Ord. 2008-09)

 

Chapter 10.44 LOADING ZONES AND TRANSIT STANDS
10.44.010 Use of loading zones.
        No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials or freight in any place designated as a loading zone during the hours when the provisions applicable to loading zones are in effect. (Ord. 517 §13(l), 1970)

 

10.44.020 Use of passenger loading zones.
        No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place designated as a passenger loading zone during the hours when the provisions applicable to passenger loading zones are in effect. (Ord. 517 §13(2), 1970)

 

10.44.030 Stopping, standing or parking of buses and taxicabs regulated.
        The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stand or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any taxicab from temporarily stopping for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the loading or unloading of passengers. (Ord. 517 §14, 1970)

 

10.44.040 Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands.
        No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stand or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab about to enter or using such zone. (Ord. 517 §15, 1970)

 

Chapter 10.52 CONTROLLED PARKING ZONES
10.52.010 Created.
        The controlled parking zone as defined in this section is created on the following streets:

        A.    Molalla Avenue, from Second Street to Ross Avenue;

        B.     Main Street, from Hart and Kennel Avenues to Berkley and Grange Avenues;

        C.     Engle Avenue from Main Street to Second Street, and on the westerly side 100 feet south of Second Street;

        D.    Center Street from Main to Ross Avenue; and

        E.     From time to time hereafter, as traffic conditions require, on such streets and avenues or other locations as selected by resolution of the City Council of the City of Molalla. (Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 1975-3 §1)

 

10.52.020 Time limitation.
        Time of parking limitation of parking in the controlled parking zone between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. shall be two hours, except for such places as designated by the street committee and posted with a shorter time limitation. (Ord. 1975-3 §2)

 

10.52.030 Penalty for violation of Sections 10.52.010 and 10.52.020.
        The penalty for violating the time limitation by overtime parking in the controlled parking zone shall be as follows:

        A.    Violation of parking restriction shall carry a fine of $20.00.

        B.     The fine automatically doubles after 30 days of issuance of the citation that has not been paid.

        C.     If the fine is not paid within 30 days, a five-dollar administration fee will be assessed and the unpaid fines will be turned over to collections.

        D.    If three or more unpaid parking citations accumulate on any one vehicle, the court may order the vehicle immobilized or towed until all fines have been paid. (Ord. 2012-06 §1; Ord. 1975-3 §3)

 

10.52.040 Parking on north side of Main Street restricted.
        All parking of all automotive vehicles or tractors is prohibited on the north side of Main Street between Grange and Center Streets, on all school days between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. (Ord. 209 §1, 1944)

 

Chapter 10.56 LOCKING UNATTENDED VEHICLE
10.56.010 Required.
        No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, and removing the ignition key from the vehicle. (Ord. 1967-11 §1)

 

10.56.020 Removal of key from vehicles by police authorized.
        Whenever any police officer shall find a motor vehicle in violation of this chapter, such police officer is authorized to remove such key from such vehicle. (Ord. 1967-11 §2)

 

10.56.030 Registered vehicle owner responsible for violations.
        The registered owner of a vehicle found in violation of this chapter shall be held prima facie responsible for any such violation. (Ord. 1967-11 §3)

 

10.56.040 Violation—Penalty.
        The penalty for violation of this chapter shall be a fine of not more than $100.00. Charges under this section shall be tried as violations, to the Court, in the manner provided in ORS 153.505 and 153.575. (Ord. 1977-10 §§1, 2; Ord. 1967-11 §4)

Division IV. Vehicles
Chapter 10.60 LUGS
10.60.010 Operation of vehicle with lugs prohibited.
        It is unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle upon the City streets of the City of Molalla which has lugs of any kind fixed to the wheels thereof. (Ord. 225 §1, 1947)

 

10.60.020 Violation—Penalty.
        Every person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before the Municipal Court Judge of the City of Molalla, County of Clackamas, State of Oregon, be fined in a sum not exceeding $100.00 and/or imprisonment in the City jail not to exceed 15 days. (Ord. 225 §2, 1947)

 

Chapter 10.64 VEHICLES EXCEEDING ONE-TON CARRYING CAPACITY
10.64.010 Operation prohibited on certain streets.
        The operation of any vehicle or combination of vehicles exceeding a carrying capacity of one ton is prohibited or restricted on the streets set forth in Section 10.64.020. (Ord. 1981-9 §1)

 

10.64.020 Streets where prohibited designated.
        The provisions of this chapter apply to those streets located in the area commonly known as Sunrise Acres, as follows: East Second, East Third, East Fourth, East Fifth, East Sixth, East Seventh, Stowers and South Cole. (Ord. 1981-9 §2)

 

10.64.030 Exemptions.
        The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:

        A.    Motor homes;

        B.     Any vehicle, combination of vehicles, or other equipment while being used by the City of Molalla or their agents in the construction, maintenance or repair of public streets; or

        C.     Vehicles used to provide services directly to the residents of the aforementioned streets, such as fuel trucks, repair vehicles, utility or sanitation vehicles, moving trucks, telephone trucks, and construction vehicles. (Ord. 1981-9 §3)

 

10.64.040 Application for authorization to operate certain noncomplying vehicles.
        A.    Upon application, the Director of Public Works may issue written authorization for the operation of certain noncomplying vehicles when it is determined that the public interest will be served. When granting such authorization, the authorization may be valid for a single trip, a number of trips, for a continuous operation, seasonal, or may establish other time limitations. The authorization may establish any additional terms, limits or conditions that are necessary or desirable for the protection of the streets and the public interest.

        B.     Any authorization so granted may be cancelled if any terms are violated, if it was obtained through misrepresentation, or if public interest shall require. (Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 1981-9 §4)

 

10.64.050 Signposting of restrictions required.
        A sign giving notice of the restriction or limitations contained in this chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous manner and placed at each end of the street or section of street affected. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to require actual or constructive notice for violation of this chapter. Once such signs have been duly posted, their destruction, removal, or damage by members of the public shall not affect the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 1981-9 §5)

 

10.64.060 Violation—Penalty.
        Violation by any owner or operator of any vehicle or combination of vehicles of the provisions of this chapter is punishable by a fine of not greater than $250.00. (Ord. 1981-9 §6)

 

Chapter 10.70 TOWING AND DISPOSITION OF VEHICLES
10.70.010 When a vehicle may be towed.
        A vehicle may be towed and held at the expense of the owner or person entitled to possession thereof from:

        A.    Any public right-of-way, public park or other public place, when:

        1.     The vehicle is parked in violation of a temporary or permanent parking restriction;

        2.     The vehicle is parked unlawfully or in a manner that may be hazardous to traffic;

        3.     The vehicle is parked on City-owned or operated property without express City permission;

        4.     The vehicle was used in committing a traffic or parking violation for which an unserved warrant or citation is on file with the Clerk of any Court;

        5.     The vehicle has been reported stolen;

        6.     The vehicle or its contents are to be used as evidence in traffic or criminal prosecutions;

        7.     The vehicle is in possession of a person taken into custody by a law enforcement agency; no other reasonable disposition of the vehicle is available, and the location of the vehicle creates a public safety hazard or there is a need to protect the vehicle; or

        8.     The vehicle is parked in a space that is marked as reserved for disabled persons unless such vehicle conspicuously displays appropriate decals, insignia, or registration plates as required by state statutes.

        B.     Private property if:

        1.     The vehicle is parked or stopped without the permission of the person in control of such property; or

        2.     Is parked or stopped in violation of this title or in violation of state law. (Ord. 2019-03 §2; Ord. 1993-4 §1)

 

10.70.020 Towing without prior notice.
        Any authorized officer may, without prior notice, order a vehicle towed, when:

        A.    The vehicle is impeding or likely to impede the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic;

        B.     The vehicle is illegally parked in a conspicuously posted restricted space, zone, or traffic lane where parking is limited to designated classes of vehicles or is prohibited in excess of a designated time period, or during certain hours, or on designated days, or at any time and place the vehicle is interfering or reasonably likely to interfere with the intended use of such a space, zone, or traffic lane;

        C.     The vehicle poses an immediate danger to the public safety;

        D.    The vehicle is illegally parked within 10 feet of a fire hydrant;

        E.     A police officer reasonably believes that the vehicle is stolen;

        F.     A police officer reasonably believes that the vehicle or its contents constitute evidence of any offense, if such towing is reasonably necessary to obtain or preserve such evidence;

        G.    The vehicle was in possession of a person taken into custody by a law enforcement officer, no other reasonable disposition of the vehicle is available and the location of the vehicle creates a public safety hazard or there is a need to protect the vehicle. (Ord. 2019-03 §3; Ord. 1993-4 §1)

 

10.70.030 When notice required before towing.
        A.    Except as provided in Section 10.70.020, vehicles may be towed only after notice has been provided as required in this chapter.

        B.     Vehicles subject to tow under this section may not be towed prior to a hearing, if one has been requested, pursuant to Section 10.70.090. (Ord. 1993-4 §1)

 

10.70.040 Towing upon Court order.
        Vehicles that have been used in the commission of a traffic or parking violation, for which an unserved warrant or citation is on file with the Clerk of any Court, may be towed upon order of the Court. (Ord. 1993-4 §1)

 

10.70.050 Notice of vehicle tow.
        A.    When notice is required before towing a vehicle, notice shall be provided by affixing a tow warning to the vehicle at least 72 hours prior to the tow.

        B.     The tow warning will state:

        1.     The vehicle is parked in violation of City code or state law;

        2.     The City intends to tow and remove the vehicle (in 72 hours) if the violation is not corrected; and

        3.     A hearing is available to contest the validity of the intended tow, and state the method of requesting a hearing, including the date by which a hearing may be requested.

        C.     If a timely request for hearing is received pursuant to Section 10.70.090, the vehicle will not be towed until the Tow Hearings Officer makes a determination. (Ord. 2019-05 §1; Ord. 2019-03 §4; Ord. 1993-4 §1)

 

10.70.060 Notice after vehicle tow.
        A.    After a vehicle has been towed pursuant to this chapter, notice will be provided to the registered owner(s) and any other person(s) who reasonably appear to have an interest in the vehicle. Notice will be mailed to such persons within 24 hours after the tow of the vehicle, Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays excluded, and will state:

        1.     That the vehicle has been towed;

        2.     The location of the vehicle and that it may be reclaimed only upon evidence that the claimant is the owner or person entitled to possession;

        3.     The address and telephone number of the person or facility that may be contacted for information on the charges that must be paid before the vehicle will be released and the procedures for obtaining the release of the vehicle;

        4.     That the vehicle and its contents are subject to a lien for the towing and storage charges; that if the vehicle is not claimed within 30 days after the mailing date of the notice, the vehicle and its contents will be subject to sale by the towing and storage facility where the vehicle is located and that failure to reclaim the vehicle within such time will constitute a waiver of all interest in the vehicle; and

        5.     Unless notice of the availability of a hearing to contest the tow has been provided prior to towing as prescribed in Section 10.70.050, the notice will state that a hearing may be requested to contest the validity of the tow and will set forth the time in which a hearing must be requested and the method of requesting a hearing.

        B.     If a vehicle has been reclaimed prior to the mailing of the notice, no notice need be mailed or provided, but the person or persons reclaiming the vehicle must be provided with written notice of the opportunity for a hearing to contest the tow pursuant to Section 10.70.080.

        C.     In those circumstances in which it can reasonably be anticipated that mailing of notice may hinder or prevent the apprehension of a suspect in an ongoing criminal investigation, the mailing of notice may be delayed until such time as will not prejudice that investigation or apprehension. (Ord. 2019-05 §2; Ord. 1993-4 §1)

 

10.70.070 Unidentifiable vehicle.
        No notice need be mailed when:

        A.    A vehicle does not display license plates or other identifying markings by which the registration or ownership of the vehicle can be determined; or

        B.     When the identity of the owner of the vehicle is not available from the appropriate motor vehicle licensing and registration authority and when the identity and address of the owner and/or other persons with an interest in the vehicle cannot otherwise be reasonably determined. (Ord. 1993-4 §1)

 

10.70.080 Notice to contest tow when vehicle claimed.
        Written notice of the opportunity to contest the validity of the tow of a vehicle, together with a statement of the time in which a hearing may be requested and the method of requesting a hearing, must be given to each person who seeks to redeem a vehicle which has been towed pursuant to this chapter. This information will be made available by the tow company or other facility holding such vehicle. (Ord. 1993-4 §1)

 

10.70.090 Request for hearing.
        A.    After a vehicle has been towed pursuant to Section 10.70.060, and prior to towing pursuant to Section 10.70.050, the owner(s) and any other person(s) who reasonably appear to have an interest in the vehicle are, upon timely application filed with the Tow Hearings Officer, entitled to request a hearing to contest the validity of the tow or intended tow of the vehicle.

        1.     In the case of a vehicle towed pursuant to Section 10.70.060, such application must be filed with and received by the Tow Hearings Officer not later than five days after the vehicle was towed. The five-day notice does include holidays, Saturdays or Sundays.

        2.     In the case of a vehicle proposed to be towed pursuant to Section 10.70.050, such application must be filed with and received by the Tow Hearings Officer not later than five days after the notice was mailed. The five-day notice does not include holidays, Saturdays or Sundays.

        B.     The Tow Hearings Officer may, for good cause shown, grant a request for hearing filed after the foregoing time requirements have expired. If the mailing of the towed vehicle notice was delayed, the Tow Hearings Officer will grant a request for hearing received and filed within five days of the mailing date of the notice or five days of the date the vehicle was reclaimed, whichever first occurs. The five-day notice does not include holidays, Saturdays or Sundays.

        C.     The request for hearing must be in writing and will state the grounds upon which the person requesting the hearing believes the tow or proposed tow invalid, or, for any other reason unjustified. The request for hearing will also contain such other information, relating to the purposes of this chapter, as the Tow Hearings Officer may require.

        D.    The Tow Hearings Officer will set and conduct an administrative hearing on the matter within 72 hours of receipt of a proper request filed pursuant to this section. The 72-hour period does not include holidays, Saturdays or Sundays. (Ord. 2019-03 §5; Ord. 1993-4 §1)

 

10.70.100 Hearing procedure.
        A.    The hearing shall afford a reasonable opportunity for the person(s) requesting it to demonstrate by the statements of witnesses and other evidence, that the tow and/or storage of the vehicle was or would be invalid, or for any other reason not justified.

        B.     The Tow Hearings Officer will make necessary rules and regulations regarding the conduct of such hearings, consistent with this section. (Ord. 1993-4 §1)

 

10.70.110 When tow found invalid.
        If the Tow Hearings Officer finds the tow and/or storage was or would be invalid or not justified, the Tow Hearings Officer will order the vehicle:

        A.    Be immediately released if already towed. The owner(s) or any other person(s) who have an interest in the vehicle are not liable for the tow and/or storage charges and any money paid for tow and/or storage charges will be returned, as appropriate.

        B.     Not be towed if such vehicle is about to be towed. (Ord. 1993-4 §1)

 

10.70.120 When tow found valid.
        A.    If the Tow Hearings Officer finds the towing and/or storage was or would be valid, the Tow Hearings Officer will order the vehicle, if still held, continue to be held until all tow and storage charges are paid. If such vehicle is about to be towed, pursuant to Section 10.70.050, the Tow Hearings Officer will order such vehicle to be towed and impounded if the violation involving that vehicle has not been completely corrected.

        B.     The City will be responsible in all cases in which a hearing has been requested and held, and the tow and/or storage found to be valid, for those storage charges that have accrued from the date that the hearing was requested through the first available hearing date. (Ord. 1993-4 §1)

 

10.70.130 Hearing administration.
        A.    The decision of the Tow Hearings Officer is final.

        B.     Any person who has a hearing schedule pursuant to this section and fails to appear at such hearing without good cause shown, as determined by the Tow Hearings Officer, will not be entitled to have such hearing rescheduled.

        C.     The owner(s) and any other person(s) who have an interest in the vehicle are only entitled to one hearing for each tow of that vehicle.

        D.    Owners of vehicles towed by Court order are not entitled to a hearing pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1993-4 §1)

 

10.70.140 Charges and release of vehicle.
        A.    Any private company that tows and stores any vehicle pursuant to this chapter, shall have a lien on the vehicle, in accordance with ORS 87.152, for the just and reasonable charges for the tow and storage services performed. The company may retain possession of that vehicle, consistent with this chapter, until towing and storage charges have been paid. Provided, however, the City shall pay all storage charges that accrue as a result of the hearings process.

        B.     If the required towing and storage charges have been paid, the vehicle must be immediately released to the person(s) entitled to lawful possession. However, if a vehicle is towed pursuant to this chapter for the operator’s failure to have liability insurance, the person reclaiming the vehicle shall also provide proof of liability insurance before the vehicle can be released. If towing and storage charges have not been paid, a vehicle will not be released, except upon order of the Tow Hearings Officer.

        C.     A vehicle towed pursuant to this chapter may only be released to the owner, or to the person who was lawfully in possession or control of the vehicle at the time it was towed, or to a person who purchased the vehicle from the owner and who produces written proof of ownership. In all cases, adequate evidence of the right to possession of the vehicle must be presented prior to release of the vehicle. (Ord. 1993-4 §1)

 

10.70.150 Charges—When tow found invalid.
        A.    The accrued towing and storage charges assessed under this chapter will be waived by the Tow Hearings Officer if the tow is found to be invalid or for any other reason not justified, after a hearing has been held.

        B.     A person’s inability to pay the towing and storage charges, in and of itself, is not a sufficient basis for the waiving of such charges.

        C.     If the charges are owed to a private company, the City will pay them if, after a hearing, the tow is found to be invalid or for any other reason not justified and the charges have not previously been paid. (Ord. 1993-4 §1)

 

10.70.160 Charges—When tow found valid.
        If the Tow Hearings Officer finds the towing and/or storage was valid, the person entitled to possession of the vehicle will be responsible for all towing and storage charges except as provided for in Section 10.70.120. (Ord. 1993-4 §1)

 

10.70.170 Storage charges at completion of hearing.
        After the Tow Hearings Officer makes a public determination on a vehicle tow hearing, the vehicle must be picked up by the person entitled to possession within 24 hours to avoid further storage charges. If the vehicle is not claimed within this time period, it will not be released until the additionally accrued storage charges, if any, are paid. (Ord. 1993-4 §1)

 

10.70.180 When a vehicle may be sold.
        Any vehicle that is not reclaimed within 30 days of the date notice is sent under Section 10.70.060 may be sold. A vehicle is not “reclaimed,” as meant in this chapter, until the owner or other person entitled to possession of the vehicle has fully paid all required fees and charges and provided such other documentation as is required under this chapter. (Ord. 1993-4 §1)

 

10.70.190 Sale of vehicles.
        A.    As often as necessary, the Director of Public Works will be provided with a list of all unclaimed vehicles which have been towed and stored by or for the City which have been in storage 30 days or longer.

        B.     The Director of Public Works will, as soon as convenient, sell such vehicles at public auction to the highest bidder for cash. Notice of such auction shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least 10 days before the date of the sale, giving the time and place of the sale and generally describing the vehicles to be sold.

        1.     When vehicles are sold as set forth in this chapter, a certificate of sale in substantially the following form shall be issued to the purchaser:

 

CERTIFICATE OF SALE

This is to certify that under the provisions of the Traffic Regulations of the City, I did on the ______ day of the month of _________, 20__, sell to _________________________ for the consideration ___________Dollars ($__________) the following described personal property:

 

(Brief description of property)

 

Dated this _________ day of the month of ______________, 20__

Director of the Public Works

City of Molalla

 

NOTE: The City of Molalla assumes no responsibility as to condition or Title of the above described property. In case this sale is for any reason invalid, the liability of the City is limited to return of the purchase price.

 

        C.     The proceeds of such sale will be first applied to payment of the cost of such sale and expense incurred in the preservation and custody of such vehicles and the balance, if any, will be credited to the general fund of the City. (Ord. 1993-4 §1)

 

Chapter 10.72 PARKING, STORAGE AND MAINTENANCE OF INOPERABLE VEHICLES
10.72.010 Unlawful storage of inoperable vehicles on private property—Designated time limits.
        A.    Prohibition and Time Limits. Except as provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to park, store, maintain, or leave, or permit the parking, storing, maintaining or leaving, of any inoperable motor vehicle on private property for a period of time in excess of 90 days within any 12-month period. This section applies equally to owners, tenants in possession, and persons in charge of or having the care of any real property where the inoperable motor vehicle is located, and without regard to the actual ownership of the vehicle.

        B.     Definitions. For purposes of this section an “inoperable motor vehicle” is defined as any vehicle which is unregistered or unlicensed, or in a wrecked, abandoned and/or junked condition, or which cannot be moved without being repaired or dismantled, or which is no longer safely useable for the purposes for which it was manufactured. The term “inoperable motor vehicle” includes major parts of vehicles, including, but not limited to, bodies, panels, fenders, engines, running gear and transmissions.

        C.     Exceptions. The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to an inoperable motor vehicle which is not visible from any public street, alley, sidewalk, or other public property. This section shall not apply to any motor vehicles kept on the premises of a lawfully operating business and which is engaged in wrecking, junking, or repairing vehicles.

        D.    Declaration of Nuisance. The accumulation of one or more such inoperable motor vehicles on private property beyond the 90-day time limit shall constitute rubbish, unsightly debris, and a nuisance, detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the City, and may be abated under the nuisance provisions of this Code. It shall be the duty of the registered owner of any such vehicle, and it shall be the duty of the owner of the private property or the tenant or other person in possession or in charge of the private property upon which the subject vehicle is located, to abate the nuisance or to move the vehicle to such a location where it is not visible from any public street, alley, sidewalk, or other public property, before the expiration of the 90-day time limit.

        E.     Enforcement. Prior to enforcing the provisions of this section the City shall attempt to discover the owner of the vehicle and the owner, tenant or person in charge of the property where the condition exists, and give written notice to said persons of the violation. Notice shall be given by personal service or by certified mail, or, if such persons cannot be found, a notice shall be conspicuously placed on the vehicle or posted on the property. The failure of such persons to actually receive notice shall not preclude the City from enforcing the provisions of this section. The notice shall describe the violation and direct such persons within 10 days to abate the nuisance or to move the vehicle to such a location where it is not visible from any public street, alley, sidewalk, or other public property. The notice shall also state that the failure to comply may result in charges being filed in Municipal Court for a City code violation or in the City abating the nuisance and liening the property for the cost of abatement. If the nuisance is not abated within 10 days of mailing or personal service of the notice, the City may proceed with enforcement action. (Ord. 2019-03 §6; Ord. 1998-2 §1)

 

10.72.020 Storage of vehicles or personal property on public property—Designated time limits.
        A.    No person shall park, store, or permit to be parked or stored, an inoperable vehicle or other motor vehicle, trailer, bus, camper, motor home, recreational vehicle, boat, or other personal property on any public street, right-of-way or other public property in excess of 72 hours without express written permission of the City Manager or designee. This section shall not apply to vehicles or other property being stored or impounded by the City of Molalla or any other municipal entity.

        B.     A recreational vehicle, motor home or camper may be parked on public property longer than the period allowed in subsection A of this section if:

        1.     It is owned by the resident or guest of the resident of the property in front of which it is parked; and

        2.     It is parked in the public street or right-of-way in front of or along-side the lot of the resident; and

        3.     It is parked in a manner which does not interfere with traffic or create a hazard by obstructing the view of drivers; and

        4.     It is parked in such location no longer than 10 days in any calendar year.

        C.     A motor vehicle, trailer, bus, camper, motor home, recreational vehicle, boat, or other personal property is considered parked, stored, or permitted to be parked or stored if it remains in the same one-half mile radius without first exiting the one-half mile radius.

        D.    Any attempt to delay, alter, or circumvent the effectiveness of the tow process by re-positioning a vehicle on the roadway without permanently removing the vehicle may be a violation of ORS 162.235 (Obstructing governmental or judicial administration) which is a Class A misdemeanor. (Ord. 2019-03 §7; Ord. 1998-2 §1)

 

10.72.030 Violation—Penalty.
        Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00. Each day’s violation after the applicable time limit shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1998-2 §1)

 

Chapter 10.80 INVENTORY OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES AND PROPERTY IN POSSESSION OF PERSONS IN CUSTODY
10.80.010 Purpose.
        This chapter is meant to apply exclusively to the process for conducting an inventory of the personal property in an impounded vehicle and the personal possessions of a person in police custody, and shall not be interpreted to affect any other statutory or constitutional rights that police officers may employ to search persons or search or seize possessions for other purposes. (Ord. 1997-4 §1)

 

10.80.020 Definitions.
        A.    “Open container” means a container which is unsecured or incompletely secured in such a fashion that the container’s contents are exposed to view.

        B.     “Closed container” means a container whose contents are not exposed to view.

        C.     “Police custody” means either:

        1.     The imposition of restraint as a result of an “arrest” as that term is defined in ORS 133.005(1); or

        2.     The imposition of actual or constructive constraint by a police officer pursuant to a Court order or ORS Chapter 426, or for purposes of taking the restrained person to an approved facility for the involuntary confinement of persons pursuant to Oregon law.

        D.    “Police officer” means any officer of the Molalla Police Department, or any other peace officer from another jurisdiction aiding or assisting, or engaging in joint operations with the Molalla Police Department.

        E.     “Impounded vehicle” means any vehicle impounded or towed pursuant to City of Molalla ordinance or Oregon law.

        F.     “Valuables” means:

        1.     Cash money of an aggregate amount of $20.00 or more; or

        2.     Individual items of personal property with a value of over $100.00. (Ord. 1997-4 §1)

 

10.80.030 Inventories of impounded vehicles.
        A.    The contents of all vehicles impounded by a police officer shall be inventoried. The inventory will be conducted before custody of the vehicle is released to a third-party towing company except under the following circumstances:

        1.     If there is reasonable suspicion to believe that the safety of either the police officer(s) or any other person is at risk, an inventory will be done as soon as safely practical; or

        2.     If the vehicle is being impounded for evidentiary purposes in connection with the investigation of a criminal offense, the inventory may be done after such investigation is completed.

        B.     The purpose of the inventory of an impounded vehicle will be to:

        1.     Promptly identify property to establish accountability and avoid spurious claims to property;

        2.     Assist in the prevention of theft of property;

        3.     Locate toxic, flammable or explosive substances; and

        4.     Reduce danger to persons or property.

        C.     Inventories of impounded vehicles will be conducted according to the following procedure:

        1.     An inventory of personal property and the contents of open containers will be conducted throughout:

        a.     The entire passenger compartment and engine compartment of the vehicle including, but not limited to, accessible areas under or within the dashboard area, in any pockets in the doors or in the back of the front seat, in any console between the seats, under any floor mats and under the seats;

        b.     Any type of unlocked compartments that are part of the vehicle, including, but not limited to, uncovered hatchback, unlocked glove box, unlocked car-top containers, and unlocked trunks; and

        c.     Any locked compartments that are part of the vehicle including, but not limited to, locked hatchbacks, locked glove box, locked car-top containers, and locked trunks, if either the keys are available or unlocking mechanisms are provided within the vehicle.

        2.     Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, closed containers located either within the vehicle or any of the vehicles compartments will not be opened for inventory purposes.

        3.     If, during the inventory, an officer locates a closed container that the officer has probable cause to believe contains evidence or contraband, the officer will seize the container, but will not open the container without first obtaining a search warrant or the owner’s consent.

        4.     Upon completion of the inventory, the police officer will complete a report as directed by the Chief of Police.

        5.     Any valuables located during the inventory process will be treated in the manner directed by the Chief of Police, and the valuables placed into the evidence facility. (Ord. 1997-4 §1)

 

10.80.040 Inventories of property in possession of persons in police custody.
        A.    A police officer shall inventory the personal property in the possession of a person taken into police custody. Such inventory will be conducted whenever:

        1.     Such person either will be placed in a secure police holding room or transported in the secure portion of a police vehicle; or

        2.     Custody of the person will be transferred to another law enforcement agency, correctional facility, or “treatment facility” as that phrase is used in ORS 426.460 or such other lawfully approved facility for the involuntary confinement of persons pursuant to Oregon law.

        B.     The purpose of the inventory of a person in police custody shall be to:

        1.     Promptly identify property to establish accountability and avoid spurious claims to property;

        2.     Fulfill the requirements of ORS 133.455 to the extent that such statute may apply to certain property held by the police officer for safekeeping;

        3.     Assist in the prevention of theft of property;

        4.     Locate toxic, flammable or explosive substances; and

        5.     Reduce danger to persons or property.

        C.     Inventories of the personal property in the possession of such persons will be conducted according to the following procedures:

        1.     An inventory will occur prior to placing such person into a holding room or a police vehicle, whichever occurs first. However, if reasonable suspicion exists to believe that the safety of either the police officer(s) or other persons are at risk, an inventory will be done as soon as safely practical.

        2.     To complete the inventory of the personal property in the possession of such person, the police officer will remove all items of personal property from the clothing worn by such person. In addition, the officer will also remove all items of personal property from all open containers in the possession of such person.

        3.     A closed container in the possession of such person shall have its contents inventories only when:

        a.     The closed container is to be placed in the possession or immediate vicinity of such person at the time that person is placed in the secure portion of a custodial facility, police vehicle or secure police holding room;

        b.     Such person requests that the closed container be with them in the secure portion of a police vehicle or a secure police holding room; or

        c.     The closed container is designed for carrying money or small valuables on or about the person including, but not limited to, closed purses, closed coin purses, closed wallets and closed fanny packs.

        D.    Valuables found during the inventory process shall be listed by the police officer in the manner directed by the Chief of Police.

        E.     All items of personal property neither left in the possession or immediate vicinity of the person in custody nor left with the facility or agency accepting custody of the person, will be handled in the following manner:

        1.     A property receipt will be prepared listing the property to be retained in the possession of the Molalla Police Department and a copy of that receipt will be tendered to the person in custody when such person is released to the facility or agency accepting custody of such person; and

        2.     The property will be placed into the evidence facility.

        F.     All items of personal property neither left in the immediate possession of the person in custody nor dealt with as provided in Section 10.80.040(E) above, will be released to the facility or agency accepting custody of the person so that it may:

        1.     Hold the property for safekeeping on behalf of the person in custody; and

        2.     Prepare and deliver a receipt, as may be required by ORS 133.455, for any valuables held on behalf of the person in custody. (Ord. 1997-4 §1)

Title 11 (RESERVED)

Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Chapter 12.04 LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
Chapter 12.08 PARKS
Chapter 12.12 PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS
Chapter 12.16 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 12.20 SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR
Chapter 12.24 STREET EXTENSIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS
Chapter 12.28 STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Chapter 12.32 STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS
Chapter 12.36 STREET AND CURB CUTS—EXCAVATIONS

Chapter 12.04 LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
12.04.010 Definitions.
        As used in this chapter, unless the content requires otherwise:

        A.    “Local improvement” means:

        1.     The grading, graveling, paving or other surfacing of any street, or opening, laying out, widening, extending, altering, changing the grade of or constructing any street;

        2.     The construction or reconstruction of sidewalks;

        3.     The installation of ornamental street lights;

        4.     The installation of underground wiring or related equipment;

        5.     The reconstruction or repair of any street improvement;

        6.     The construction, reconstruction or repair of any sanitary or storm sewer or water main;

        7.     The acquisition, establishment, construction, or reconstruction of any off-street motor vehicle parking facility;

        8.     The construction, reconstruction, or repair of any flood control dike or dam;

        9.     The construction, reconstruction, installation and equipping of a park, playground, or neighborhood recreation facility;

        10.   Any other local improvement for which an assessment may be made on the property specially benefited.

        B.     “Lot” means lot, block or parcel of land.

        C.     “Owner” means the owner of the title to real property or the contract purchaser of real property, of record as shown on the last available complete assessment roll in the office of the county assessor.

        D.    Property Description.

        1.     Real property may be described by giving the subdivision according to the United States survey when coincident with the boundaries thereof, or by lots, blocks, and addition names, or by giving the boundaries thereof by metes and bounds, or by reference to the book and page of any public record of the county where the description may be found, or by designation of tax lot number referring to a record kept by the assessor of descriptions of real properties of the county, which record shall constitute a public record, or in such other manner as to cause the description to be capable of being made certain. Initial letters, abbreviations, figures, fractions and exponents, to designate the township, range, section, or the part of a section, or the number of any lot or block or part thereof, or any distance, course, bearing or direction, may be employed in any such description of real property.

        2.     If the owner of any land is unknown, such land may be assessed to “unknown owner” or “unknown owners.” If the property is correctly described, no assessment shall be invalid by a mistake in the name of the owner of the real property assessed or by the omission of the name of the owner or the entry of a name other than that of the true owner. Where the name of the true owner, or the owner of record, of any parcel of real property is given, the assessment shall not be held invalid on account of any error or irregularity in the description if the description would be sufficient in a deed of conveyance from the owner, or is such that, in a suit to enforce a contract to convey, employing such description a Court of Equity would hold it to be good and sufficient.

        3.     Any description of real property which conforms substantially to the requirements of this section shall be a sufficient description in all proceedings of assessment for a special improvement district, foreclosure and sale of delinquent assessments, and in any other proceeding related to or connected with levying, collecting and enforcing special assessments for special benefits to such property. (Ord. 1980-1 §1)

 

12.04.020 Initiation of proceedings by City Council.
        A.    Whenever the City Council deems it expedient to perform any location improvement for which it determines that funds are available to finance construction and for which it is anticipated that special assessments will be levied, it shall by resolution declare its intention to initiate such improvement and direct the Director of Public Works to make an improvement study and to submit a written report containing the information specified in Section 12.04.040.

        B.     Whenever the City of Molalla has expended funds for the performance of any local improvement and whenever the City Council deems it expedient to initiate a local improvement district in order to levy special assessments against the property benefited by such local improvement, it may by resolution declare its intention to initiate such improvement district and direct the Director of Public Works to file with the City Council the final plans of the public improvement as constructed together with a statement of the actual cost of said improvement, and together with an improvement report by the Director of Public Works containing the information specified in Section 12.04.040. (Ord. 1980-1 §2)

 

12.04.030 Initiation of proceedings by property owners.
        A.    Whenever the owners of 51% of the abutting property propose an improvement and desire to form themselves into an improvement district at least 100 yards in length for the purpose of accomplishing such improvements, they may by written petition request the Council to declare by resolution the intent of the Council to initiate such improvement and to direct the Director of Public Works as specified in Section 12.04.020. The Council, if satisfied that the petition is signed by the owners of at least 51% of the abutting property within the district specified in the petition, and that the City has sufficient funds available to finance construction of the improvement, shall pass the requested resolution unless by a vote of Councilors the Council deems it not in the public interest to comply with such petition.

        B.     The petition shall contain the following:

        1.     A description of the improvement to be made;

        2.     A written description and map of the boundaries of the district;

        3.     A preliminary estimate of the total cost of the project made by the Director of Public Works. Such estimate shall be identified as preliminary, and the petition shall state that the estimate should not be relied upon as a maximum limit of the cost of the project. (Ord. 1980-1 §3)

 

12.04.040 Improvement report.
        The Director of Public Works shall file with the City Recorder within the time specified in the resolution of intention the report required by Section 12.04.020 containing the following information:

        A.    A full description of the project, its boundaries, and the plans and specifications proposed therefor;

        B.     A description of each lot, tract, parcel or portion thereof specially benefited by the project with the name and address of the owner thereof, as shown by the last assessment roll of the county;

        C.     The assessed valuation of each lot, tract, parcel or portion thereof, specially benefited, together with the unpaid assessments, if any, against each;

        D.    An estimate of the probable cost of such project, or a statement of the actual cost if the project has been completed, including legal, administrative, and engineering costs attributable thereto;

        E.     A recommendation as to the fair method of apportionment and portion of the cost to be assessed. (Ord. 1980-1 §4)

 

12.04.050 Costs.
        A.    The cost of the improvement shall include the cost of property acquisition and the expense of condemnation proceedings. The direct costs of advertising, engineering, supervision, survey, materials, labor, contracts, equipment and legal services are to be considered part of the cost of the improvements.

        B.     The City shall be entitled to recover by including as part of the assessment, a sum equal to 10% percent of the construction cost to cover the administrative, legal and engineering costs incurred by the City through the use of its employees. (Ord. 1980-1 §5)

 

12.04.060 Public hearing.
        Upon the filing of the improvement report, the City Recorder shall set a date and time for the public hearing before the City Council. The purpose of the public hearing shall be to hear public testimony concerning the improvement and to receive oral and written remonstrances. After the close of the public testimony, the City Council shall determine by resolution the following issues:

        A.    Whether the improvement should be made and whether the plans and specifications therefor should be approved;

        B.     The boundaries of the assessment district;

        C.     Whether sufficient remonstrances have been filed to defeat the project, pursuant to Section 12.04.090 of this code;

        D.    Whether the City employees shall perform the work or whether all or part of the project shall be submitted for bid;

        E.     A preliminary determination of the method of assessing individual properties within this district;

        F.     Preliminary determination of whether the City shall bear any portion of the cost of the project. (Ord. 1993-2 §2; Ord. 1980-1 §6)

 

12.04.070 Notice of public hearing.
        A.    At least 10 days prior to the public hearing referred to in Section 12.04.060, the City Recorder shall cause a notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. Such notice shall contain a date, time and location of the public hearing, a description of the project, a description of the assessment district boundaries, and the estimated probable cost of such proposed improvement. In addition, such notice shall contain the information that a proposal to levy and collect a special assessment may be defeated by a remonstrance as provided by the Molalla Municipal Code, Section 12.04.090; that all objections or remonstrances must be submitted at or before such public hearing; and that if remonstrances are made orally, they shall be made, in person, at the public hearing.

        B.     At least 10 days prior to the public hearing referred to in Section 12.04.060, the City Recorder shall cause a notice as described in subsection A of this section to be sent by mail, postpaid, to each of those designated in the improvement report as owners of property within the assessment district. (Ord. 1993-2 §3; Ord. 1980-1 §7)

 

12.04.080 Method of assessment.
        The Council may:

        A.    Use any just and reasonable method of determining the extent of any improvement district consistent with the benefits derived;

        B.     Authorize payment by the City of all or any part of the cost of such improvement;

        C.     Use any method of apportioning the sum to be assessed as is just and reasonable between the properties determined to be specially benefited. (Ord. 1980-1 §8)

 

12.04.090 Remonstrances.
        A public improvement under this section will not be undertaken if the owners of those properties which are to be assessed 66% or more of the cost of the improvement file with the Council a remonstrance expressing their disapproval. Remonstrances will be received and tabulated only if received at or prior to the public hearing described in Section 12.04.060. All oral remonstrances must be delivered in person at such public hearing. A written remonstrance must be dated and signed and delivered to the City Recorder prior to the close of the public hearing. If the assessment is defeated by the filing of sufficient remonstrances, it shall not again be proposed for a period of three months. (Ord. 1993-2 §1; Ord. 1980-1 §9)

 

12.04.100 Project completion.
        Upon completion of the project, the Director of Public Works shall file a certificate of satisfactory completion with the City Council which shall, by resolution, accept the project, if satisfactory. (Ord. 1980-1 §10)

 

12.04.110 Proposed assessment.
        After the project is accepted, pursuant to Section 12.04.100, and as soon as the total cost of the project is ascertained, the City Recorder shall prepare, utilizing the Council’s preliminary determinations as to the method and proportion of the assessment, a plat of the assessment district showing the proposed assessments of each tract or portion of land therein, and it shall be posted in the City Hall and a notice published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City for two successive weeks stating that the proposed assessment is on file at the City Hall and requiring all persons having objections to the proposed assessment to present their objections to the proposed assessment at a meeting of the City Council to be held not less than 10 days after first publication of such notice. It shall be the duty of the Recorder to send by mail, postpaid, to each of those designated in the report of the Director of Public Works, a notice which shall set forth that the plat showing the proposed assessment is on file in the City Hall, the amount of the proposed assessment on a tract or portion of property owned by such person, and requiring objections to the proposed assessment to be presented to the City Council at the time specified in the published notice. The notices which are required to be mailed shall be placed in the mail not less than 10 days prior to the date set for the meeting of the Council to hear objections to the proposed assessments. Whenever a notice is required to be sent to the owner of a lot affected by a proposed assessment, such notice shall be addressed to the owner or his/her agent. If the address of the owner or of the owner’s agent is unknown to the Recorder, he or she shall mail the notice addressed to the owner or his/her agent at the City where such property is located. Any mistake, error, omission, or failure with respect to such mailing shall not be jurisdictional or invalidate the assessment proceedings. (Ord. 1980-1 §11)

 

12.04.120 Assessment hearing.
        A.    When the Council, after hearing the objections to the proposed assessment, has ascertained what it deems to be a fair, just and proper assessment of benefits to the property it determined to be specially benefited, it may pass an ordinance specifying in detail such assessment. If the Council at such hearing deems it just and proper to increase the amount of any proposed assessment against any parcel of land embraced in the proposed assessment report, it shall fix a time for a further hearing with regard to such increase, cause the Recorder to send a notice by mail to each person who is shown by the improvement report to be interested in the property thus affected, stating what is proposed with respect to such property, and giving a date not less than 10 days thereafter for further hearing. After such hearing, the Council may pass an ordinance assessing such increase, and if at the time of such further hearing, the ordinance specifying in detail the final assessment has not yet been passed, the Council at that time shall pass an ordinance levying the final assessments.

        B.     Promptly after passage of the ordinance levying the final assessments, the Recorder shall cause to be mailed, postpaid, to all owners whose property has been assessed, a notice that such ordinance has been passed, that such amounts are due and payable, and that applications for bonding the assessment will be received for a period of 15 days after such notice was placed in the mail. (Ord. 1980-1 §12)

 

12.04.130 Recordation of liens and collection of assessments.
        After passage of the assessment ordinance by the Council, the City Recorder shall enter in the docket of City liens, a statement of the amounts assessed upon each particular lot, parcel or land, or portion thereof, together with a description of the improvement, the name of the owners and the date of the assessment ordinance. Upon entry in the lien docket, the amount so entered shall become a lien and charge upon the respective lots, parcels of land or portions thereof which have been assessed for such improvement. All assessment liens of the City of Molalla shall be superior and prior to all other liens or encumbrances on property insofar as the laws of the State of Oregon permit. Interest shall be charged at the rate of nine percent per year until paid on all amounts not paid within 30 days from the date of the assessment ordinance; and, after expiration of 30 days from the date of such assessment ordinance, provided the owner has not applied for Bancroft or other City-approved financing, the City may proceed to foreclose or enforce collection of the assessment liens in the manner provided by the general law of the state; provided, however, that the City may, at its option, enter a bid for the property being offered at a foreclosure sale, which bid shall be prior to all bids except those made by persons who would be entitled under the laws of the State of Oregon to redeem such property. (Ord. 1980-1 §13)

 

12.04.140 Authority to abandon proceedings.
        The City Council shall have full power and authority to abandon and rescind proceedings for projects pursuant to this chapter at any time prior to the final consummation of such proceedings. (Ord. 1980-1 §14)

 

12.04.150 Validity of assessments.
        No assessment made pursuant to this chapter shall be invalid by reason of a failure to give, in any report, in the proposed assessment, in the ordinance making the assessment, in the lien docket or elsewhere in the proceedings, the name of the owner of any lot, tract, or parcel of land, or the name of any persons having a lien upon or interest therein, or by a mistake in the name of any such person, or the entry of a name other than the name of such owner or other person having a lien upon or interest therein, or by a mistake in the name of any such person or the entry of a name other than the name of such owner or other person having a lien upon or interest in such property, or by reason of any error, mistake, delay, omission, irregularity, or other action, jurisdictional or otherwise, in any of the proceedings or steps herein before specified. (Ord. 1980-1 §15)

 

12.04.160 Adoption of Bancroft Bonding Act.
        The provisions of ORS 223.205 to 223.300, which is known as the “Bancroft Bonding Act,” together with the amendments or future amendments thereof, are adopted and made a part of this chapter by reference. (Ord. 1980-1 §16)

 

12.04.170 Interest limitation.
        Notwithstanding the interest limitation of ORS 223.265, the City shall have the authority to charge at any rate of interest which does not exceed the rate of interest on general obligation bonds as set by the laws of the State of Oregon. (Ord. 1980-3 §1; Ord. 1980-1 §16.5)

 

12.04.180 Reassessment.
        The authority of the City to make reassessment, the basis for, amount and method, the effect of reassessment, necessary ordinances, lien record and review shall be the same as contained in ORS 223.405 through 223.485. (Ord. 1980-1 §17)

 

12.04.190 Segregation of assessments—Fees.
        A.    Whenever an application has been made under the provisions of Section 12.04.160 (and the Bancroft Bonding Act as therein adopted), and the application has been accepted and the payment of the assessment has been in fact financed by such procedure, the lien of such assessment may be segregated upon the following terms and conditions:

        1.     The property for which the segregation is to be made shall have been assessed as a unit and entered accordingly in the docket of liens;

        2.     There shall be no delinquent installments of principal or interest on the assessment of the entire parcel;

        3.     Written application shall be made to the City on such form as may be required, and such applications shall be accompanied by the fees established as provided in subsection B of this section;

        4.     If the Director of Public Works determines that the lien may be segregated and divided without prejudice to the overall security of the entire balance owed, he or she shall establish equitable division of the assessment based upon the original assessment formula and the preservation of the security interest. Such segregation shall describe the various parcels of the entire tract and the amount of the assessment to be apportioned to each parcel. He or she may require that the portion of the assessment segregated and apportioned to a particular parcel be paid in full before the remaining parcels shall be relieved of liability for payment of that portion of the lien;

        5.     If application is approved and the fees paid, the Director of Public Works shall certify the facts to the City Recorder. Thereupon, upon compliance with any conditions of payment, the City Recorder shall cause the appropriate entries to be made in the docket of liens segregating the total assessment. When such entries are made, the lien shall thereby be segregated and divided, and shall constitute a lien only in the amounts and as to the parcels thereby provided.

        B.     In order to help defray the cost of investigation preparing legal description, calculating an equitable division of the assessment and making lien docket entries, the City Council may by resolution establish and from time to time amend a schedule of fees to be paid with any application filed under this section. Such fees shall not be refundable if the application is disapproved or the applicant withdraws his or her application. (Ord. 1980-1 §18)

 

12.04.200 Capital development and improvement fund.
        A.    Unless otherwise directed by resolution of the City Council, the monies received from the collection of improvement assessments and the sale of improvement bonds shall be credited to the capital development and improvement fund.

        B.     Such fund shall be maintained in the books and records of accounts of the City for the purpose of financing any capital improvement, capital acquisition or development, or to provide interim financing for additional local improvement projects or any other purpose the Council finds reasonably related to the improvement of city services and property. (Ord. 1980-1 §19)

Chapter 12.08 PARKS
Article I. City Park
12.08.010 Hours.
        City parks shall open for public use from dawn to dusk each day. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall use or occupy the city parks between the hours of dusk and dawn. (Ord. 2012-05 §1; Ord. 1987-2 §1; Ord. 1974-6 §1)

 

12.08.015 Alcoholic beverages prohibited.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall possess or consume alcoholic beverages within any area of the city parks. (Ord. 1987-2 §1)

 

12.08.020 Permits.
        The City Manager may by permit allow the use of city parks during closed hours, and may also by permit allow the possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages in city parks. (Ord. 1987-2 §1; Ord. 1974-6 §2)

 

12.08.030 Violation—Penalty.
        Violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine of up to $500.00. (Ord. 1994-9 §2; Ord. 1987-2 §1; Ord. 1974-6 §3)

 

Article II. Operation of Motor Vehicles
12.08.040 Prohibited.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall operate a motor vehicle within the city parks. (Ord. 1987-2 §1; Ord. 1977-15 §1)

 

12.08.050 Exemption.
        Section 12.08.040 shall not apply to emergency vehicles and the operation of motor vehicles by or at the direction of City employees for the construction, maintenance, security or operation of City parks, or when the operation of motor vehicles in City parks has been authorized by the City Manager in conjunction with specifically authorized events or occasions. (Ord. 1987-2 §1; Ord. 1977-15 §2)

 

12.08.060 Violation—Penalty.
        A violation of Section 12.08.040 commits a Class B traffic infraction as defined in the ORS, and shall be punishable as set forth therein. (Ord. 1987-2 §1; Ord. 1977-15 §3)

Chapter 12.12 PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS
12.12.010 Adoption of design and construction specifications.
        The City of Molalla adopts current version Molalla Public Works Standards and City standard detail drawings for design and construction standards or as determined by the Public Works Director. (Ord. 2017-04 §1)

 

12.12.020 Updates to the Public Works Standards.
        The Molalla Public Works Standard may be updated administratively by the Public Works Director to address changes in departmental operation and maintenance needs, technology, material standards, agency permitting requirements, and state or federal rules and regulations. Revisions shall be posted electronically to the City’s website. (Ord. 2017-04 §1)

 

12.12.030 Notification list for updates.
        Interested parties may request to be placed on a notification list for updates to the Public Works Standards. The list will be maintained at the office of the Public Works Director and interested parties must submit their requests in writing on a form provided by the Public Works Department. (Ord. 2017-04 §1)

Chapter 12.16 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
12.16.010 Service of notice to property owners.
        A.    When in the judgment of the City Council the public need demands it, the Chief of Police shall serve a notice upon the owners of property abutting on any street or portion thereof, requiring them within 30 days to build sidewalks on such street or portion thereof in front of their property, designating in such notice the class of sidewalk to be built.

        B.     Such notice shall be posted on the property and sent by mail to the owner, if known, of such property, or to the agent, if known, of the owner, and directed to the post office address of such owner or agent, when such post office address is known to the street committee or Chief of Police, or if such post office address is unknown to them, such notice shall be directed to such owner or agent at Molalla, Oregon. A mistake in the name of the owner or agent, or a name other than that of the true owner or agent of such property, shall not render void such notice, but in such case posted notice shall be sufficient.

        C.     If such owner or agent shall fail, neglect, or refuse to build such sidewalk within 30 days after the mailing and posting of such notice, it shall be built by the City and the cost thereof assessed as a lien against the property and entered as such lien upon the City lien docket, and collected as provided in the City Charter. (Ord. 163 §5, 1939)

 

12.16.020 Permit—Required fee.
        Any person desiring to build a sidewalk shall obtain from the City Manager or designate a permit to do so in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The fee for such permit shall be set by the City Council by resolution. (Ord. 1991-3 §4; Ord. 163 §6, 1939)

 

12.16.030 Required space for sidewalks, curbing and parking.
        All public streets, avenues and highways forty feet or more in width shall have 10 feet on each side thereof along their lines reserved and used for sidewalks, curbing and parking. (Ord. 163 §1, 1939)

 

12.16.040 Width requirements.
        A.    Unless otherwise provided herein, sidewalks bordering lots in commercial zones shall be eight feet wide and constructed of concrete.

        B.     Sidewalks on Molalla Avenue, between Third Street and the south end of City Park, and on Main Street between Grange and Berkeley Avenues and Shaver Avenue, shall be eight feet wide, shall adjoin the property line, and shall be constructed of concrete.

        C.     Sidewalks along all other streets, avenues and highways and the remaining portions of Molalla Avenue and Main Street shall be five feet wide, shall adjoin the property line, and shall be constructed of concrete. (Ord. 1991-3 §5; Ord. 163 §1, 1939)

 

12.16.050 Extension of aprons.
        Aprons of the same material and construction as the sidewalk may extend from the walk to the curbline for entrance to property or to crosswalks of streets. (Ord. 163 §1, 1939)

 

12.16.060 Concrete walk specifications.
        A.    Concrete walks shall be made of first class Portland Cement, clean, sharp, coarse sand and clean gravel of hard durable rock, in proportions not poorer than 1-3-5, straight-edged to exact grade and line of street. Crushed rock of hard, durable stone, not exceeding one and one-half inch in any dimension, may be used with or in place of gravel.

        B.     Concrete curbs shall be put in with all concrete walks of same material and shall be four inches wide on top and not less than six inches wide on bottom of gutter. All exposed surfaces of curb shall be finished off smooth with a one inch thick coating of cement mortar, one part of cement to two parts of sand. All curbs at street corners shall be joined on a curve of a one-foot radius. (Ord. 163 §2, 1939)

 

12.16.070 Crosswalks.
        Crosswalks at street intersections or elsewhere shall be constructed of material of the quality equal to that in the sidewalks, and of dimension and form prescribed in each case by the City Engineer. All sidewalks, crosswalks, curbs, and related matters shall be constructed under the direction and approval of the City Engineer. (Ord. 163 §4, 1939)

 

12.16.080 Unlawful construction.
        It is unlawful for any person or persons to build sidewalks in this City other than as prescribed by this chapter, or without permit, or to leave sidewalks already built in front of their premises in an unsafe or unsightly condition. (Ord. 163 §7, 1939)

 

12.16.090 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction before the City Recorder or Mayor, shall be fined in a sum not to exceed $100.00, or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days, or by both fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 163 §7, 1939)

Chapter 12.20 SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR
12.20.010 Duty of landowners.
        It shall be the duty of all landowners in the City of Molalla, Oregon, to maintain in good repair all sidewalks now existing or hereafter constructed in front of, along or abutting their land. (Ord. 1975-5 §1)

 

12.20.020 Permit required.
        Before making any sidewalk repairs the landowner responsible therefor shall apply to the Director of Public Works for a permit to make repairs. The permit shall describe the location of the sidewalk to be repaired, a description of the property abutting such sidewalk, the name of the owner or reputed owner thereof, the type or kind of repairs to be made, the material to be used in making the repairs, and a time limit in which the repairs are to be completed, not exceeding 60 days from the date of such permit. No charge shall be made for the issuance of such permit. (Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 1975-5 §2)

 

12.20.030 Service of notice to repair.
        A.    If any landowner responsible for repairing any sidewalk fails or refuses to apply for a sidewalk repair permit then it shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works to deliver a notice to repair to such owner if he or she is a resident of or can be found in the City of Molalla, Oregon. If the owner is not a resident of Molalla or cannot be found in the City, such notice shall be sent by either registered or certified mail, with return receipt requested, to the last known address of such owner as may appear in the City’s records. The notice shall contain the name or names of the owners or reputed owners of the property responsible for making any sidewalk repairs, the location of the sidewalk to be repaired, a description of the property abutting the sidewalk, the type or kind of repairs to be made, the materials to be used in making the repairs, the time limit within which the repairs are to be made, a reference to this chapter, the date of the notice, and the signature of the City official giving the notice.

        B.     A copy of such notice shall be filed with the Molalla City Recorder. If any notice which is mailed is not receipted for by the owner or is returned by the post office department because the owner cannot be located, then the City Recorder or City Director of Public Works shall post a copy of such notice for a period of not less than 10 days in a conspicuous place on the property of such owner. The City Recorder or City Director of Public Works shall indicate on the copy of the notice filed with the City Recorder the date that the original notice was delivered or mailed, the name and address of the person to whom it was delivered or mailed, the name and address of the person to whom it was delivered or mailed, and the date and place the notice was posted, if posting is required. (Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 1975-5 §3)

 

12.20.040 Expense—Repair requirements—Time limits.
        All sidewalk repairs shall be made at the expense of the landowner responsible for making the repairs, and all repairs shall be made in accordance with the requirements set forth in the sidewalk repair permit or the sidewalk repair notice, and within the time limited therefor. Time limits for making sidewalk repairs may be extended by the Molalla City Council on application of the landowner or his lawful agent, and on good cause being shown for the granting of an extension. (Ord. 1975-5 §4)

 

12.20.050 Repair by City.
        If any landowner responsible for making sidewalk repairs fails to make such repairs in the manner and within the time required by either the repair permit or the notice of repairs, then the Molalla City Council shall direct the Director of Public Works to make or cause such repairs to be made. After the costs of making such repairs have been determined, the Director of Public Works shall report the same to the City Council, and the Council shall by resolution direct the City Recorder to enter the amount plus 15% for administrative, legal and engineering expenses in the docket of the City liens, as an assessment against the property together with the date of entry, the name of the owner and a description of the property assessed. The assessment shall thereafter be collected in the manner prescribed by ORS 223.505 to 223.595, and all assessments docketed as liens shall draw interest at the rate of six percent per year from the date of the entry in the City lien docket until paid. (Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 1975-5 §5)

 

12.20.060 Liability of landowners.
        The owners of all property responsible for repairing sidewalks as provided in this chapter shall be liable in damages to individuals injured because of any negligence to such owners in failing to keep a sidewalk in good condition, and no liability shall be imputed to or imposed upon the City of Molalla, its officers or employees, because of injuries sustained by any person by reason of any defect in any sidewalk, nor because of any extension of time having been granted by the City Council for repairing any defects in sidewalks. (Ord. 1975-5 §6)

Chapter 12.24 STREET EXTENSIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS
12.24.010 Payment of costs.
        A.    An extension and improvement of a street may be paid for by the person, or corporation requesting such extension or improvement, if approved by the City. The amount paid shall be the actual cost of engineering and construction plus 10% for City supervision and overhead. All such extensions or improvements shall be made by the City or by a contract approved by the City in accordance with standards and specifications governing such work and materials. The City shall determine the specifications of the street in accordance with current standards and policy. Such extension or improvement shall be made within a public right-of-way to a point opposite the furthermost point on the property of the person requesting the extension or improvement. Extension or improvement may be terminated at a lesser point if it is found that the street cannot be extended to serve other properties in the area due to existing development or topography, if approved by the City.

        B.     Advance payment for extension or improvement shall be made by said person. The advance payment shall be made in accordance with an estimate of cost by the City on the approved plans and specifications. Work shall not commence until payment has been made for the full amount of the proposed working including engineering and overhead. After completion of the work, actual cost shall be computed, and any deficiency shall be paid forthwith and any excess shall be refunded. (Ord. 1977-20 §1)

 

12.24.020 Assessments—Reimbursement by City.
        A.    Assessments shall be made for such extension or improvement through a local improvement district and the person paying for the improvement shall be reimbursed by the City for the adjoining landowners’ share of the assessment as it is received by the City, from assessment on benefited property.

        B.     The amount of the refund shall be determined by the City Council, subsequent to a request from the person paying the cost of the extension or improvement, and such determination shall be final. (Ord. 1977-20 §2)

 

12.24.030 Improvements to become City property.
        All street extensions and improvements installed shall become the sole property of the City of Molalla and shall be maintained and operated by the City. (Ord. 1977-20 §3)

Chapter 12.28 STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY
12.28.010 Adoption of official maps of thoroughfares.
        The City Council may adopt official maps of planned thoroughfares. Before an official map may be adopted or an adopted map may be revised, the Planning Commission shall hold a hearing upon the proposed plan of thoroughfares and then transmit a report and recommendations on the plan and the proposed official map to the Council. Upon receiving the report and recommendations of the Planning Commission and after tentatively approving the plan of thoroughfares, the Council shall provide notice and hold a hearing on the proposal. Notice of the hearing shall be by publication once in the Molalla Pioneer not less than seven nor more than 15 days before the scheduled hearing. Following the hearing, the Council may adopt or revise an official map by ordinance. (Ord. 1967-8 §1)

 

12.28.020 Building locations restricted.
        A.    Upon the adoption by the Council of an official map of planned thoroughfares, no structure or other improvement shall be moved onto or constructed in the bed of a proposed thoroughfare shown on the official map.

        B.     Structures moved or constructed adjacent to a proposed thoroughfare shown on the official map shall be located to provide building setback lines along the proposed thoroughfare to conform with the intent of the City zoning regulations.

        C.     No building permit shall be issued for construction which does not conform to the requirements of subsections A and B of this section. (Ord. 1967-8 §2)

 

12.28.030 Allowance of exceptions.
        If, prior to public acquisition of the thoroughfare right-of-way, the restrictions of Section 12.28.020 make it impractical for an affected property owner to receive a fair return from his or her land, considering the entire land parcel or contiguous parcels under a single ownership, the Council may permit a building in the thoroughfare or within the building setback lines along the thoroughfare, provided the building will as little as practicable increase the cost of opening the proposed thoroughfare or tend to necessitate a change in the plan or result in eventual variation from the objective of the City zoning ordinance. In granting the permit the Council may impose conditions to protect any future layout of a public thoroughfare and its relationship to the development of adjacent land. The Council shall refuse a permit for construction within a proposed thoroughfare or building setback line when the applicant will not be substantially damaged by placing his or her building outside these restricted areas. Before granting a permit for an exception, the Council shall refer the matter to the Planning Commission which shall hold a hearing regarding it and shall submit a report and recommendations to the Council as to the most reasonable solution to the problem taking into account the importance of preserving the objectives of the official map involved and the general plans for community development. (Ord. 1967-8 §3)

 

12.28.040 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not to exceed $100.00 or imprisoned not to exceed 10 days or both for each violation. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1967-8 §4)

Chapter 12.32 STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS
12.32.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings:

        A.    “Land Use Hearings Officer” means the official duly appointed under Sections 16.20.010 through 16.20.050.

        B.     “Permanent obstruction” means any existing or proposed structure, appurtenance, foundation, support, edifice or any other object, natural or manmade, which may impede or obstruct any sidewalk or street longer than 90 days.

        C.     “Sidewalk” means the entire right-of-way reserved for public use along the sides of all public streets, avenues and highways, and includes all walkways, curbs and parking areas within the right-of-way, existing or officially planned.

        D.    “Street” means any public street, avenue, highway, right-of-way or thoroughfare, existing or officially planned.

        E.     “Temporary obstruction” means any existing or proposed structure, appurtenance, foundation, support, edifice, or any other object, natural or manmade, which may impede or obstruct any sidewalk or street for not more than 90 days. (Ord. 1983-3 §1)

 

12.32.020 Obstruction permit—Required.
        No person or organization shall obstruct or impede any street or sidewalk within the City without first having obtained an obstruction permit as described in this section. No building permit shall be issued for any construction within the City which would obstruct or impede any street or sidewalk unless an obstruction permit has first been obtained. (Ord. 1983-3 §1)

 

12.32.030 Obstruction permit—Application—Filing fee.
        Any person or organization desiring to place or maintain any temporary or permanent obstruction upon any street or sidewalk within the City shall apply on forms provided by the City for an obstruction permit. The obstruction permit application fee shall be set from time to time by resolution of the City Council. Such application and required fee shall be filed in the office of the City Recorder. (Ord. 1983-3 §1)

 

12.32.040 Obstruction permit—Issuance criteria.
        A.    Before an obstruction permit is issued, the application shall be reviewed to determine if the following criteria have been met:

        1.     The obstruction will not unduly impede or impair the use of any street or sidewalk;

        2.     The obstruction will not create any unreasonable interference with the maintenance, repair, extension, widening or addition to any street, sidewalk, waterline, sewer line or utility easement;

        3.     The obstruction shall not create any undue safety hazards;

        4.     The obstruction shall not bear the weight of any structure, edifice or building;

        5.     The obstruction shall not create any public or private nuisance.

        B.     In construing the criteria in subsection A of this section, due regard shall be given to the duration of time the obstruction shall be allowed to exist.

        C.     Permits for obstructions shall be denied if any of the criteria in subsection A of this section are not met. The criteria in subsection A of this section shall not be construed to be the exclusive grounds for denial of a permit. (Ord. 1983-3 §1)

 

12.32.050 Obstruction permit—Issuance or denial.
        A.    Permits for Temporary Obstructions. Applications for temporary obstruction permits shall be reviewed by the City planning staff within five business days of the permit application. The City planning staff shall issue or deny the permit on the basis of the criteria set forth in Section 12.32.040. A denial shall be in writing and explain the reason for such denial, and shall be appealable to the Land Use Hearings Officer.

        B.     Permits for Permanent Obstructions. Applications for permanent obstruction permits shall be made pursuant to the procedures and requirements set forth in Chapter 16.20. The Hearings Officer shall have the power to make the approval of the permit application contingent on any reasonable conditions he or she may deem fit to impose. (Ord. 1983-3 §1)

 

12.32.060 Obstruction permit—Exemptions.
        This chapter shall not be construed to cover trees, hedges, flowers or other natural obstructions which are in place as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1983-3 §1)

 

12.32.070 Removal of obstructions.
        The City may, in order to widen or improve any street or sidewalk, require a permittee who has obstructed a street, sidewalk or right-of-way to remove the obstruction at the permittee’s expense, upon 10 days’ notice. This section shall operate without regard to the fact that a permittee’s permit may not yet have expired. (Ord. 1983-3 §1)

 

12.32.080 Land Use Hearings Officer—Powers.
        The Land Use Hearings Officer shall, in addition to the powers given to him or her in Sections 16.20.010 through 16.20.050, have the power to exercise the duties given to him or her in this chapter. (Ord. 1983-3 §1)

Chapter 12.36 STREET AND CURB CUTS—EXCAVATIONS
12.36.010 Permit required.
        It is unlawful for any person, firm or organization to cut, break, dig up, damage in any manner, undermine, or tunnel under any public street or alley without first making application to the City, depositing security, and obtaining a permit as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1986-5 §1)

 

12.36.020 Applications.
        Applications of the permits shall be in the form prescribed by the City and shall specify the name and address of the applicant, the date of the application, the name of the street or alley to be cut or tunneled under, the nature of the street surface or pavement involved, the purpose of the work, the size and nature of the cut or excavation, the number of days required to complete the work, and an agreement to deposit such security as required by the City, and to file a report of work done within two working days of the completion. Application shall also contain or be accompanied by such maps, plans, information, and stipulations as required by the City of Molalla. (Ord. 1986-5 §1)

 

12.36.030 Security.
        Before the issuance of any permit, the City shall require the applicant to file as security either:

        A.    A surety bond in an amount fixed by the City, but not to exceed $2,500.00 conditioned that the applicant will immediately, upon the completion of the work, remove all surplus earth, rubbish or other materials, replace the pavement, cut or undermine in a condition as good as or better than existed, and keep the same in good repair at his or her own expense for a period of time to be designated by the City but not to exceed three years from the completion of the work.

        B.     Cash or certified check in an amount equal to twice the estimated replacement value of the pavement to be cut, together with the cost of re-excavation and refilling with proper materials, if necessary, as determined by the City, to be held and returned subject to the same conditions as set forth above in the case of surety bonds. Provided, however, in the case of unimproved streets, no security shall be required unless in the opinion of the Director of Public Works such security is necessary for the protection of the public interest. (Ord. 1986-5 §1)

 

12.36.040 Permits.
        If the Director of Public Works is satisfied that the excavation, cut or tunnel is feasible and proper, that the said application has been made in due form, and that adequate security has been filed as required by the provision of this chapter, he or she shall issue a permit which designates: the name and address of permittee; the date of issuance of the permit; the street(s) to be cut or tunneled under; the nature of the street surface or asphalt involved; the purpose of the work; the size and nature of the cut or excavation; the nature and amount of security deposited; the time within which the work is to be completed, and any such other restrictions or stipulations as deemed necessary for the protection and safety of the public interests involved. A fee for the permit may be charged, in an amount set by the Council by resolution. (Ord. 1986-5 §1)

 

12.36.050 Conduct of work.
        All work under the permits shall be done in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, the terms of the applications and permits, and under the supervision and subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works. Upon completion of work, all surplus earth, rubbish or other materials will be removed immediately and the street or surface pavement shall be returned to as good or better condition than existed. (Ord. 1986-5 §1)

 

12.36.060 Adherence to and exhibition of permit.
        No work shall be undertaken other than that specified in the application and permit for the particular cut or excavation. Upon demand of the Director of Public Works or designate or any City police officer, the permits shall be produced at the place where the work is in progress, or such work shall be stopped until the permit is produced. (Ord. 1986-5 §1)

 

12.36.070 Notice of completion.
        Within two working days of completion of the cuts or excavations, the person to whom the permit to do such work has been issued shall report to the Director of Public Works stating that such work has been completed and give such other information as may be required by the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 1986-5 §1)

 

12.36.080 Safety measures.
        Whenever work is being performed under the provisions of this chapter, the permittee shall provide such barricades, flashing lights, safety cones or other safety equipment as required by the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 1986-5 §1)

 

12.36.090 Violation—Penalty.
        Violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00 for each violation. Each day in which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 1986-5 §1)

Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES
Chapter 13.02 UTILITY CODE
Chapter 13.04 WATER
Chapter 13.08 SANITARY SEWERS
Chapter 13.12 SEWER AND WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS
Chapter 13.13 SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT
Chapter 13.14 SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT CHARGES
Chapter 13.16 ADVANCE FINANCING OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

Chapter 13.02 UTILITY CODE
13.02.010 Utility Code.
        Chapters 13.02 through 13.16 of the Molalla Municipal Code shall be known as the “Utility Code.” (Ord. 2020-02 §1)

 

13.02.020 Exclusive control of utility systems and services by City.
        The City of Molalla has exclusive control of the water, sewer and stormwater management utility systems and services within the City limits, including all connections and contributions to the utility systems. It is prohibited for any person to install any service, connect to any system, discharge sewer or stormwater into the system, provide utility service or otherwise tamper or interfere with any part of the system without authorization from the City. (Ord. 2020-02 §1)

 

13.02.030 Jurisdiction and operation.
        The City may provide utility service to or receive utility service from any other utility service provider pursuant to an agreement authorized by the City Council. Such agreements may include, but are not limited to:

        A.    Sale or purchase of surplus water to or from any other municipal corporation, special district or utility company.

        B.     Sale or purchase of treatment services to or from any other municipal corporation, special district or utility company.

        C.     Provision of utility service within the City limits by any other municipal corporation, special district or utility company. (Ord. 2020-02 §1)

 

13.02.040 Payments for utility services.
        A.    All charges for utility service shall be due and payable monthly on the date of mailing and become delinquent on the 16th of each month. A late fee set by resolution shall be assessed on any utility accounts, which become delinquent. After a customer’s utility bill is delinquent, the Finance Director or designee shall mail to customer a notice stating:

        1.     That the utility bill is delinquent;

        2.     The amount necessary to cure the delinquency;

        3.     That the utility service to the property will be shut off 20 days after the date of the notice, unless the delinquency is paid in full.

        4.     After termination of utility service, the full account balance including the fees will be required before service can be restored. If notice is mailed as provided in this section, the City may shut off utility service to the property 20 days after mailing of the notice unless the total amount due is paid in full, but subject to the City’s compliance with the options specified in subsection C.

        B.     Utility services disconnected for lack of payment of the utility bills will be assessed a disconnect/reconnect fee as set by resolution and shall not be restored until all past-due bills, late fees, and any other utility charges or connection fees are paid in full.

        C.     1. The customer may request in writing a one-time emergency extension of payment (not to exceed 10 days) to avoid service being shut off and a disconnect fee being charged. If customer defaults on this agreement the utility account will be shut off the morning after the agreement expires and a disconnect fee will then be charged.

        2.     Any customer may request a waiver of their late fee in writing providing no other late fees have been assessed in the prior 12 months.

        3.     A customer may appeal a notice of utility shut-off by filing a written request for an informal hearing with the City within 15 days after the date of mailing of the notice. The appeal shall be filed with the City Manager and shall specify the reasons for the appeal. If an appeal is so filed, utility service shall not be disconnected before the business day after the announcement of the result of the hearing. The informal hearing shall be held as soon as is practically possible before the City Manager or designee. The City shall provide the customer reasonable notice of the date of the hearing. The customer may be represented by an attorney at the hearing, and any probative evidence shall be admissible. The hearing officer may affirm, overrule, or modify the notice of utility shut-off, considering applicable law and the nature of any hardship of the customer.

        D.    All payments shall be made to the City either by mail, online bill pay, at the office of the City, placed in drop box, or such other place as the Council may from time to time designate. (Ord. 2020-02 §1)

Chapter 13.04 WATER
13.04.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings:

        A.    “City” means the City of Molalla.

        B.     “Council” means the Mayor and City Council of the City of Molalla, Oregon.

        C.     “Customer” means any person granted water service after due application.

        D.    “Customer line” means the pipe, valves and fittings leading from the water meter into the premises served.

        E.     “Director” means the Director of Public Works of the City of Molalla, employed by the City of Molalla.

        F.     “Main” or “water main” means the pipe in the street, alley or right-of-way owned and maintained by the City for the purpose of distributing water to customers and servicing fire hydrants.

        G.    “Person” means and includes any natural person, firm, co partnership, association or corporation.

        H.    “Service line” or “service connection” means the pipe, valves, stops and fitting from a main to and including the meter and meter box.

        I.      “System” means all or any part of the water system owned and operated by the City and includes all service lines to and including all meters. (Ord. 1976-3 §1)

 

13.04.020 Ownership of system.
        The water system is owned by the City of Molalla and the people residing therein, and none of the properties may be disposed of except as by Charter or ordinance provided. (Ord. 1976-3 §2)

 

13.04.030 Jurisdiction and operation.
        A.    The entire system including all mains, service lines, meters, reservoirs, pumping stations, treatment plants, and all facilities and appurtenances shall be operated only by regularly employed and authorized personnel of the City.

        B.     No person shall connect to any main or service of the system or interfere with the operation of any of the facilities whatsoever, or turn on any meter or service, or operate any valves or fire hydrants; provided, however, that members of regularly constituted fire departments shall be permitted to connect to and use fire hydrants for the express purpose of fighting fire, testing and use consistent therewith. (Ord. 1976-3 §3)

 

13.04.040 Responsibility and liability of City.
        A.    The City shall maintain and repair its mains, service pipes, meters, structures, facilities and all appurtenances so as to keep them in repair and operative condition at all times insofar as practical and reasonable.

        B.     The City shall not be liable for damages or otherwise responsible because of interruptions or discontinuance of water service. The Council shall have the right in cases of inadequate supply or shortages of water to determine how water shall be used, and give preference to those uses determined to be in the best interest of the public health and public convenience or necessity. (Ord. 1976-3 §4)

 

13.04.050 Use of water.
        The City shall furnish water for ordinary domestic, business and community use and for such sprinkling, irrigation, industrial, commercial and firefighting purposes as the system may reasonably supply and as may be approved by the Council. (Ord. 1976-3 §5)

 

13.04.055 Restricted use of water.
        A.    The City Council may, by resolution, at such times as it deems appropriate, restrict the use of City water.

        B.     It is unlawful for anyone to use water in violation of the terms of a water restriction resolution duly imposed by the City Council. Violation of such restrictions may be punishable by a fine not exceeding $100.00 for each day of the violation. (Ord. 1988-1 §1)

 

13.04.060 Furnishing water.
        The City shall not be obligated to furnish and install at its expense system facilities for all property within the City. The City shall, so far as reasonable and practicable and within its financial means, however, provide adequate source of supply, necessary primary feeder mains, storage facilities and other improvements necessary to make water service generally available to all areas within the City. Extensions to furnish water to areas at present not now obtaining water from the system shall, at the expense of those persons requesting service, be made by the City or by those expressly authorized to do so. (Ord. 1976-3 §6)

 

13.04.070 Water service—Application requirements.
        A.    Application for water service shall be made in writing by the owner of the premises to be served, or the owner’s agent duly authorized in writing on regular application forms furnished by the City. No service will be rendered until such application has been completed and the required payments made. All applications shall include signature of applicant, locations of premises for which service is requested, address to which all bills shall be sent, and such additional data as the Council from time to time may require.

        B.     Applications for service shall be considered merely as a request for service, and they shall not bind the City or Council to provide service. (Ord. 1976-3 §7)

 

13.04.080 Water service—Payment of installation charges in advance.
        Charges made for the installation of water services shall be paid in full and in advance of installation by the City. (Ord. 1976-3 §7)

 

13.04.090 Water service—Spider connections prohibited.
        Water service shall be provided only from pipes or mains located within streets, alleys, or rights-of-way controlled by the City, and to-property or premises abutting such mains. So-called “spider connections” which would provide service from one street or road to property or premises abutting another street or road shall not be permitted, and requests for such service shall be disapproved. (Ord. 1976-3 §7)

 

13.04.110 Water service—Connection and meter required.
        A.    Each dwelling or building, or building complex under the same ownership shall be provided with its own water service connection and meter. Multifamily dwellings and other multi-occupancy units under the same ownership shall be provided with one meter, unless the customer requests and pays for additional meters.

        B.     No person shall furnish water to either buildings or premises without making application for water service with the City, and then only under the specific terms of any such authorization which might be granted.

        C.     No City water customer may furnish City-supplied water to a noncustomer by means of a hose, pipe or similar conveyance. A de minimus temporary use of City water does not constitute a violation of this subsection. (Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 2002-02 §1; Ord. 1976-3 §7)

 

13.04.120 Location of meters—Pipes and meters to be City property.
        Meters shall be set at property lines, and the service pipe from the main to the meter as well as the meter and meter box shall be the property of the City and not the person owning the premises or paying for the installation. (Ord. 1976-3 §7)

 

13.04.130 Size of service connections.
        Service connection sizes shall be in accordance with the City of Molalla Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction and the water master plan. Service needs that are greater than the minimum service size shall be based on the use requirements of the property served. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures must be approved by the Director of Public Works before installation. (Ord. 2019-12 §1)

 

13.04.140 Larger service connections for fire protection. (Repealed Ord. 2002-02 §3)
 

13.04.150 Service outside City.
        Service to persons residing outside of the limits of the City shall be made only if the City has sufficient surplus water over and above its requirements within the City, and such service, if provided, may be discontinued at any time if the interest and the needs of the City so require. The rate schedule for outside service shall in no instance be less than the rates charged for residents within the City, and it may be more in such additional amount as the Council may from time to time determine. The City may at its discretion require annexation or a waiver of remonstrance to annexation as a condition of providing water service. (Ord. 2011-01 §1; Ord. 1976-3 §7)

 

13.04.160 Establishment of rate schedules.
        Rate schedules for water service within and without the City shall be established and may from time to time be revised by the Council by resolution. (Ord. 2002-02 §4; Ord. 1976-3 §7)

 

13.04.170 Temporary service.
        For temporary water service a customer shall pay the established charge for installation of the service connections requested plus any additional charge which may be required by the City for the removal or resetting of the service following the termination of the temporary use. He or she shall also pay in advance one month’s anticipated or estimated water service charge, and shall continue to do so each month thereafter so long as the temporary service is maintained. (Ord. 1976-3 §8)

 

13.04.180 Discontinuance of service or change of occupancy.
        A.    At any time a customer wishes to discontinue water service, the City shall read the meter and the bill shall be payable at once.

        B.     Bills for a portion of a month shall be prorated upon the actual days of use if the amount is less than allowed under the minimum bill.

        C.     If, at the customer’s request, a service is shut off and turned on more than once in a given month, such charge shall be made therefore as the Council shall determine proper from time to time and as set forth in Appendix I to Ordinance No. 1976-3, as amended or modified, on file in the City Recorder’s office. (Ord. 2002-02 §5; Ord. 1976-3 §9)

 

13.04.190 Contracts.
        A.    In case the premises of the applicant for water service are connected for water service as a result of the application made and accepted by the City, the application given in writing shall be considered as a contract in which the applicant agrees to abide by all rules and regulations as are in effect at the time of signing the application, or as may be adopted or modified thereafter by the Council, and to pay all bills promptly.

        B.     Whenever the applicant’s requirements for water service are unusual, large, or subject to a great fluctuation or variation in draft, the City may require a special contract for an extended period of time, and the City may require reasonable security satisfactory to the City and sufficient to protect the City against loss and to guarantee performance under the terms of the contract.

        C.     All rules, regulations, rates and charges are subject to change or modification by the Council without notice, except however, special contracts which specify the length of time in which the contract rates shall apply.

        D.    All special contracts shall be in writing, signed by the proper person or customer and officers of the Council. (Ord. 1976-3 §10)

 

13.04.200 Deposits and establishment of credit.
        A.    At the time a written application is made for a new water service, the applicant shall pay to the City an amount sufficient to cover the cost of the installation in accordance with schedule established by the City. After such installation is made, the facilities shall be the property of the City, and the cost of installation shall not be refunded to the customer or owner of the premises served.

        B.     Each water service customer shall pay a deposit to secure the payment of water/utility bills, unless exempted under the provisions of subsection C of this section. The amount of the deposit shall be established by the City Council by resolution. After payment of all amounts due for water service, the deposit shall be refunded to the customer upon termination of service or upon the customer’s qualification for an exemption from the deposit requirement.

        C.     Water service customers shall be exempt from the requirement to maintain a water bill deposit if:

        1.     The customer has maintained a water service account with the City for a continuous period of one year without any delinquencies in payment; or

        2.     The customer previously had a water service account with the City of Molalla for a period of at least one year, and there were no delinquencies in payment on that account.

        D.    Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the City Manager may waive a customer’s deposit requirement, extend the period during which a deposit is required, or reinstate a customer’s deposit requirement for good cause. (Ord. 2018-03 §1; Ord. 2002-02 §6)

 

13.04.210 Meter reading and billing. (Repealed Ord. 2002-02 §7)
 

13.04.220 Leakage within premises.
        All leakage occurring beyond the meter installation shall be at the expense of the user, and he or she shall be responsible for the proper maintenance and repair of the customer’s lines, stop and waster valves, gate valves, pressure regulators, plumbing fixtures, etc., within his or her premises. (Ord. 1976-3 §13)

 

13.04.230 Water damages or injuries within property.
        The City shall not be liable for any damage or injury whatsoever for leakage or the running of water on the premises from the pipe lines, plumbing fixtures, open faucets, valves, fixtures and hoses beyond meters set at property lines. (Ord. 1976-3 §14)

 

13.04.240 Payments for service. (Repealed Ord. 2018-03 §1)
 

13.04.250 Turning on water services and meters.
        No person other than an employee of the City shall turn on or off any of the services or meters. Users desiring either discontinuance of service, a new service or restoration of service shall make arrangements therefore with the Council through the office of the City. (Ord. 1976-3 §16)

 

13.04.260 Maintenance and repair of customer’s lines.
        A.    Customers shall install, maintain and repair all piping between the meter and the premises served, and shall install same at a depth sufficient to protect from damage and freezing.

        B.     Customers shall be responsible for the cost of all water lost from leakage in a customer’s lines. (Ord. 2002-02 §9; Ord. 1976-3 §17)

 

13.04.270 Cross connections or physical connections with other water supplies or systems. (Repealed 2002-02 §10)
 

13.04.271 Cross connection control and backflow prevention policy—Purpose.
        As required by the Oregon Health Division pursuant to Oregon Administrative Rules 333-61-070, and in order to prevent any possibility of backflow contaminating the water system, it shall be the policy of the City of Molalla to require the installation of backflow prevention devices, and inspections of those devices, as set forth in this chapter. References herein to “this policy” shall refer to the provisions of Sections 13.04.271 through 13.04.277 of this code. (Ord. 2002-02 §11)

 

13.04.272 Records and reports.
        The City shall maintain current records of backflow assemblies installed, inspections completed, and backflow assembly test results, and shall report such data as may be required by state law. (Ord. 2002-02 §11)

 

13.04.273 Discontinuance of service for violations of policy.
        A.    After proper notice to the customer as required by this chapter, and until the violation has been corrected, the City shall discontinue water service to any premises under any of the following circumstances:

        1.     For failure to install an approved backflow prevention device;

        2.     For failure to conduct an annual test on the backflow device;

        3.     When City staff has reasonable cause to believe that an existing or potential cross connection is located on the user’s premises, until an appropriate backflow prevention assembly is installed or until the cause of the hazard is eliminated;

        4.     For any other violation of Sections 13.04.271 through 13.04.277 of this code.

        B.     This section shall not in any way be construed to impair the City’s ability to immediately discontinue water service in the event of imminent threat to the City’s water system or other emergency situations. (Ord. 2002-02 §11)

 

13.04.274 Notification to City when water treated.
        The City Public Works Director shall be notified whenever a water user or the owner of the premises obtaining water from the City treats the water in any way or adds any chemical or substance to the water. (Ord. 2002-02 §11)

 

13.04.275 Backflow prevention—When required.
        A.    Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed at the service connection to premises where an approved air gap does not exist and:

        1.     There is an auxiliary water supply which is, or can be, connected to the potable water piping; or

        2.     There is piping for conveying liquids other than potable water, and where that piping is under pressure and is installed in proximity to potable water piping; or

        3.     There is intricate plumbing which makes it impractical to ascertain whether or not cross connections exist; or

        4.     There is back siphonage potential; or

        5.     Cross connections or potential cross connection exist. (Ord. 2002-02 §11)

 

13.04.276 Approved devices and installation thereof—Methods of backflow prevention required.
        A.    New Assemblies. All backflow prevention assemblies required under this policy shall be of a type and model approved by the Oregon Health Division, and shall be installed in accordance with Oregon Administrative Rules 333-61-071 Sections (1) through (4), as now existing or later amended. Suitable pressure-relieve devices to prevent damage from thermal expansion shall be required in conjunction with the installation of all new backflow prevention assemblies.

        B.     Existing Assemblies. Backflow prevention assemblies installed before the adoption of the policy and which were approved by the Oregon Health Division at the time they were installed, but are not on the current list of approved assemblies, shall be permitted to remain in service provided they are properly maintained, are commensurate with the degree of hazard, are tested at least annually, and perform satisfactorily. When assemblies of this type are moved, or require more than minimum maintenance or are on services that are modified, changed size or remodeled, they shall be replaced by assemblies, which are on the Health Division list of approved assemblies.

        C.     Methods Required. The method of backflow prevention required under this policy shall at a minimum be commensurate with the degree of hazard which exists, and not less than the following:

        1.     When the substance which could backflow could be hazardous to health, an approved air gap of at least twice the inside diameter, but not less than one inch, of the incoming supply line measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel shall be installed, or an approved reduced pressure backflow (RPBA) assembly shall be installed.

        2.     When the substance, which could backflow, is objectionable but does not pose an unreasonable risk health, an approved double check valve assembly (DCVA) shall be installed. An approved double check valve assembly shall be the minimum protection for fire sprinkler systems using piping material that is not approved for potable water use and/or which does not provide for periodic flow through during each 24-hour period.

        3.     An approved pressure vacuum breaker assembly (PVBA) or an atmospheric vacuum breaker (AVB) shall be installed where the substance which could backflow is objectionable but does not pose an unreasonable risk to health and where there is no possibility of backpressure in the downstream piping. A shutoff valve may be installed on the line downstream of a pressure vacuum breaker but shall not be installed downstream of an atmospheric vacuum breaker. (Ord. 2002-02 §11)

 

13.04.277 Testing required.
        A.    When Required. The water user or the owner of the premises where one or more reduced pressure assembly (RPBA), double check valve assembly (DCVA), or pressure vacuum breaker (PVBA) have been installed shall have the assemblies tested by a certified tester at least once per year. Assemblies installed at facilities, which pose an extreme health risk and assemblies, which repeatedly fail, shall be tested on a more frequent basis as determined by the City. Backflow assemblies which have been moved or which have been installed shall be tested before use.

        B.     Malfunctioning Assemblies. Backflow prevention assemblies found not to be functioning properly shall be promptly repaired by the owner or water user, and failure to do so may result in the denial or discontinuance of service as provided in this policy.

        C.     Test Procedures and Reports. Tests performed by certified testers shall be in conformance with procedures adopted under OAR 333-061-0070(10), as now existing or later amended. Reports on the tests shall be prepared by the certified tester and copies shall be provided to the City and to the water user or owner of the premises. (Ord. 2002-02 §11)

 

13.04.280 Plumbing. (Repealed 2002-02 §10)
 

13.04.290 Maintenance, repair and testing of meters.
        A.    Normal maintenance and repair of meter shall be carried on by the City at its expense. Should a customer wish to have his or her meter tested, the City will make such tests, but should the meter so tested be found accurate within four percent of true delivery, the customer requesting such testing shall pay the cost thereof; provided, however, that should such meter be found to under register in excess of four percent testing shall be at the cost of the City.

        B.     Charges made for meter testing shall be paid in advance, and the deposit required for the testing shall be set by the Council by resolution.

        C.     Wherever a meter has been found to over-register more than four percent, an adjustment in reasonable amount shall be made to the customer for past billings, but in no case shall adjustment exceed a period of one year. (Ord. 1991-3 §9; Ord. 1976-3 §20)

 

13.04.300 Service interruptions.
        The City from time to time must interrupt service for repairing mains, making extensions, repairing valves, pumps, and control devices, etc., and for cleaning, maintaining and reconditioning reservoirs and storage tanks. The City shall not be responsible for any damages caused by such interruptions of service or fluctuations in pressure, but shall, whenever feasible to do so, give customers advance notice whenever it is known that service is to be interrupted for any appreciable length of time, but failure to give such notice shall in no manner cause the City to become liable for loss or damage caused by service interruption. (Ord. 1976-3 §21)

 

13.04.310 Pressure regulation.
        A.    Insofar as it is reasonably possible, feasible and economical for the City to do so, it will furnish water at desirable service pressures. In locations in which service pressures are higher than needed or desired by users, customers shall install and maintain within their premises any pressure regulators required.

        B.     The City shall not be responsible for damages or difficulties experienced by reason of variations in pressure within the system. (Ord. 1976-3 §22)

 

13.04.320 Maintenance and repair of service lines.
        The City shall maintain and repair service piping between mains and meters at its expense. Water users shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of service piping between meters and premises. Service lines shall be installed at such depth that pipes shall be protected from freezing and traffic. Owners and users shall take all reasonable precautions to protect service lines and meter installations from damage of any kind whatsoever. (Ord. 1976-3 §23)

 

13.04.330 Maintenance and replacement of mains.
        The City will maintain and replace mains within the distribution system at its expense, provided the original installation was made by the City or with materials furnished or approved by the City. (Ord. 1976-3 §24)

 

13.04.340 Water main extensions—Responsibility for payment.
        The City as a whole shall pay for the cost of supply, pumping stations, storage facilities and primary mains for the general distribution of water within the city, but it shall not pay the cost of main extensions to service additional customers, properties, tracts or subdivisions. Such extensions, when requested, shall be paid for by the person or persons requesting such extensions, at actual cost plus 10% for overhead. (Ord. 1976-3 §25)

 

13.04.350 Water main extensions—To be made by City.
        All water main extensions shall be made by the City or by a contractor approved by the City, and shall be constructed to such design standards as the City may designate. (Ord. 2002-02 §12; Ord. 1976-3 §25)

 

13.04.360 Water main extensions—Size.
        The City shall determine the size and extent of mains and appurtenances required in accordance with the City of Molalla Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction and the water master plan. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures must be approved by the Director of Public Works before installation. (Ord. 2019-13 §1)

 

13.04.370 Water main extensions—Advance payment by property owner—Cost assessment by City.
        Advance payment for extensions shall be made by the owner or owners of the property for which service is desired. After receipt of a written request for a main extension, the Director of Public Works shall prepare an estimate of cost and furnish the applicant with a copy thereof. The City shall not proceed with the work until payments have been made for the full amount of the proposed work including 10% for overhead. After completion of the work and tabulation of costs of the installation, any excess monies deposited prior to the work shall be refunded and any deficiency shall forthwith be paid to the City by the owner. (Ord. 1976-3 §25)

 

13.04.380 Water main extensions—Maintenance and operation by City.
        The facilities after installation shall be the sole property of the City and shall be maintained and operated by the City’s personnel exclusively, and all connections for services thereto shall be made in the manner elsewhere set forth in these regulations, and the charges made for service connections and meters shall be as therein set forth. (Ord. 1976-3 §25)

 

13.04.390 Water main extensions—Reimbursement to persons paying for extensions on property owned by others. (Repealed Ord. 2002-02 §13)
 

13.04.391 Water main extensions—Reimbursement to persons paying for extensions.
        Persons paying for water main extensions shall be entitled to reimbursement under the provisions of Section 13.12.050 of this code. (Ord. 2002-02 §14)

 

13.04.400 Water main extensions—Collection of costs from prospective users. (Repealed Ord. 2002-02 §13)
 

13.04.410 Water main extensions—City to pay for installation of larger mains.
        The City may elect to install a larger main than charged for when extensions are made, and when it does so, it shall bear the additional cost of the pipe, fittings and other materials and equipment used. In no case will a person requesting an extension be expected to pay an amount greater than that which would be incurred by the installation of a six-inch pipeline and appurtenances unless the development to be served, such as a subdivision, commercial development, or industrial enterprise, is such as to require larger mains either for normal use, fire protection, or both. All such cases shall be considered separately, and the requirements for each such development shall be specified to the applicant for extensions or service. (Ord. 1976-3 §25)

 

13.04.430 Water rates and charges. (Repealed Ord. 2002-02 §16)
 

13.04.460 Violation—Penalty.
        A.    Whenever the City determines that a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter has occurred, the City Manager shall cause a written notice to be mailed to the customer, the owner of the property, and to such other persons as the City Manager may designate, stating the nature of the violation and a 14-day limit upon which the violation must be corrected. Any person who continues any violation beyond the time limit provided for in Section 13.04.460 shall be guilty of a violation and, on conviction thereof, shall be fined in the amount set by Council resolution or subject to fines established per code Section 1.04.010, general provisions for each violation. Each day in which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. Failure to comply with a written directive or timeline of the City Manager made under the authority of this chapter is a punishable offense and may result in a temporary loss of City water and sewer services.

        B.     If a violation to this chapter is likely to cause damage to the City water system or create a danger to public health, water service shall be cut off without formal written notice. The City shall not be responsible for any damage to private property resulting there from. (Ord. 2018-03 §1; Ord. 2002-02 §17; Ord. 1976-3 §30)

Chapter 13.08 SANITARY SEWERS
13.08.010 Definitions.
        Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as set forth as follows:

        “Alternative sewage disposal system” means alternative wastewater treatment process(es) and technique(s) which are proven methods providing for the reclaiming and reuse of water and productively recycled wastewater constituents, or otherwise eliminate the discharge of pollutants. (See Appendix E of the Innovative and Alternative Technology Guidelines, EPA Innovative and Alternative Technology Assessment Manual, MCD53.)

        “Backflow preventer” means a device or means designed to prevent backflow or back-siphonage.

        “BOD (biochemical oxygen demand)” means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams/liter (mg/l). (EPA Standard Methods 5210(B) shall be used for any tests of BOD.)

        “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building, and conveys it to the building storm sewers, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building walls.

        “Building service line” means all water service piping on the customer’s side of the main service meter where the meter is within the public right-of-way or easement. Also, all other service connection piping between the meter and the main located on private property (excluding water meters) where the City does not have existing agreements to maintain and replace such piping.

        “Building sewer” means that part of the horizontal piping of a drainage system which extends from the end of the building drain and which receives the discharge of the building drain and conveys it to a public sewer at the public right-of-way or easement, private sewer, individual sewage disposal system, or other point of disposal.

        “Business day” or “working day” means Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., excluding any City-recognized holidays.

        “COD (chemical oxygen demand)” means the quantity of oxygen, expressed in milligram per liter, utilized by decomposition of organic and inorganic contaminants, dissolved or suspended in water, during a two-hour oxidation test. (EPA Standard Methods 5220(D) shall be used for any tests of COD.)

        “Commercial business” means a business establishment which furnishes goods or services to either the general public or other commercial operations.

        “Controlled cross-connections” means a connection between a potable water system and a non-potable water system, with an approved backflow-prevention device properly installed that will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.

        “Cross-connection” means any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other non-potable water or industrial fluids of questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow or back-siphonage may occur into the potable water system. Other types of cross-connections include, but are not limited to, connectors such as swing connections, removable sections, four-way plug valves, spools, dummy sections of pipe, swivel or changeover devices, sliding multiport tube, and solid connections.

        “Customer.” See “User.”

        “Developer” means any person, company or corporation who purchases or holds an interest in real property with the intent to increase the value thereof by the installation of utilities, construction of a building or buildings, grading, ditching, improving or enhancing the ground or structures for the purpose of resale.

        “Dwelling unit” means any of the following:

        A.    A single-family dwelling;

        B.     An accessory dwelling unit;

        C.     A habitable unit of multifamily dwelling(s), including an apartment;

        D.    A condominium; or

        E.     A manufactured home.

        “Garbage” means the solid animal and vegetable waste from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from handling, storage and sale of produce.

        “Industrial facility” means an establishment primarily engaged in manufacturing, processing or fabrication of goods.

        “Industrial user” means any user engaged in the introduction of pollutants into a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) from any non-domestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Title 33 U.S.C. 1251.

        “Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from any industrial user. A user in the divisions listed in industrial user may be excluded if it is determined that it will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.

        “Maintenance” means preservation of functional integrity and efficiency of equipment and structures. This includes preventive maintenance, corrective maintenance and replacement of equipment as needed.

        “Mains” means collection pipelines that are part of the City sewer system.

        “Multi-user” means a customer supplied with water service to more than one dwelling unit, commercial business or industrial facility, or combination thereof, from one water service connection.

        “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater.

        “Operation” means control of the unit processes and equipment which make up the treatment works. This includes financial and personnel management, records, laboratory control, process control, safety and emergency operation planning.

        “Operation and maintenance” means activities, including, but not limited to, replacement, to assure the dependable and economical function of the treatment works.

        “Person” means any individual, firm, company, association, society, group or corporation.

        “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.

        “Premises” means the integral property or area, including improvements thereon, to which water service is or will be provided.

        “Private sewer” means a privately owned and maintained lateral sewer system normally six or eight inches in diameter, installed to serve multi-unit structures on single-ownership properties, which cannot legally be further divided, such as apartments, mobile home parks, schools and condominiums.

        “Properly shredded garbage” means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and disposing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.

        “Property owner” means the owner of the premises who is also the ultimate responsible party for all customer charges and fees. The property owner may also be the customer for any given premises.

        “Public sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority.

        “Publicly Owned Treatment Works or POTW” means a treatment plant or system, owned and operated by the City of Molalla, for the treatment of waters collected in a sewer collection system.

        “Replacement” means any work and/or expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term “operation and maintenance” includes replacement.

        “Sanitary sewer” means a conduit intended to carry liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.

        “Service connection” means a water connection or sewer connection as the context indicates.

        “Service connection charge” means the fee levied to pay for the cost of labor, materials and any inspection required during the construction of a utility service line from the water or sewer main to the property that is to be served, with the charges to be itemized on a standard City billing form.

        “Sewage” means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water, and stormwater as may be present.

        “Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treatment of sewage.

        “Sewage works” means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposition of sewage.

        “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.

        “Sewer connection” means a public sewer that has been constructed to the property line or right-of-way line from a public main for the sole purpose of providing a connection for the building sewer.

        “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive.

        “Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation.

        “Storm drain” (sometimes termed “storm sewer”) means a sewer designed to carry stormwater and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.

        “Stormwater” means surface runoff and street wash waters, and drainage.

        “Surface water” means all naturally occurring water whose surface is exposed to the atmosphere, including natural drainage ways, stream corridors, rivers, ponds, wetlands, and impoundments.

        “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering.

        “System development charge” means the fee or charge assessed to each commercial business, industry or dwelling unit for the right to connect to the City’s sewer or water system, and which is used for expansion of those systems.

        “Temporary service” means service of limited duration.

        “TSS (total suspended solids)” means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering. (EPA Standard Methods 2540(D) shall be used for any tests for TSS.)

        “Useful life” means the period during which a treatment works is planned and designed to be operated.

        “User” means the owner, agent, tenant or other authorized representative responsible for occupancy of the premises that is served by a City utility system. A person, corporation, association or agency which rents, or leases premises shall be considered an agent of the property owner.

        “User service charge” means a charge levied on customers that may be a combination of a base fee, a usage fee and a fixed fee as set by resolution and/or ordinance.

        “Utility” or “utility system” means sewer, water and stormwater management services provided by the City of Molalla.

        “Utility rate” is the rate established by City Council to cover the cost of providing utility system services.

        “Utility service” means services provided for water, sewer, and stormwater.

        “Wastewater” means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such incidental groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present.

        “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.020 Fees, rates and charges—Council authority.
        All fees, rates and charges stated within the utility code may be changed at any time by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.030 Fees, rates and charges set by resolution.
        The City Council will establish the fees, rates and charges for the City’s utilities by resolution in an amount reasonable and necessary to fund the administration, debt, planning, design, construction, operation, maintenance and repair of the City’s utility systems. Rates shall be based on generally accepted rate-making principles, including the City’s true costs in upgrading the system to accommodate regulatory requirements and to provide adequate collection and treatment capacity for system users. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.040 Application for service.
        The following criteria must be met regarding application for utility service:

        A.    Application for sewer service shall be made in writing by the owner of the premises to be served, or the owner’s agent duly authorized in writing on regular application forms furnished by the City. No service will be rendered until such application has been completed and the required payments made. All applications shall include signature of applicant, locations of premises for which service is requested, address to which all bills shall be sent, and such additional data as the Council from time to time may require.

        B.     Applications for service shall be considered merely as a request for service, and they shall not bind the City or Council to provide service.

        C.     Two or more parties who join together to make or who jointly make application for service are jointly and individually liable and will be sent a single billing.

        D.    Any person 18 years of age or older who receives utility services at a premises is liable for the services provided.

        E.     Contracts, other than applications, may be required prior to service where, in the opinion of the City, special circumstances exist.

        F.     If a service is connected to the City utility system without application, the City will disconnect the premises. Before a new connection is made, the applicant must pay double the rate of the estimated charges for the unpaid services during the period of non-City-approved connection.

        G.    In no case will utility service be allowed until the customer has complied with the terms of this section and all appropriate fees and charges have been paid.

        H.    In no case will utility service be allowed for properties that are not in compliance with any other section of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.050 Deposit requirements.
        Each sewer service customer shall pay a deposit to secure the payment of sewer/utility bills, unless exempted under the provisions of subsection (A)(3) of this section. The amount of the deposit shall be established by the City Council by resolution. After payment of all amounts due for sewer service, the deposit shall be refunded, within 90 calendar days, to the customer upon termination of service or upon the customer’s qualification for an exemption from the deposit requirement.

        A.    Sewer service customers shall be exempt from the requirement to maintain a deposit if:

        1.     The customer has maintained a sewer service account with the City for a continuous period of one year without any delinquencies in payment; or

        2.     The customer previously had a sewer service account with the City of Molalla for a period of at least one year, and there were no delinquencies in payment on that account.

        3.     Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the City Manager may waive a customer’s deposit requirement, extend the period during which a deposit is required, or reinstate a customer’s deposit requirement for good cause. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.060 Rates—Generally.
        All users of the City’s sewage system shall pay to the City the rates for sewer service as provided by this chapter.

        Sewer service charges shall commence at the time a private connection to the public sewer system is installed at a property. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.070 Service connection charges—Generally.
        A.    A connection charge levied and imposed upon the owner of any property connecting to the sanitary sewer system of the City of Molalla, which shall be paid prior to such connection. The charge shall be established by the City Council by resolution.

        B.     The connection charge is levied upon a property based upon the existing or intended use of the property at the time of application for connection. If the property is improved, expanded, subdivided or otherwise modified so as to increase the connection charge due from that property, a connection charge shall be levied for the modified portion of the property based upon connection charges in effect at the time of the modification. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.080 Rates—Outside-City.
        A.    No services will be provided outside of City limits. User service charges for preexisting utility customers located outside the City limits will be billed at rates necessary to ensure the financial viability of the utility system as determined by a rate study and established by resolution. User service charges will include both base rate charges and metered usage charges.

        B.     The rate schedule for outside service shall in no instance be less than the rates charged for residents within the City limits, and it may be more in such additional amount as the Council may from time to time determine. The City shall require annexation as a condition of providing sewer service for all new service connections. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.090 Charges for restoration of service.
        The City will charge a fee to a customer for restoration of utility service when service has been discontinued under the provisions of the utility code. This charge does not apply to newly installed service connections unless the applicant has outstanding charges on another account. The City may require a deposit, or require a larger deposit, before it will restore utility service based on prior payment history. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.100 Computation and collection of charges.
        The Finance Department will collect all user service charges. User service charges are computed and payable as provided in the utility code. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.110 Revenues—Deposit and use.
        The Finance Department will deposit in the appropriate fund all the gross revenues received from charges, rates and penalties collected for the use of the utility systems. The revenues deposited in the appropriate fund must be used exclusively for administration, planning, design, construction, improvements, operation, maintenance, debt payments and repair of the City’s sewer utility system. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.120 Billing—Mailing address.
        The City will mail bills for user service charges to the mailing address specified on the application for services, unless a different owner or customer has requested to the Finance Department that services be placed in their name and has agreed in writing to be responsible for the user service charges. When requested, the City will submit bills through its online billing program. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.130 Billing—Payment responsibility.
        A.    The property owner of record is ultimately responsible for payment of all charges prescribed in the utility code, regardless of any agreement the property owner may have with a third party and regardless of whether the customer’s bills were in a tenant’s name.

        B.     A customer who is a tenant continues to be responsible for delinquent utility charges until paid regardless of relocation to premises different from the premises at which the tenant accrued delinquent charges. The City may refuse to provide service to such tenant at any new address, and/or may terminate utility service until the delinquent bill is paid. The City may also pursue any action available under the laws of the City or State of Oregon to recover payment.

        C.     Multi-metered accounts must be in the property owner’s name. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.140 Adjustment of accounts—Non-leaks.
        A.    A customer’s account will be adjusted if the customer receives less than one month of service. Customers receiving less than one month of service will be billed on a pro rata basis for base and fixed charges.

        B.     The City may bill the customer for utility services if the service account is active and ON, but the meter is not registering. The bill will be at an amount determined by the finance department to closely reflect what would have been billed had the meter been functioning. This may be based on the prior year’s usage during the same time period, if available, or the prior two months’ usage.

        C.     Adjustments will be in the form of credits on future bills unless the customer no longer has an active account with the City, in which case the City will issue a refund. Eligibility for an adjustment on an account will end 90 calendar days after the date a final bill was issued for that account.

        D.    In no event may an adjustment be made for more than six consecutive months of billing. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.150 Adjustment of accounts—No service provided.
        If a customer pays for utility services not actually received as a result of the City’s error, the City will refund the amount paid for services not received. Refunded amount may not exceed a period of one year from the date the customer notified the City. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.160 Adjustment of accounts—Leaks.
        A.    The City may adjust a customer’s utility billing to reduce charges resulting from a verified leak when:

        1.     The customer notifies the City in writing of the leak;

        2.     The customer makes a reasonable effort to locate the leak and initiates repairs within 30 calendar days of discovering the leak;

        3.     The City verifies the leak exists. Verification of a leak that is not an obvious broken pipe consists of:

        a.     The customer certifying all plumbing fixtures within the building are in the OFF position, and

        b.     The meter leak detector wheel continues to spin;

        4.     The customer (or a contractor hired by the customer) fully repairs the leak within 30 calendar days of notice to the City of the leak; and

        5.     The customer provides proof that:

        a.     The leak was indeed caused by either a broken pipe or pipe connection, and

        b.     The leak was repaired. Proof shall be provided to the City in a form and manner as prescribed by the Finance Department, including, but not limited to, receipts and other verification of repairs or costs.

        B.     If the City determines the customer meets the conditions in subsection A of this section, the City will adjust the billing by reducing the affected monthly usage by the excess over the user’s normal amount.

        Adjustments to the bill may not exceed two months from the date before the customer fixes the leak. The City will add a leak adjustment fee to the customer’s bill for any adjusted billings due to leaks.

        C.     Faulty valves or similar devices of the customer are not grounds for the adjustment of a utility bill. In addition, obvious neglect or improper installation by the customer is not grounds for adjustment of a utility billing.

        D.    The City will not adjust an account balance resulting from a leak if the same leak occurred within the last two years and the customer has already received an adjustment based on that leak. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.170 Liens for delinquent utility account.
        Utility service charges become a lien against the premises served from and after the date of billing and entry on City records pertaining to the utility system. Such records are accessible for inspection by anyone interested to ascertain the amount of such charges against the property. Whenever a bill for utility service remains unpaid for 90 calendar days after billing, the lien thereby created may be foreclosed in a manner provided for in Oregon Revised Statutes, or in any other manner provided for by law or by City ordinance. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.180 Sewer classifications.
        User location classifications shall be comprised of, but not limited to, the following:

        A.    Residential.

        1.     Single-family (per dwelling unit);

        2.     Multifamily (per dwelling unit);

        3.     Mobile home park (per dwelling unit); and

        4.     Bed and breakfast; shall be considered one dwelling unit, unless the property is clearly divided into multiple dwelling units.

        B.     Commercial I.

        1.     Barbershops and beauty shops (each);

        2.     Car dealers (each);

        3.     Churches (each, without garbage disposal);

        4.     Department stores (each);

        5.     Fraternal clubs (each, without food service/kitchen);

        6.     Grocery stores (each, without meat cutting);

        7.     Hardware stores (each);

        8.     Hotels and motels (each, without food service/kitchen);

        9.     Laundromats (each);

        10.   Light industrial (each, flow less than 25,000 gpd, BOD less than 400 mg/l, TSS less than 450 mg/l);

        11.   Medical, dental and veterinary clinics (each);

        12.   Pharmacies (each);

        13.   Print shops (each);

        14.   Professional offices (each business);

        15.   Schools (each, without food service/kitchen);

        16.   Service stations (each, without food service/kitchen);

        17.   Tap rooms (each, without food service/kitchen);

        18.   Warehouses (each); and

        19.   Travel trailer park (per dwelling unit).

        C.     Commercial II.

        1.     Churches (each, with food service/kitchen);

        2.     Drive-in restaurants (each, with food service/kitchen);

        3.     Taverns (each, with food service/kitchen);

        4.     Full-service restaurants and fraternal clubs (each, with food service/kitchen, with grease trap); and

        5.     Institutions (each, hospitals, schools, nursing homes).

        D.    Commercial III.

        1.     Bakeries (each);

        2.     Full-service restaurants, taverns, and fraternal clubs (each, with food service/kitchen, without grease trap);

        3.     Grocery stores (each, with meat cutting and/or bakery); and

        4.     Meat markets, if allowed by City (each).

        E.     Commercial IV.

        1.     Septic haulers, if allowed by City (each).

        F.     Industrial.

        1.     Any facility that is found by the City to be classified as a Categorical User as outlined in the Clean Water Act, or that discharges effluent to the sanitary sewer for any period which equals or exceeds the following criteria:

        a.     Flow greater than 25,000 gpd;

        b.     BOD greater than 1,500 mg/l;

        c.     TSS greater than 1,500 mg/l;

        d.     pH greater than 9.0;

        e.     pH less than 6.0.

        G.    Where two or more user classifications apply to the same water meter usage, then the higher usage rate shall apply. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.190 Service discontinuance at customer request.
        A.    A customer may have utility service discontinued by notifying the City at least five business days in advance of the desired date of discontinuance.

        B.     If the customer does not give notice, the customer must pay for utility service until the date the City has learned the customer has vacated the premises or a new customer has requested service. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.200 Abandoned and non-revenue-producing services.
        A.    The City may remove a utility service connection to a premises that has been abandoned or not used for a period of one year or longer.

        B.     The City will only begin new utility service when the City receives a new customer application and payment for the new connection. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.210 Disconnection from sewer system—Destroyed or removed structures.
        A.    When any structure connected to the sewer system is destroyed by an act of God, is removed, or is torn down, and/or no longer usable, it shall be required to disconnect from the sewer system. The owner must advise the City of the destruction, stating the date of destruction or removal of the structure, and pay all user service charges to the date of destruction or removal, and thereafter no sewer user service charge will be made to the property until new improvements, if any, are placed on the property. However, the customer must continue to pay other fees, including, but not limited to, stormwater fees.

        B.     When the property is relieved from user service charges and then reconnected to the utility system, the City will determine whether the property had paid into the appropriate utility fund the amount required while the property was using City utilities. If the property had paid user service charges equal to the amount required under the utility rates that were in effect at the time of the disconnection from the utility system, the City will not levy any additional charges.

        C.     In addition, when a building with sewer service is destroyed or is relocated to a different property and thereafter replaced by a new building within three years after the date of destruction or removal, the City shall not levy a system development charge for the new building, unless the new building constitutes an increase in use under the system development charge schedule currently in effect. If the replacement building requires a greater system development charge than compared to the destroyed or relocated building previously on the same site, then a credit will be given on the replacement building’s system development charge equal to that of the previous building fee, and when the above provisions of this section and Section 13.08.220 are met.

        D.    The current system development charge schedule shall be used for all comparisons and credit determinations under Chapter 13.14. When a destroyed or relocated building is not replaced by a new building within three years of the date of destruction or an update to the sewer master plan is completed, then the owner of any replacement building must pay the full system development charge in effect at the time of application for sewer service. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.220 Disconnection from sewer system—Reuse of old facilities.
        A.    Before the City will issue a moving or demolition permit, City personnel must verify disconnection and capping of the building sewer service at the right-of-way cleanout. If a cleanout does not exist, property owner must install a cleanout and cap at the right-of-way meeting City requirements.

        B.     In addition, when a building with sewer service is destroyed or relocated to a different property and is not replaced by a new building within three years from the date of destruction or removal, the Director of Public Works or director’s designee may inspect the sewer service to determine whether it is in usable condition and is to be reused. If the sewer service is found unusable, the property owner is required to pay all costs for replacement of the sewer service connection. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.230 Disconnection and reconnection procedures.
        A.    When any structure connected to the sewer system is destroyed by an act of God, is removed or is torn down, and/or no longer usable, it shall be required to disconnect from the sewer. The owner shall advise the City, stating the date of destruction or removal of the structure, and pay all user service charges to the date of destruction or removal, and thereafter no user service charge shall be made to the property until new improvements, if any, are placed on the property.

        B.     When the property is relieved from user charges and then reconnected to the sewer, the City shall determine whether the property had paid into the sewer fund the amount required while the property was using the sewer. If the property had paid user service charges equal to the amount required under sewer rates that were in effect at the time of disconnecting from the sewer, no additional charges will be levied.

        C.     In addition, when a building with sewer service is destroyed, or relocated to a different property and thereafter replaced by a new building within three years from the date of destruction or removal, the City shall not levy a system development charge for the new building unless the new building constitutes an increase in use under the system development charge schedule currently in effect. If the replacement building requires a greater system development charge when compared to the destroyed or relocated building previously on the same site, then a credit will be given on the replacement building system development charge equal to that of the previous building fee, and when the above provisions of this section are met.

        D.    The current system development charge schedule will be used for all comparisons and credit determinations under this section.

        E.     When a destroyed or relocated building is not replaced by a new building within three years of the date of destruction or an update to the sewer master plan is completed, then any replacement building shall pay the system development charges in effect at the time of application for sewer service. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.240 Unsanitary deposit of waste.
        It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other unsanitary waste. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.250 Treatment of sewage required.
        It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any sewage or other polluted substances. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.260 Unlawful sewage disposal facilities.
        Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.270 Toilet facilities and sewer connections required.
        The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the City, is required at the owner’s expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 calendar days after date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.280 Private sewage disposal—When permitted.
        A.    Where a public sanitary sewer is not available, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the requirements of the Oregon State Department of Environmental Quality, the Oregon State Board of Health, the Plumbing Code of the State of Oregon, and Clackamas County and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations.

        B.     The provisions of this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of the requirements of other applicable laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.290 Private sewage disposal—Operation and maintenance.
        The owner of property with a private sewage disposal system shall operate and maintain the system in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the City. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.300 Upon availability of public sewer—Abandonment of private systems.
        At such times as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in Section 13.08.280, and upon notification to the property owner from the City, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be decommissioned, abandoned and filled with suitable material. All costs associated with decommissioning, abandonment and connection shall be the responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.310 Unauthorized connections and disturbances.
        No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.320 Costs of building sewer borne by owner.
        All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.330 Building sewer for each lot or parcel.
        A.    Every single-ownership property which cannot legally be further subdivided, and which was constructed after February 6, 1984, must have a separate sewer and water connection. These properties include, but are not limited to, multiple-family apartments, condominiums, mobile home parks and commercial or industrial establishments. Only one sewer lateral shall be provided to a residential property.

        B.     Multi-users with more than one unit located in common ownership on a single parcel of property shall also comply with the Oregon State Plumbing Specialty Code.

        C.     Any property which is located so as to require the sewer lateral to cross any other property or parcel shall provide evidence of a duly recorded perpetual easement for such lateral, appurtenant to the property to which such lateral will provide service, before any sewer connection is made.

        D.    Property other than residential shall utilize a common sewer main to provide services to individual building. Exceptions to this requirement must be in the interest of the public as determined and approved by the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.340 Materials and connections—Private side.
        The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in connecting, excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the uniform building and plumbing code and all other applicable rules and regulations. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply, or the most current version thereof. All connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Director of Public Works before installation.

        Sewer laterals on private property that are not part of the public system or within a public right-of-way or public sewer easement, the size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in connecting, excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the uniform building and plumbing code and all other applicable rules and regulations. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.350 Elevation.
        Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer at the property owner’s expense. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.360 Connection of sources of surface runoff.
        A.    No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.

        B.     Where the City finds that any private service lateral piping is leaking or not legally connected, the property owner will be notified in writing by the City to make necessary repairs. The notification shall include the type of repairs to be made and the date, no less than 30 calendar days from the date of the notice, by which the repairs shall be completed.

        C.     The property owner shall notify the Director of Public Works when repairs have been made, but before any piping is buried, and the City shall inspect and retest the private service lateral for leaks. The lateral will be considered repaired when it passes the retest by the City. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.370 Inspection—Connection to public sewer.
        The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Director of Public Works when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Director of Public Works or representative. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.380 Protection of excavations—Restoration of public property.
        All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.390 Unlawful discharge of storm and other waters.
        No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.400 Regular utility service—Rules and regulations.
        A.    The City may furnish and install a utility service connection of such size and location as a customer requests; provided, that the request is reasonable and is in compliance with provisions of the Oregon State Plumbing Specialty Code, the City’s design standards, and the utility code. The customer is responsible for all costs, including administration, for installation of utility service.

        B.     The City will install the sewer service from the main to right-of-way/property line of the premises, if the main is in the street, or to a point in a City right-of-way or easement.

        C.     The customer or property owner must furnish, install and keep in good and safe condition equipment that may be required for receiving, controlling, applying and utilizing any city utility, and the customer or property owner must do so at their own risk and expense.

        D.    The City is not responsible for loss or damage caused by the improper installation of the equipment used for receiving a City utility service by customer or customer’s agent, or the negligence, want of proper care, or wrongful act in installing, maintaining, using, operating or interfering with the equipment by the customer or customer’s agent.

        E.     The City is not responsible for damage to property caused by City’s regular cleaning and maintenance of sewer main lines.

        F.     A customer making any material change in the size, character or extent of the equipment or operation utilizing sewer service, or whose change in operations results in a large increase in the use of water, shall immediately give the City written notice of the nature of the change and, if requested, amend the customer’s application.

        G.    Any utility service connection, whether located on public or private property, is the property of the City, and the City reserves the right to repair, maintain and/or replace it. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.410 Inspection and maintenance—Responsibility.
        The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City, wherein such facilities are connected to the proper public sewer in accordance with this chapter, are responsible for the maintenance and cost of maintaining the private service lateral. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.420 Inspection and maintenance—Testing, cleanouts, and right of entry.
        A.    The Director of Public Works and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties, upon prior written notice, to make tests of private service lateral piping to determine whether such piping is adequately watertight.

        B.     The property owner shall be responsible to supply cleanout at or adjacent to the house or buildings upon 10 business days’ written notice by the City. Such cleanout shall be the same size as the service lateral piping and shall conform to the City of Molalla standard specifications for service lateral cleanout.

        C.     The City may elect at its cost to construct a service lateral cleanout on public right-of-way for use in testing and/or repairing of service lateral piping. The cleanout shall conform to City standards. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.430 Inspection and maintenance—Grease traps and interceptors.
        Where grease, oil and sand interceptors are required under Section 13.08.530, monthly cleaning records of traps and interceptors and monthly disposal records of grease, oils and sand shall be maintained and made available for inspection in a form established by the City. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.440 Improper connection and notice to repair.
        A.    Where the City finds that any private service lateral piping is leaking or not legally connected, the property owner will be notified in writing by the City to make necessary repairs. The notification shall include the type of repairs to be made and the date, no less than 30 calendar days from the date of the notice, by which the repairs shall be completed.

        B.     The property owner may elect to have the City repair or replace private service laterals by notifying the Director of Public Works in writing. The property owner may then contract with the City for such repairs.

        C.     The City shall contract out the work and charge for any in-house labor and materials so furnished.

        D.    Upon completion of repairs, the City shall provide a written accounting to the property owner prepared by the Director of Public Works.

        E.     The property owner shall pay the City for the repairs by paying no less than one-twelfth the cost of the improvements as a surcharge on the sewer bill until the outstanding amount has been paid in full. The City shall charge no interest on the unpaid balance.

        F.     The City does not assume any obligation for reasonably necessary damage to landscaping, vegetation and walkways caused by repair work, and the property owner shall be solely responsible for repairing or replacing such damages. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.450 Nonconformance—Notice.
        A.    Any property owner who fails to comply with the provisions of Sections 13.08.410 through 13.08.440 shall be deemed to possess a private service lateral not in conformance.

        B.     The Director of Public Works shall notify by mail each property owner he or she determines is in violation at the address of such owner as listed on the latest tax rolls of the Tax Assessor for Clackamas County, Oregon. The notice shall set forth the basis for such alleged violations along with an explanation of the consequences of having a service lateral not in conformance. The notice shall include notification of the right to a hearing as described in this section.

        C.     Within 10 business days of the mailing of the notice described in subsection B of this section, the property owner may request a hearing before the City Manager. At such hearing the City Manager shall determine whether or not the property is in violation as alleged. Unless such request for a hearing is filed within the time provided by this section, the property owner shall be deemed to possess a service lateral not in conformance. If the property owner is found to be in violation at the hearing by the City Manager, then the property owner’s service lateral shall be deemed not in conformance. The property owner may appeal the decision of the City Manager within 10 business days of such decision by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Manager. Appeals shall be heard by the City Council. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.460 Nonconformance—Charges.
        Any property owner who maintains a private service lateral not in conformance with the maintenance requirements of this article shall be assessed a monthly sewer charge triple the normal rate until the private service lateral is brought into conformance with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.470 City may assume cost of repairs.
        At such times that the City Council shall determine by resolution that it is in the public interest to repair a service lateral or group of service laterals without delay the City may repair such lateral at the City’s expense without prior testing of such lateral and with the consent of the property owner without notice as provided in Sections 13.08.410 through 13.08.440. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.480 Damage to sewage works prohibited.
        No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.490 Entry on property.
        The Director of Public Works and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The Director of Public Works or representative shall also have the authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for wastes treatment. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.500 Observance of safety rules—Liability of City.
        While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in Section 13.08.490, the Director of Public Works or duly authorized employees of the City shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the City employees and the City shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by City employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.510 Entry and work on easements.
        The Director of Public Works and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.520 Certain discharges subject to approval.
        No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the Director of Public Works that such wastes can harm either the sewer, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Director of Public Works will give consideration to such factors as to quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewer, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:

        A.    Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C);

        B.     Any water or waste containing fats, gas, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F (0°C and 65°C);

        C.     Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director of Public Works;

        D.    Any waters or wastes containing strong acid from pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;

        E.     Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such a degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Director of Public Works for such materials;

        F.     Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the Director of Public Works as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction of such discharge to the receiving waters;

        G.    Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Director of Public Works in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;

        H.    Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;

        I.      Materials which exert or cause:

        1.     Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate),

        2.     Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions),

        3.     Unusual BOD, biochemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works,

        4.     Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting “slugs” as defined herein;

        J.      Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.530 Decision of Director of Public Works regarding harmful wastes.
        If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances, or possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 13.08.520 and which, in the judgment of the Director of Public Works, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, nuisance, the Director of Public Works shall:

        A.    Reject the wastes;

        B.     Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;

        C.     Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or

        D.    Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of Sections 13.08.520 through 13.08.550. If the Director of Public Works permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director of Public Works, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.540 Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
        Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Director of Public Works and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All maintenance and cleaning shall be performed at the owner’s expense, and as required by the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.550 Restricted discharges and pretreatment.
        A.    Standard Methods for Testing and Analysis.

        1.     All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water and waste to which reference is made in the utility code shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. In the event that no special manhole is required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.

        2.     Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect the effluent may be having on the sewer works and to determine the possible impact to the public welfare.

        B.     Sanitary Sewers—Prohibited Discharges.

        1.     No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or polluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.

        2.     Dilution. No industrial user may increase the use of potable or process water in any way, for the purpose of diluting wastewater to achieve compliance with the standards set forth in this code.

        C.     Storm Sewer Use Requirements.

        1.     Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Director of Public Works. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet, upon written approval of the Director.

        D.    Nonpermitted Discharges Designated.

        1.     No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any one of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:

        a.     Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; nor any kerosene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides;

        b.     Any water or waste containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other waste, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two mg/l of cyanide in the waste as discharged to the public sewer;

        c.     Any water and waste having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works;

        d.     Solids or visceral substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, feathers, tar, asphalt, lubricating oil, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshing, entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.

        E.     Prohibited Discharges.

        1.     No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works or designee, that such wastes can harm either the sewer system, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger public health, safety or welfare, or constitute a nuisance. In forming such opinion, the Director of Public Works or designee will give consideration to such factors as to quantities of waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewer system, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of waste in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors.

        2.     The substances prohibited are:

        a.     Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C);

        b.     Any water or waste containing fats, gas, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F (0°C and 65°C), or which has a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant, and in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant receiving water which exceeds 105°F (40°C);

        c.     Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director of Public Works;

        d.     Any water or waste containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;

        e.     Any water or waste containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, lead, nickel, silver, mercury, cadmium or other similar toxic substances which exceed EPA or DEQ standards;

        f.      Any water or waste containing high concentrations of phenols or other taste- or odor- producing substances;

        g.     Any radioactive waste or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed state or federal requirements;

        h.     Any water or waste having a pH in excess of 9.5;

        i.      Materials which exert or cause:

        i.      Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as fuller’s earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or of dissolved solids such as sodium chloride and sodium sulphate,

        ii.     Excessive discoloration, such as dye waste and vegetable tanning solutions,

        iii.    Unusual BOD or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works,

        iv.    Unusual volume of flow or concentration of waste constituting slugs, as defined in Section 13.08.010;

        j.      Water or waste containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving water.

        F.     Rejection or Pretreatment Conditions.

        1.     If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics outlined in Section 13.08.550(E), and which may have a detrimental effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving water, or which otherwise may create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Director of Public Works may:

        a.     Reject the wastes;

        b.     Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewer;

        c.     Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or

        d.     Require payment to cover any increase of administering the wastewater permit, the added cost of chemicals needed to address the situation, and the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes, fees or other charges under the provisions of the utility code.

        G.    Grease, Oil and Sand Interceptors. When required by the Director of Public Works, interceptors shall comply with Section 13.08.540.

        H.    Pretreatment Facilities—Operation and Maintenance. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any water or waste, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at the owner’s own expense.

        I.      Control Manhole for Tests. When required by the Director of Public Works, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Director of Public Works. Any cost to the City for required non-City sampling or testing shall be paid by the owner affected. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner’s own expense and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times.

        J.      Special Agreements Not Restricted.

        1.     No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern, and provided such agreement is in compliance with EPA and DEQ regulations.

        2.     When requested, an industrial user must submit information on a survey form prepared by the Director of Public Works before commencing discharge into the City wastewater system, identifying the nature and characteristics of the user’s wastewater. The Director may periodically require industrial users to update the survey. Failure to complete this survey within the time set by the Director is grounds for terminating service to the industrial user.

        K.    Discharges Prohibited Without a Permit.

        1.     No industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the City’s municipal wastewater system without first obtaining a wastewater permit.

        2.     No permittee shall violate the terms and conditions of a wastewater permit issued pursuant to this chapter. Obtaining a wastewater permit does not relieve a permittee from the obligation to obtain other permits required by federal, state, or local law.

        L.     Permitting Existing Connections. Any industrial user, not already possessing a permit, that discharges industrial waste into the City wastewater system prior to the effective date of this chapter and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future shall, within 90 calendar days after the effective date, apply to the City for a wastewater permit, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the system to continue after 180 calendar days of the effective date except in accordance with a permit issued by the Director of Public Works.

        M.    Permitting New or Renewed Connections.

        1.     Any industrial user proposing to begin or to recommence discharging industrial wastes directly or indirectly into the City wastewater system must obtain a wastewater permit prior to beginning or recommencing such discharge.

        2.     An application for a permit renewal must be received at least 90 calendar days before the current permit expires.

        N.    Wastewater Permit Issuance.

        1.     Within 60 calendar days of the date the Director of Public Works deems a permit application complete, the Director will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and determine whether a wastewater permit should be issued. The Director will issue a permit within said 60 calendar days unless a circumstance identified in subsection B of this section exists.

        2.     If any wastewater proposed to be discharged to the City wastewater system contains substances identified or possesses the characteristics enumerated in subsections (D) and (E) of Section 13.08.550 which, in the Director’s judgment, may have a deleterious effect upon the City wastewater system, processes, equipment, or waters of the state, or otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Director may:

        a.     Refuse to permit the discharge;

        b.     Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge into the City wastewater system; or

        c.     Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.

        O.    Wastewater Permit Duration. Permits shall be issued for a time period of five years. Each permit shall indicate the specific date upon which it will expire.

        P.     Wastewater Permit Contents.

        1.     A wastewater permit shall include such conditions deemed reasonably necessary by the Director of Public Works, or designee, to prevent pass through or interference and to implement the objectives of this chapter. Wastewater permits shall, at a minimum, contain:

        a.     A statement of permit duration;

        b.     A statement the permit is nontransferable;

        c.     Effluent limits applicable to the industrial user, including best management practices, based on applicable pretreatment standards in 40 CFR Part 403, categorical pretreatment requirements, local limits, and state and local law;

        d.     Monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping requirements, including an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law;

        e.     Statement of applicable penalties for violation of pretreatment standards, pretreatment requirements, and compliance schedules; and

        f.      Requirements to control spills or slug discharges as determined necessary by the POTW, including conditions for emergency suspension of the permit, or conditions thereof.

        2.     Permits may contain:

        a.     Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;

        b.     Limits on the instantaneous daily and monthly average, and/or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater pollutants or properties;

        c.     Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology or construction of appropriate containment devices or other similar technologies or devices designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;

        d.     Development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine discharges;

        e.     Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the City wastewater system;

        f.      Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;

        g.     Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include designation of sampling locations and frequency of sampling; the number, types, and standards for tests; and reporting schedules;

        h.     Requirements for immediate reporting of any instance of noncompliance and for automatic resampling and reporting within 30 calendar days of such noncompliance where monitoring indicates a violation;

        i.      Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment standards and pretreatment requirements;

        j.      Requirements for submission of periodic monitoring or special notification reports;

        k.     Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge, and affording the Director or designee access thereto;

        l.      Requirements for prior notification and approval by the Director of Public Works, or designee, of any introduction of new wastewater pollutants or any unpermitted change in the volume or character of wastewater prior to introduction in the City wastewater system;

        m.    Requirements for prior notification to and approval by the Director of any significant change in the manufacturing and/or pretreatment process;

        n.     Requirements for immediate notification of excessive, accidental, or slug discharges, or other discharge which may cause any problems to the City wastewater system;

        o.     A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards and pretreatment requirements, including those which become effective during the term of the permit; and

        p.     Other conditions deemed appropriate by the Director to ensure compliance with this chapter; state and federal laws, rules, and regulations; and the terms of the permit.

        Q.    Wastewater Permit Appeals.

        1.     Any person, including the permittee, may appeal the conditions imposed in a permit, or the issuance or denial of a permit within 10 business days of the issuance of the final permit by filing a notice of appeal, as provided for in Section 13.08.550(KK). Failure to submit a timely notice of appeal shall be a waiver of all rights to administrative review.

        2.     In addition to the requirements in Section 13.08.550(KK), the appellant shall indicate the specific objection, the reasons for the objection, and alternative conditions, if any, the appellant seeks to have placed in the permit.

        3.     The effectiveness of the permit shall not be stayed pending resolution of appeal.

        R.     Wastewater Permit Modifications.

        1.     The Director of Public Works may modify a permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following:

        a.     To incorporate any newly revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or pretreatment requirements;

        b.     To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial user’s operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of permit issuance;

        c.     A change in the City wastewater system that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the permitted discharge;

        d.     Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the City wastewater system, City personnel, or waters of the state;

        e.     Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater permit;

        f.      Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in the permit application or in any required reporting;

        g.     A revision or grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; or

        h.     To correct typographical or other errors in the permit.

        2.     The filing of a request by the permittee for a permit modification does not stay any permit condition.

        S.     Wastewater Permit Transfer. Permits may not be reassigned or transferred from the permittee to a new industrial user.

        T.     Wastewater Permit Reissuance. An industrial user shall apply for permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application no later than 90 calendar days before the expiration of the user’s permit.

        U.    Reports of Potential Problems.

        1.     If an accidental, slug, or other discharge occurs which may cause problems for the City wastewater system, the user shall immediately notify the City by telephone and email of the incident. Notification shall include the location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. Telephone numbers and email information are provided on the Public Works pages of the City’s website.

        2.     Unless waived by the Director, within five business days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, expense, loss, damage, or other liability that may be incurred or imposed as a result of damage to the City wastewater system, natural resources, or persons or property.

        3.     Failure to notify the City of potential problem discharges shall be deemed a separate violation of this chapter.

        4.     Industrial users shall prominently post a notice on a bulletin board or other similar place readily accessible to the user’s employees, advising the employees of whom to call in the event of a potential problem discharge, and shall train all employees in the emergency notification procedure.

        5.     Where the City has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user, the control authority must perform the repeat sampling and analysis unless it notifies the user of the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat analysis. Resampling may not be required if:

        a.     The City performs sampling at the industrial user at a frequency of at least once per month, or the City performs sampling at the user between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user or the control authority receives the results of this sampling.

        b.     Cost to the City for repeat analysis may be recouped per Section 13.08.530.

        V.    Reports of Significant Production Change. An industrial user operating under a waste discharge permit incorporating equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a production-based standard shall notify the City within two business days after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user not notifying the City of such anticipated change will be required to meet the mass or concentration limits in its permit that were based on the original estimate of the long-term average production rate. For purposes of this section the term “significantly” will be defined in the permit. An industrial user is not required to report or warn of a production change unless it will change the industrial discharge to an extent not allowed by the industrial user’s permit.

        W.    Inspection and Sampling.

        1.     An industrial user shall allow the City to enter the facilities of the user without unreasonable delay, to ascertain whether the user is complying with pretreatment standards and pretreatment requirements. Industrial users shall allow the Director of Public Works, or designee, ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.

        2.     If an industrial user has security measures that require identification and clearance before entry, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that upon presentation of proper identification personnel from the City, state, and the EPA will be permitted entry without unreasonable delay to perform their specific responsibilities.

        3.     The City, state, and the EPA shall have the right to set up or require installation of such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the industrial user’s operations.

        4.     The City may require the industrial user to install all necessary monitoring equipment. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in safe and proper operating condition by the industrial user at the industrial user’s expense. A qualified technician must calibrate all devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality at least twice yearly to ensure accuracy.

        5.     Any obstruction to safe and easy access to the industrial facility shall be promptly removed by the industrial user at the request of the Director and shall not be replaced. The costs of removal shall be borne by the industrial user.

        6.     Unreasonable delays in allowing City personnel access to the industrial user’s premises shall be a violation of this chapter.

        X.    Search Warrants. If the Director is refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and has probable cause to believe there may be a violation to this chapter or needs to conduct an inspection as part of a routine program designed to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, the Director may apply for a search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction. The application shall identify the specific location to be searched and shall specify what locations may be searched and what property may be seized. After issuance, the Director will serve the warrant at reasonable hours.

        Y.    Confidential Information.

        1.     Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring programs, and City inspection and sampling activities shall be available to the public without restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City Attorney that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets, and are exempt from disclosure under applicable law.

        2.     Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 are not confidential and will be available to the public without restriction.

        3.     Any information determined to be exempt from disclosure under subdivision 1 of this subsection shall remain confidential, and portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be available for public inspection; provided, that such information shall be made available to governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter or the NPDES program. Notwithstanding subdivision 1 of this subsection, no information is confidential if the information is relevant to, and necessary for, enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.

        4.     For the purposes of this section, a specific request is made when the words “confidential business information” are stamped on each page containing such information. If no such specific request is made at the time of furnishing the report, the City may make the information available to the public without further notice.

        5.     All costs, expenses and attorney’s fees associated with defending a request for confidential information shall be the responsibility of the industrial user requesting confidentiality.

        Z.     Notification of Violation. Whenever any industrial user has violated or is violating this chapter, a wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirement, the Director may issue a written notice of violation. Within 10 business days of the receipt of this notice, the industrial user shall submit an explanation of the violation and a detailed plan for the satisfactory correction of the violation and the prevention of future violation. Submission of this plan does not relieve the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the City authority to take emergency action without first issuing a notice of violation.

        AA.  Consent Orders. The Director may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with an industrial user to resolve issues of noncompliance. Such orders shall include the specific action to be taken by the industrial user to correct noncompliance within a time period specified in the order. Consent orders shall be judicially enforceable, and any costs, including attorney’s fees, incurred by the City in seeking such enforcement shall be assessed against the industrial user as part of any judgment entered therein.

        BB.  Compliance Orders. When the Director finds an industrial user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, or a permit or order issued hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirement, the Director may issue an order discontinuing the industrial user’s sewer service unless compliance is obtained within a time certain stated in the order. Compliance orders may contain other requirements necessary and appropriate to correct noncompliance, including additional monitoring and changes to management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the City wastewater system. The Director may require additional monitoring for at least 90 calendar days after consistent compliance has been achieved, after which monitoring conditions set forth in industrial user’s discharge permit shall be followed.

        CC.  Cease and Desist Orders.

        1.     When an industrial user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, permits or orders issued hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirement, the Director may issue a notice and proposed order to the industrial user to cease and desist all such violations and commanding the user to:

        a.     Immediately comply with all requirements.

        b.     Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address the continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.

        2.     The Director may order any industrial user that causes or contributes to a violation of this chapter, wastewater permits or orders issued hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirement to appear and show cause why a cease and desist order should not be issued.

        3.     The City will serve notice on the industrial user specifying the time and place for hearing, the nature of the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a direction that the user appear and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served upon the industrial user or the user’s authorized representative, personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least 10 business days prior to the hearing. A cease and desist order may be issued immediately following the hearing.

        DD.  Emergency Suspensions.

        1.     The Director may immediately suspend any user’s discharge that threatens to interfere with the operation of the City wastewater system, endangers the environment, or may cause violation of the NPDES permit.

        2.     Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately terminate all discharges into the City wastewater system. In the event a user fails to immediately and voluntarily comply with the suspension order, the Director may take such steps deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the user’s connection to the City wastewater system. The Director may allow the user to recommence discharge when the user demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Director that endangerment has passed, unless termination proceedings under Section 13.08.550(JJ) have been initiated.

        3.     No hearing shall be required prior to any emergency suspension.

        EE.   Permit revocation.

        1.     An industrial wastewater permit may be revoked if the user:

        a.     Fails to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;

        b.     Fails to accurately report wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;

        c.     Falsifies monitoring reports;

        d.     Refuses reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling;

        e.     Tampers with monitoring equipment;

        f.      Refuses to allow the City timely access to the facility premises and records;

        g.     Fails to meet effluent limitations;

        h.     Fails to pay fines;

        i.      Fails to pay sewer charges;

        j.      Fails to meet compliance schedules;

        k.     Fails to complete a wastewater survey; or

        2.     Violates any pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirement, the user’s permit, any order issued pursuant to this chapter, or any provision of this chapter.

        3.     Industrial users shall be notified of proposed termination and be offered an opportunity to appear and show cause why the permit should not be revoked. Termination of a permit shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other enforcement action against the user.

        4.     Notice shall be served on the industrial user specifying the time and place for the show cause hearing, the reasons for permit revocation, and a direction that the user appear and show cause why the permit should not be revoked. The notice of the hearing shall be served upon the industrial user or the user’s authorized representative personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least 10 business days prior to the hearing. An order revoking the permit may be issued immediately after the hearing.

        FF.   Injunctive Relief. In addition to other relief, the City Attorney may petition a court of competent jurisdiction for the issuance of temporary or permanent injunction to restrain a violation, or compel specific performance, of the terms and conditions of the wastewater permit, order, pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirement, or other provision of this chapter.

        GG.  Civil Penalties—Industrial Users Only.

        1.     The Director may impose upon any industrial user that has violated or continues to violate this chapter, any order or permit hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirement a maximum civil penalty of $2,500.00 per violation per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties may accrue for each day during the period of this violation.

        2.     Where appropriate, the Director may accept mitigation projects in lieu of the payment of civil penalties where the project provides a valuable service to the City and the industrial user’s expense in undertaking the project is at least 150 percent of the civil penalty.

        3.     For purposes of this section, the term “civil penalty” means the same as the term “administrative fine” as set forth in any enforcement response plan adopted by the City Council pursuant to this chapter’s authority. Any civil penalty assessed pursuant to this section will be based on the severity of the violation using the factors outlined in the enforcement response plan.

        HH.  Civil Penalties—Nonindustrial Users.

        1.     A violation of Section 13.08.550(GG) or 13.08.550(N) is punishable by a civil penalty not exceeding $2,500.00.

        2.     A violation of any other provision of this chapter is punishable by a civil penalty of $1,000.00 in accordance with Chapter 1.04.

        3.     Any civil penalty assessed pursuant to this section will be based on the severity of the violation using the factors outlined in a City Council-adopted enforcement response plan, even if the offender is not a party to that plan.

        II.     Remedies Nonexclusive. The Director of Public Works shall prepare an enforcement response plan to be adopted by a resolution of the City Council for use with industrial users related to any violation of this chapter. The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive, and the Director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user, and may bring more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the City’s enforcement response plan; however, the Director may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant.

        JJ.    Water Supply Severance. Whenever an industrial user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter or orders or permits issued hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed and service will only be resumed, at the user’s expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.

        KK.  Administrative Review.

        1.     Any person aggrieved by any decision or action of the Director may appeal such decision or action as provided in this section.

        2.     The appeal must be filed with the City Manager within 30 calendar days after the date of the decision or action being appealed, must be in writing and must state:

        a.     The name and address of the appellant;

        b.     Nature of the decision or action being appealed;

        c.     The reason the decision or action is incorrect; and

        d.     What the correct decision or action should be.

        Within 10 business days of an appeal being filed with the City Manager, the City Manager will meet with the appealing industrial user and attempt to resolve the matter prior to action by the City Council.

        3.     An appellant who fails to file such a statement within the time permitted waives all objections, and the appeal shall not be considered.

        4.     Unless the appellant and City agree to a longer period, an appeal shall be heard by the City Council within 45 calendar days of the receipt of the notice of appeal. At least 10 business days prior to the hearing, the City shall mail notice of the time and location of the hearing to the appellant.

        5.     The City Council will hear and determine the appeal on the basis of the appellant’s written statement and any additional evidence the council deems appropriate. At the hearing, the appellant may present testimony and oral arguments personally or by counsel.

        6.     If the appeal is from the modification of a permit pursuant to the imposition of a civil penalty, the burden is on the Director to prove that the modification or civil penalty was proper. If the appeal is from the denial of a permit, the burden is on the appellant to prove that the denial was improper. In all other cases the burden of proof is on the proponent of a fact or position.

        7.     The City Council will issue a written decision within 30 calendar days of the hearing date. The decision of the City Council is final.

        8.     An appeal fee established by Council Resolution must accompany the statement of appeal. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.560 Reporting of harmful discharges.
        Businesses are required to accurately report chemical discharges to the sewerage system and other discharges that may affect the sewerage system as directed by the Director of Public Works via survey or other means as pre-approved by the Director of Public Works or designee. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.570 Construction—Public works design standards.
        Sanitary sewers shall be designed in compliance with Chapter 12.12 for all public improvements and the Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code for all private plumbing services. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.580 Construction—Construction specifications.
        Sanitary sewers shall be constructed in compliance with Chapter 12.12 for all public improvements. All building sewers shall be constructed in compliance with the Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code, except where higher standards apply within the utility code. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.590 Construction—Permit required for sewer work.
        No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.600 Construction—Building sewer permit classes and application.
        A.    There are two classes of building sewer permits:

        1.     For residential and commercial service;

        2.     For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.

        B.     In either case, the owner or the owner’s agent shall make application on a form furnished by the City. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent, in the judgment of the Director of Public Works. No permit shall be issued until all required fees have been paid. Permit fees shall be established and revised by City Council Resolution. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.610 Construction—Cost of installation and connection.
        All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, lessee or occupant of a building to maintain the building sanitary sewer or private collection system in a free-flowing and watertight condition, from the structure served to the public sewer. All existing private sewers shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.620 Construction—Cleanout specifications.
        At the connection with the public sewer and the building sewer, there shall be a cleanout of the same material as the public sewer connection pipe furnished by the owner. The cleanout shall extend vertically to within six inches of the finished ground surface and shall be sealed with an approved cap or plug. This riser shall be used for inserting a test plug for water or air testing the building sewer, and as an auxiliary cleanout. Backfilling around the riser shall be done in such a manner as not to damage the pipe. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.630 Construction—Separate sewers for each building.
        Every building sewer shall be separate and independent of any other building, whether connecting to a public or private sewer. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.640 Construction—Private sewer restrictions.
        Private sewer lines shall only be allowed where the building or buildings affected are located on a single parcel of land. Private sewer connections to public sewer shall be subject to the same design and construction standards as public sewers of the city and shall be subject to complete review and approval by the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.650 Construction—Leaks and extraneous discharges—Monitoring procedures.
        A.    New and existing private sewers, building drains and building sewers will be monitored for leaks or discharges of extraneous water. This monitoring may take the form of, but is not limited to:

        1.     Direct visual observation;

        2.     Indirect measurement;

        3.     Tele-inspection; or

        4.     Air or water pressure tests, smoke tests, or exfiltration tests.

        B.     If, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, such monitoring shows a sewer to be defective, no further proof is needed for the Director to require the sewer to be repaired to current standards.

        C.     Existing sewer exceeding a maximum allowable infiltration/inflow rate of more than 300 gallons per day per single detached dwelling unit, or 1,200 gallons per acre per day, are deemed unsafe and unsanitary and shall be repaired.

        D.    Those users who do not comply with these infiltration/inflow regulations shall have a period of time, as determined by the Director of Public Works, but not to exceed six months, to reach compliance with the regulations. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.660 Construction—Capping and inspection prior to abandonment.
        A.    Before a moving or demolition permit is allowed to be issued, evidence must be presented showing the sewer has been properly capped and inspected. No exceptions will be allowed. All building sanitary sewer shall be capped at the public main in an approved manner by the applicant or the applicant’s contractor and inspected by City forces prior to closure of the excavation.

        B.     Exception. If adequate proof can be given showing a sewer service is in usable condition and is to be reused, the inspector may allow the service to be capped at the property line. It is the applicant’s responsibility to ensure that no other structure is connected to the sewer service being abandoned. If the line abandoned is serving more than one structure, a service connection for the structure(s) still using the service must be provided. If the Director of Public Works determines that capping at the main will cause undue hazard to the public, or if a street has been recently resurfaced, a variance to this section may be granted to require that the sewer be capped as close to the main as practical. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.670 Construction—Public works inspection fees.
        A.    The construction inspection services and fee is mandatory and not subject to request by the property owner. All construction costs must be verified from actual invoices and receipts when the City is not responsible for contract administration.

        B.     The City Council will establish the fees, rates and charges for the City’s inspection services by resolution. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.680 Construction—Bonding and insurance.
        Bonding and insurance for utility construction will be as provided in the Molalla Municipal Code or the Public Works design standards adopted Chapter 12.12. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.690 Construction—Sewer main extensions.
        Whenever a public improvement is to construct or extend a sewer main, the following shall apply:

        A.    Extension of all lines will be to the farthest edge of the property requesting service, unless otherwise authorized by the Director of Public Works.

        B.     Minimum pipe sizes shall be in compliance with the public works standards unless otherwise approved by the Director of Public Works.

        C.     When required by the City, the City will share in the cost of sewer lines larger than the minimum size provided in Section 13.08.690(B) by paying the difference in cost between a minimum size pipe and the larger size, except:

        1.     When a new development requires a larger line to provide adequate service, as determined by the Director of Public Works;

        2.     Only pipe and fitting materials will be paid by the City unless the line size is greater than 10 inches in diameter.

        D.    The property owner requesting the extension must pay the cost for extending new sewer lines. If a property owner requests service from a portion of the sewer line provided by the original developer, then the City shall collect a proportionate share of the sewer line cost, and reimburse the original developer or assignee that amount, less administrative costs. This reimbursement policy shall continue for 10 years from the date of line construction, and then end.

        E.     When service is requested by a developer from an existing line less than six inches in diameter, the city engineer will determine if both fire protection or domestic flow are adequate.

        1.     If fire protection is not adequate to either the new structure or neighboring structures, but domestic flow is adequate, then service will be allowed. However, an advance assessment or waiver of remonstrance for the cost of future upgrading of the line will be collected or obtained before any service connections are completed.

        2.     If both fire protection and domestic flow are inadequate, the developer must replace all lines necessary to adequately supply both fire and domestic flows as determined by the City Engineer; however, in no case will the line be replaced to a size less than six inches in diameter. If the property or properties were previously assessed by the City for an undersized line, a credit will be given toward construction of a new line. The developer shall initiate the request for credit, and shall provide written documentation to the satisfaction of the City Manager that the assessment is valid. Upon construction of the new line, the developer shall have the right of reimbursement from new water users on the new line. The right to reimbursement shall continue for a period of 10 years and then end.

        F.     Costs of any construction pursuant to the utility code shall include not only the water line, but also the cost of replacing street paving, sidewalks, driveways, and other improvements damaged during construction. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.700 Violation—Notice.
        Unless otherwise stated in section of this chapter, any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a 14-day time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.710 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person who continues any violation beyond the time limit provided for in Section 13.08.700 shall be guilty of a violation and, on conviction thereof, shall be fined in the amount set by Council resolution or subject to fines established per code Section 1.04.010, general provisions for each violation. Each day in which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. Failure to comply with a written directive or timeline of the City Manager made under the authority of this chapter is a punishable offense and may result in a temporary loss of City water and sewer services. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

 

13.08.720 Violators liable to City.
        Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned by the City of Molalla by reason of such violation. (Ord. 2020-03 §1)

Chapter 13.12 SEWER AND WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS
13.12.010 Extension of mains by City.
        Any extension of a sanitary sewer, storm sewer or water main by the City shall be at the discretion of the City and only if adequate funding for engineering, construction, and ongoing maintenance is available. (Ord. 2020-04 §1)

 

13.12.020 Costs paid by persons requesting extensions.
        Any extension of a sanitary sewer, storm sewer or water main that is not in accordance with Section 13.12.010 shall be paid for by the person, firm, or corporation requesting such extension. The amount paid shall be the actual cost of engineering and construction plus 10 percent for City supervision and overhead. All such extension shall be made by the City of Molalla or by a contract approved by the City in accordance with standards and specifications governing such work and materials. The City of Molalla shall determine the size and location of the water and sewer mains and appurtenances in accordance with current standards and policy. (Ord. 2020-04 §1)

 

13.12.030 Location.
        All sanitary sewer, storm sewer or water main extensions shall be made within a public right-of-way to a point opposite the furthermost point on the person’s property making agreement for the extension. The extensions may be terminated at a lesser point if it is found that the extension cannot be extended to serve other properties in the area, due to existing development or topography, if approved by the City. (Ord. 2020-04 §1)

 

13.12.040 Advance payment of costs.
        Advance payment for extensions including engineering, construction and overhead shall be made by the owner or owners of property for which service is desired. The advance payment shall be made in accordance with an estimate of cost by the City in accordance with approved plans and specifications. Work shall not proceed until payment has been made for the full amount of the proposed work including engineering and 10 percent for overhead. (Ord. 2020-04 §1)

 

13.12.050 Tabulation of costs after completion.
        After completion of the work, a tabulation of costs shall be prepared by the City and any excess money deposited prior to the work shall be refunded to the depositor, and any deficiencies shall be forthwith paid to the City of Molalla by the depositor or owner as the case may be. (Ord. 2020-04 §1)

 

13.12.060 City ownership and maintenance.
        All sanitary sewer, storm sewer or water main and appurtenances installed shall become the sole property of the City of Molalla, and furthermore shall be maintained and operated by the City. (Ord. 2020-04 §1)

Chapter 13.13 SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT
13.13.010 Definitions.
        Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as set forth as follows:

        “Auxiliary water supply” means any water supply on or available to the premises, other than the City’s approved public potable water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another provider’s public potable water supply, or any natural source(s) such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or “used waters” or “industrial fluids.” These waters may be polluted or contaminated, or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the City does not have sanitary control.

        “Backflow” means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances under pressure into the distributing pipes of a potable water supply from any source or sources other than its intended source.

        “Backflow preventer” means a device or means designed to prevent backflow or back-siphonage.

        “Back-siphonage” means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable water supply system, from any source other than its intended source, caused by the sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system.

        “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building, and conveys it to the building storm sewers, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building walls.

        “Building sewer” means that part of the horizontal piping of a drainage system which extends from the end of the building drain and which receives the discharge of the building drain and conveys it to a public sewer at the public right-of-way or easement, private sewer, individual sewage disposal system, or other point of disposal.

        “Business day” or “working day” means Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., excluding any City-recognized holidays.

        “Commercial business” means a business establishment which furnishes goods or services to either the general public or other commercial operations.

        “Controlled cross-connections” means a connection between a potable water system and a non-potable water system, with an approved backflow-prevention device properly installed that will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.

        “Cross-connection” means any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other non-potable water or industrial fluids of questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow or back-siphonage may occur into the potable water system. Other types of cross-connections include but are not limited to connectors such as swing connections, removable sections, four-way plug valves, spools, dummy sections of pipe, swivel or changeover devices, sliding multiport tube, and solid connections.

        “Customer.” See “User.”

        “DEQ” means the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.

        “Developed” means any property which has been altered by grading, filling of the ground surface, or by construction of any improvement or impervious surface area, which could affect the hydraulic or hydrologic properties of the property.

        “Developer” means any person, company or corporation who purchases or holds an interest in real property with the intent to increase the value thereof by the installation of utilities, construction of a building or buildings, grading, ditching, improving or enhancing the ground or structures for the purpose of resale.

        “Domestic stormwater” means surface or subsurface drainage of the type commonly introduced into a drainageway or storm sewer system by residential users.

        “Double-check valve assembly” means an assembly of two independently operating approved check valves with tightly closing shutoff valves on each side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications and approval of a recognized and City-approved testing agency for backflow-prevention devices. To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible for the in-line maintenance and testing.

        “Dwelling unit” means any of the following:

        A.    A single-family dwelling;

        B.     An accessory dwelling unit;

        C.     A habitable unit of multifamily dwelling(s), including an apartment;

        D.    A condominium; or

        E.     A manufactured home.

        “Equivalent development unit (EDU)” means a unit of measurement of impervious surface. One EDU is equal to the estimated amount of impervious surface that would contribute the same amount of runoff to the City’s storm and surface water drainage system as the impervious surface on the average single- family residential use in the City of Molalla. One EDU is therefore equal to square feet of impervious surface area or any portion thereof.

        “Erosion prevention and sediment control (ESC)” means any temporary or permanent measures taken to reduce erosion, control siltation and sedimentation, and ensure that sediment laden water does not leave a site.

        “Erosion prevention and sediment control plan (ESC plan)” means plan approved by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality through a 1200-C permit or other state agency permit for construction activities within the City of Molalla.

        “Impervious surface” means a developed hard surface area which prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil mantle and/or causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow than would occur under natural or undeveloped conditions. “Impervious surface” includes, but is not limited to, rooftops, concrete or asphalt paving, compacted gravel, walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots or storage areas, and oiled, macadam or other surfaces which similarly impede the natural infiltration or runoff of surface water.

        “Industrial facility” means an establishment primarily engaged in manufacturing, processing or fabrication of goods.

        “Industrial user” means any user engaged in the introduction of pollutants into a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) from any non-domestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Title 33 U.S.C. 1251.

        “Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from any industrial user. A user in the divisions listed in industrial user may be excluded if it is determined that it will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.

        “Mains” means collection pipelines that are part of the City stormwater system.

        “Maintenance” means preservation of functional integrity and efficiency of equipment and structures. This includes preventive maintenance, corrective maintenance and replacement of equipment as needed.

        “Multi-user” means a customer supplied with water service to more than one dwelling unit, commercial business or industrial facility, or combination thereof, from one water service connection.

        “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater.

        “Non-potable water” means water that is not safe for human consumption, or which is of questionable potability.

        “NPDES” means National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.

        “Operation” means control of the unit processes and equipment which make up the treatment works. This includes financial and personnel management, records, laboratory control, process control, safety and emergency operation planning.

        “Operation and maintenance” means activities required to assure the dependable and economical function of the treatment works.

        “Person” means any individual, firm, company, association, society, group or corporation.

        “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.

        “Premises” means the integral property or area, including improvements thereon, to which water service is or will be provided.

        “Private sewer” means a privately owned and maintained lateral sewer system normally six or eight inches in diameter, installed to serve multi-unit structures on single-ownership properties, which cannot legally be further divided, such as apartments, mobile home parks, schools and condominiums.

        “Property owner” means the owner of the premises who is also the ultimate responsible party for all customer charges and fees. The property owner may also be the customer for any given premises.

        “Publicly owned treatment works” or “POTW” means a treatment plant or system, owned and operated by the City of Molalla, for the treatment of waters collected in a sewer collection system.

        “Public sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority.

        “Replacement” means expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term “operation and maintenance” includes replacement.

        “Service connection” means a water connection or sewer connection as the context indicates.

        “Service connection charge” means the fee levied to pay for the cost of labor, materials and any inspection required during the construction of a utility service line from the water or sewer main to the property that is to be served, with the charges to be itemized on a standard City billing form.

        “Sewage” means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water, and stormwater as may be present.

        “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.

        “Sewer connection” means a public sewer that has been constructed to the property line or right-of-way line from a public main for the sole purpose of providing a connection for the building sewer.

        “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive.

        “Single-family residential” means any service location which is improved with a dwelling unit for occupancy by a single family or a similar group of persons.

        “Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation.

        “Storm drain” (sometimes termed “storm sewer”) means a sewer designed to carry stormwater and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.

        “Stormwater” means surface runoff and street wash waters, and drainage.

        “Surface water” means all naturally occurring water whose surface is exposed to the atmosphere, including natural drainage ways, stream corridors, rivers, ponds, wetlands, and impoundments.

        “Surface water management system” means all facilities, both natural and constructed, used by the City to regulate the quantity and quality of surface water, including drainage easements, culverts, storm drains, catch basins, stream corridors, rivers, ponds, wetlands and impoundments.

        “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering.

        “System development charge” means the fee or charge assessed to each commercial business, industry or dwelling unit for the right to connect to the City’s sewer or water system, and which is used for expansion of those systems.

        “Temporary service” means service of limited duration.

        “TSS (total suspended solids)” means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering. (EPA Standard Methods 2540(D) shall be used for any tests for TSS.)

        “Undeveloped” means any location which has not been altered by grading or filling of the ground surface, or by construction of any improvements or other impervious area, which could affect the hydraulic or hydrologic properties of the property.

        “Untreated stormwater” means any runoff from a site or property, whether by storm, washdown, or any other form, that either violates the basin approved Molalla-Pudding River Subbasin TMDL standards for Temperature, Bacteria, Pesticides, Nitrate, Metals, the conditions of any NPDES permit that applies, or that in the opinion of the Public Works Director constitutes a harmful discharge to the ecology or use of the receiving body within the City.

        “Useful life” means the period during which a treatment works is planned and designed to be operated.

        “User” means the owner, agent, tenant or other authorized representative responsible for occupancy of the premises that is served by a City utility system. A person, corporation, association or agency which rents, or leases premises shall be considered an agent of the property owner.

        “User service charge” means a charge levied on customers that may be a combination of a base fee, a usage fee and a fixed fee as set by resolution and/or ordinance.

        “Utility” or “utility system” means sewer, water and stormwater management services provided by the City of Molalla.

        “Utility rate” is the rate established by City Council to cover the cost of providing utility system services.

        “Utility service” means services provided for water, sewer, and stormwater.

        “Wastewater” means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such incidental groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present.

        “Water connection” means the pipe, valves, fittings and meter by means of which the City conducts water from its main to and through a meter(s), but not including piping from the meter to the premises served.

        “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.

        “Water main” means water pipe and all necessary valves, fittings, hydrant connections and other appurtenances used for the distribution of water.

        “Water system” means all municipally owned facilities of the City used to supply, process and distribute drinking-quality water to each customer service connection or temporary service. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.020 Fees, rates and charges—Council authority.
        All fees, rates and charges stated within the utility code may be changed at any time by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.030 Fees, rates and charges set by resolution.
        The City Council will establish the fees, rates and charges for the City’s utilities by resolution in an amount reasonable and necessary to fund the administration, debt, planning, design, construction, operation, maintenance and repair of the City’s utility systems. Rates shall be based on generally accepted rate-making principles, including the City’s true costs in upgrading the system to accommodate regulatory requirements and to provide adequate collection and treatment capacity for system users. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.040 Application for service.
        The following criteria must be met regarding application for utility service:

        A.    Application for storm sewer service shall be made in writing by the owner of the premises to be served, or the owner’s agent duly authorized in writing on regular application forms furnished by the City. No service will be rendered until such application has been completed and the required payments made. All applications shall include signature of applicant, locations of premises for which service is requested, address to which all bills shall be sent, and such additional data as the Council from time to time may require.

        B.     Applications for service shall be considered merely as a request for service, and they shall not bind the City or Council to provide service.

        C.     Two or more parties who join together to make or who jointly make application for service are jointly and individually liable and will be sent a single billing.

        D.    Any person 18 years of age or older who receives utility services at a premises is liable for the services provided.

        E.     Contracts, other than applications, may be required prior to service where, in the opinion of the City, special circumstances exist.

        F.     If a service is connected to the City utility system without application, the City will disconnect the premises. Before a new connection is made, the applicant must pay double the rate of the estimated charges for the unpaid services during the period of non-City-approved connection.

        G.    In no case will utility service be allowed until the customer has complied with the terms of this section and all appropriate fees and charges have been paid.

        H.    In no case will utility service be allowed for properties that are not in compliance with any other section of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.050 Deposit requirements.
        Each storm sewer service customer shall pay a deposit to secure the payment of sewer/utility bills, unless exempted under the provisions of subsection (A)(3) of this section. The amount of the deposit shall be established by the City Council by resolution. After payment of all amounts due for storm sewer service, the deposit shall be refunded, within 90 calendar days, to the customer upon termination of service or upon the customer’s qualification for an exemption from the deposit requirement.

        A.    Storm sewer service customers shall be exempt from the requirement to maintain a deposit if:

        1.     The customer has maintained a storm sewer service account with the City for a continuous period of one year without any delinquencies in payment; or

        2.     The customer previously had a storm sewer service account with the City of Molalla for a period of at least one year, and there were no delinquencies in payment on that account.

        3.     Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the City Manager may waive a customer’s deposit requirement, extend the period during which a deposit is required, or reinstate a customer’s deposit requirement for good cause. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.060 Rates—Generally.
        All users of the City’s stormwater system shall pay to the City the rates for storm sewer service as provided by this chapter. A surface water utility user charge, which shall be set by the City Council by resolution, is established. The rate shall be in an amount reasonable and necessary to fund the administration, planning, design, construction, operation, maintenance and repair of the surface water management system.

        The surface water utility user charge shall be based upon the amount of developed impervious surface used by a customer. Owners or occupants of undeveloped property shall not be charged. Each customer using a location for one single-family residential use shall be charged a uniform rate based upon one equivalent development unit (EDU). For multifamily residential uses, the charge shall be one EDU per each residential unit. The charge for all other uses shall be based upon the total amount of measured impervious surface used, divided by one EDU and rounded to the nearest whole number. The actual service charge shall be computed by multiplying the total amount of EDUs measured for each use by the rate established for each EDU. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.070 Service connection charges—Generally.
        A.    A connection charge levied and imposed upon the owner of any property connecting to the storm sewer system of the City of Molalla, which shall be paid prior to such connection. The charge shall be established by the City Council by resolution.

        B.     The connection charge is levied upon a property based upon the existing or intended use of the property at the time of application for connection. If the property is improved, expanded, subdivided or otherwise modified so as to increase the connection charge due from that property, a connection charge shall be levied for the modified portion of the property based upon connection charges in effect at the time of the modification. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.080 Rates—Outside-City.
        No services will be provided outside of City limits. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.090 Charges for restoration of service.
        The City will charge a fee to a customer for restoration of utility service when service has been discontinued under the provisions of the utility code. This charge does not apply to newly installed service connections unless the applicant has outstanding charges on another account. The City may require a deposit, or require a larger deposit, before it will restore utility service based on prior payment history. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.100 Computation and collection of charges.
        The Finance Department will collect all user service charges. User service charges are computed and payable as provided in the utility code. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.110 Revenues—Deposit and use.
        The Finance Department will deposit in the appropriate fund all the gross revenues received from charges, rates and penalties collected for the use of the utility systems. The revenues deposited in the appropriate fund must be used exclusively for administration, planning, design, construction, improvements, operation, maintenance, debt payments and repair of the City’s storm sewer utility system. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.120 Billing—Mailing address.
        The City will mail bills for user service charges to the mailing address specified on the application for services, unless a different owner or customer has requested to the Finance Department that services be placed in their name and has agreed in writing to be responsible for the user service charges. When requested, the City will submit bills through its online billing program. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.130 Billing—Payment responsibility.
        A.    The property owner of record is ultimately responsible for payment of all charges prescribed in the utility code, regardless of any agreement the property owner may have with a third party and regardless of whether the customer’s bills were in a tenant’s name.

        B.     A customer who is a tenant continues to be responsible for delinquent utility charges until paid regardless of relocation to premises different from the premises at which the tenant accrued delinquent charges. The City may refuse to provide service to such tenant at any new address, and/or may terminate utility service until the delinquent bill is paid. The City may also pursue any action available under the laws of the City or State of Oregon to recover payment.

        C.     Multi-metered accounts must be in the property owner’s name. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.140 Reserved.
 

13.13.150 Adjustment of accounts—No service provided.
        If a customer pays for utility services not actually received as a result of the City’s error, the City will refund the amount paid for services not received. Refunded amount may not exceed a period of one year from the date the customer notified the City. To be designated as property not receiving service, the property must be undeveloped. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.160 Reserved.
 

13.13.170 Liens for delinquent utility account.
        Utility service charges become a lien against the premises served from and after the date of billing and entry on City records pertaining to the utility system. Such records are accessible for inspection by anyone interested to ascertain the amount of such charges against the property. Whenever a bill for utility service remains unpaid for 90 calendar days after billing, the lien thereby created may be foreclosed in a manner provided for in Oregon Revised Statutes, or in any other manner provided for by law or by City ordinance. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.180 Exclusive control of system and services by City.
        The surface water management system within the City limits, including all connections and contributions to the system, shall be under the exclusive control of the City. No person shall install any service, connect to any part of the system, discharge storm sewer or surface water into the system, or otherwise interfere with any part of the system without authorization of the City. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.190 Service discontinuance at customer request.
        A.    A customer may have utility service discontinued by notifying the City at least five business days in advance of the desired date of discontinuance.

        B.     If the customer does not give notice, the customer must pay for utility service until the date the City has learned the customer has vacated the premises or a new customer has requested service. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.200 Abandoned and non-revenue-producing services.
        A.    The City may remove a utility service connection to a premises that has been abandoned or not used for a period of one year or longer.

        B.     The City will only begin new utility service when the City receives a new customer application and payment for the new connection. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.210 Disconnection from storm sewer system—Destroyed or removed structures.
        A.    When any structure connected to the storm sewer system is destroyed by an act of God, is removed, or is torn down, and/or no longer usable, it shall be required to disconnect from the storm sewer system and remove all impervious surfaces from site. The owner must advise the City of the destruction, stating the date of destruction or removal of the structure, and pay all user service charges to the date of destruction or removal, and thereafter no storm sewer user service charge will be made to the property until new improvements, if any, are placed on the property.

        B.     When the property is relieved from user service charges and then reconnected to the utility system, the City will determine whether the property had paid into the appropriate utility fund the amount required while the property was using City utilities. If the property had paid user service charges equal to the amount required under the utility rates that were in effect at the time of the disconnection from the utility system, the City will not levy any additional charges.

        C.     In addition, when a building with storm sewer service is destroyed or is relocated to a different property and thereafter replaced by a new building within three years after the date of destruction or removal, the City shall not levy a system development charge for the new building, unless the new building constitutes an increase in use under the system development charge schedule currently in effect. If the replacement building requires a greater system development charge than compared to the destroyed or relocated building previously on the same site, then a credit will be given on the replacement building’s system development charge equal to that of the previous building fee, and when the above provisions of this section and Section 13.13.220 are met.

        D.    The current system development charge schedule shall be used for all comparisons and credit determinations under Chapter 13.14. When a destroyed or relocated building is not replaced by a new building within three years of the date of destruction or an update to the storm sewer master plan is completed, then the owner of any replacement building must pay the full system development charge in effect at the time of application for storm sewer service. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.220 Disconnection from storm sewer system—Reuse of old facilities.
        A.    Before the City will issue a moving or demolition permit, City personnel must verify disconnection and capping of the building storm sewer service at the right-of-way cleanout. If a cleanout does not exist, property owner must install a cleanout and cap at the right-of-way meeting City requirements.

        B.     In addition, when a building with storm sewer service is destroyed or relocated to a different property and is not replaced by a new building within three years from the date of destruction or removal, the Director of Public Works or director’s designee may inspect the storm sewer service to determine whether it is in usable condition and is to be reused. If the storm sewer service is found unusable, the property owner is required to pay all costs for replacement of the storm sewer service connection. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.230 Disconnection and reconnection procedures.
        A.    When any structure connected to the storm sewer system is destroyed by an act of God, is removed or is torn down, and/or no longer usable, it shall be required to disconnect from the storm sewer. The owner shall advise the City, stating the date of destruction or removal of the structure, and pay all user service charges to the date of destruction or removal, and thereafter no user service charge shall be made to the property until new improvements, if any, are placed on the property.

        B.     When the property is relieved from user charges and then reconnected to the storm sewer, the City shall determine whether the property had paid into the storm sewer fund the amount required while the property was using the storm sewer. If the property had paid user service charges equal to the amount required under storm sewer rates that were in effect at the time of disconnecting from the storm sewer, no additional charges will be levied.

        C.     In addition, when a building with storm sewer service is destroyed, or relocated to a different property and thereafter replaced by a new building within three years from the date of destruction or removal, the City shall not levy a system development charge for the new building unless the new building constitutes an increase in use under the system development charge schedule currently in effect. If the replacement building requires a greater system development charge when compared to the destroyed or relocated building previously on the same site, then a credit will be given on the replacement building system development charge equal to that of the previous building fee, and when the above provisions of this section are met.

        D.    The current system development charge schedule will be used for all comparisons and credit determinations under this section.

        E.     When a destroyed or relocated building is not replaced by a new building within three years of the date of destruction or an update to the storm sewer master plan is completed, then any replacement building shall pay the system development charges in effect at the time of application for storm sewer service. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.240 Unsanitary deposit of waste.
        It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other unsanitary waste that can drain into or impact a storm sewer or drainageway. This includes ranging livestock, poultry, or pet-runs near or within storm facilities such as bioswales. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.250 Treatment of storm sewer required.
        It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any untreated stormwater or other polluted substances. All discharges shall comply with the Molalla Public Works Standards and its NPDES permit issued by the DEQ. Stormwater shall be protected from soap, wax or other pollution runoff from vehicle wash facilities. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.260 Unlawful sewage disposal facilities.
        Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage that may have an effect on groundwater or surface water within the City limits. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.270 Storm sewer connections required.
        The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public storm sewer of the City, is required at the owner’s expense to install storm facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public storm sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 calendar days after date of official notice to do so, provided that the public storm sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.280 Private storm sewer disposal—When permitted.
        A.    Where a public storm sewer is not available the building storm sewer shall be connected to a private storm system that meets all federal and state rules, and does not impact groundwater, drainageways, or downstream properties.

        B.     The provisions of this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of the requirements of other applicable laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.290 Private storm sewer disposal—Operation and maintenance.
        The owner of property with a private storm sewer disposal system shall always operate and maintain the system in a sanitary manner, at no expense to the City. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.300 Upon availability of public storm sewer—Abandonment of private systems.
        At such times as a public storm sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in Section 13.13.280, and upon notification to the property owner from the City, a direct connection shall be made to the public storm sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any drywell and similar private storm sewer disposal facilities shall be decommissioned, abandoned and filled with suitable material. All costs associated with decommissioning, abandonment and connection shall be the responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.310 Unauthorized connections and disturbances.
        No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public storm sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.320 Costs of building storm sewer borne by owner.
        All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building storm sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building storm sewer. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.330 Building storm sewer for each lot or parcel.
        A.    Every single-ownership property which cannot legally be further subdivided must have a separate storm sewer connection. These properties include, but are not limited to, multiple-family apartments, condominiums, mobile home parks and commercial or industrial establishments. Only one storm sewer lateral shall be provided to a residential property.

        B.     Multi-users with more than one unit located in common ownership on a single parcel of property shall also comply with the Oregon State Plumbing Specialty Code.

        C.     Any property which is located so as to require the storm sewer lateral to cross any other property or parcel shall provide evidence of a duly recorded perpetual easement for such lateral, appurtenant to the property to which such lateral will provide service, before any storm sewer connection is made.

        D.    Property other than residential shall utilize a common storm sewer main to provide services to individual building. Exceptions to this requirement must be in the interest of the public as determined and approved by the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.340 Materials and connections—Private side.
        The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building storm sewer, and the methods to be used in connecting, excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the uniform building and plumbing code and all other applicable rules and regulations. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply, or the most current version thereof. All connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Director of Public Works before installation.

        Storm sewer laterals on private property that are not part of the public system or within a public right-of-way or public storm sewer easement, the size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building storm sewer, and the methods to be used in connecting, excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the uniform building and plumbing code and all other applicable rules and regulations. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.350 Elevation.
        Whenever possible, the building storm sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation to drain directly to the street through a weep hole in the curb. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public storm sewer, storm sewer carried by a building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the public storm sewer at the property owner’s expense. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.360 Connection of sources of surface runoff.
        A.    No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sanitary sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.

        B.     Where the City finds that any private service lateral piping is leaking or not legally connected, the property owner will be notified in writing by the City to make necessary repairs. The notification shall include the type of repairs to be made and the date, no less than 30 calendar days from the date of the notice, by which the repairs shall be completed.

        C.     The property owner shall notify the Director of Public Works when repairs have been made, but before any piping is buried, and the City shall inspect and retest the private service lateral for leaks. The lateral will be considered repaired when it passes the retest by the City. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.370 Inspection—Connection to public storm sewer.
        The applicant for the building storm sewer permit shall notify the Director of Public Works when the building storm sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public storm sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Director of Public Works or representative. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.380 Protection of excavations—Restoration of public property.
        All excavations for building storm sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.390 Unlawful discharge of storm and other waters.
        No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.400 Regular utility service—Rules and regulations.
        A.    The City may furnish and install a utility service connection of such size and location as a customer requests; provided, that the request is reasonable and is in compliance with provisions of the Oregon State Plumbing Specialty Code, the City’s design standards, and the utility code. The customer is responsible for all costs, including administration, for installation of utility service.

        B.     The City will install the storm sewer service from the main to right-of-way/property line of the premises, if the main is in the street, or to a point in a City right-of-way or easement unless storm access through a weep hole in the curb is a viable option.

        C.     The customer or property owner must furnish, install and keep in good and safe condition equipment that may be required for receiving, controlling, applying and utilizing any city utility, and the customer or property owner must do so at their own risk and expense.

        D.    The City is not responsible for loss or damage caused by the improper installation of the equipment used for receiving a City utility service by customer or customer’s agent, or the negligence, want of proper care, or wrongful act in installing, maintaining, using, operating or interfering with the equipment by the customer or customer’s agent.

        E.     The City is not responsible for damage to property caused by City’s regular cleaning and maintenance of storm sewer main lines.

        F.     A customer making any material change in the size, character or extent of the equipment or operation utilizing storm sewer service, or whose change in operations results in a large increase in the use of water, shall immediately give the City written notice of the nature of the change and, if requested, amend the customer’s application.

        G.    Any utility service connection, whether located on public or private property, is the property of the City, and the City reserves the right to repair, maintain and/or replace it. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.410 Inspection and maintenance—Responsibility.
        The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City, wherein such facilities are connected to the proper public storm sewer in accordance with this chapter, are responsible for the maintenance and cost of maintaining the private service lateral and private site systems. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.420 Inspection and maintenance—Testing, cleanouts, and right of entry.
        A.    The Director of Public Works and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties, upon prior written notice, to make tests of private service lateral piping to determine whether such piping is adequately watertight.

        B.     The property owner shall be responsible to supply cleanout at or adjacent to the house or buildings upon 10 business days’ written notice by the City. Such cleanout shall be the same size as the service lateral piping and shall conform to the City of Molalla standard specifications for service lateral cleanout.

        C.     The City may elect at its cost to construct a service lateral cleanout on public right-of-way for use in testing and/or repairing of service lateral piping. The cleanout shall conform to City standards. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.430 Inspection and maintenance—Grease traps and interceptors.
        Where no polluted waters are allowed to discharge to the storm system, groundwater, or drainageway, no grease traps or interceptors shall be connected to the storm system or any other facility carrying stormwater. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.440 Improper connection and notice to repair.
        A.    Where the City finds that any private service lateral piping is leaking or not legally connected, the property owner will be notified in writing by the City to make necessary repairs. The notification shall include the type of repairs to be made and the date, no less than 30 calendar days from the date of the notice, by which the repairs shall be completed.

        B.     The property owner may elect to have the City repair or replace private service laterals by notifying the Director of Public Works in writing. The property owner may then contract with the City for such repairs.

        C.     The City shall contract out the work and charge for any in-house labor and materials so furnished.

        D.    Upon completion of repairs, the City shall provide a written accounting to the property owner prepared by the Director of Public Works.

        E.     The property owner shall pay the City for the repairs by paying no less than one-twelfth the cost of the improvements as a surcharge on the storm sewer bill until the outstanding amount has been paid in full. The City shall charge no interest on the unpaid balance.

        F.     The City does not assume any obligation for reasonably necessary damage to landscaping, vegetation and walkways caused by repair work, and the property owner shall be solely responsible for repairing or replacing such damages. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.450 Nonconformance—Notice.
        A.    Any property owner who fails to comply with the provisions of Sections 13.13.410 through 13.13.440 shall be deemed to possess a private service lateral not in conformance.

        B.     The Director of Public Works shall notify by mail each property owner he or she determines is in violation at the address of such owner as listed on the latest tax rolls of the Tax Assessor for Clackamas County, Oregon. The notice shall set forth the basis for such alleged violations along with an explanation of the consequences of having a service lateral not in conformance. The notice shall include notification of the right to a hearing as described in this section.

        C.     Within 10 business days of the mailing of the notice described in subsection B of this section, the property owner may request a hearing before the City Manager. At such hearing the City Manager shall determine whether or not the property is in violation as alleged. Unless such request for a hearing is filed within the time provided by this section, the property owner shall be deemed to possess a service lateral not in conformance. If the property owner is found to be in violation at the hearing by the City Manager, then the property owner’s service lateral shall be deemed not in conformance. The property owner may appeal the decision of the City Manager within 10 business days of such decision by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Manager. Appeals shall be heard by the City Council. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.460 Nonconformance—Charges.
        Any property owner who maintains a private service lateral not in conformance with the maintenance requirements of this article shall be assessed a monthly storm sewer charge triple the normal rate until the private service lateral is brought into conformance with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.470 City may assume cost of repairs.
        At such times that the City Council shall determine by resolution that it is in the public interest to repair a service lateral or group of service laterals without delay the City may repair such lateral at the City’s expense without prior testing of such lateral and with the consent of the property owner without notice as provided in Sections 13.13.410 through 13.13.440. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.480 Damage to sewage works prohibited.
        No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the storm system. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.490 Entry on property.
        The Director of Public Works and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties, upon prior written notice, for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The Director of Public Works or representative shall also have the authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the storm sewers or waterways or facilities for wastes treatment. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.500 Observance of safety rules—Liability of City.
        While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in Section 13.13.490, the Director of Public Works or duly authorized employees of the City shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the City employees and the City shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by City employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.510 Entry and work on easements.
        The Director of Public Works and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.520 Certain discharges subject to approval.
        No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the Director of Public Works that such wastes can harm the storm sewer system or public drainageways. The substances prohibited are including but not limited to the following:

        A.    Any untreated stormwater as defined in Section 13.13.010;

        B.     Stormwater discharges a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C);

        C.     Stormwater discharges containing fats, gas, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not;

        D.    Stormwater discharges containing acid, plating solutions whether neutralized or not;

        E.     Stormwater discharges containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances, or chlorine;

        F.     Stormwater discharges containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances;

        G.    Stormwater discharges containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes;

        H.    Stormwater discharges containing having a pH in excess of 8.0 or less than 6.0;

        I.      Stormwater discharges containing unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids or discoloration;

        J.      Stormwater discharges containing paint, stains, or other coatings;

        K.    Stormwater discharges containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the water quality facilities;

        L.     Stormwater discharges or runoff containing fluids or materials from a defective or improperly maintained septic system. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.530 Decision of Director of Public Works regarding harmful wastes.
        If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public storm sewers, which waters contain the substances, or possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 13.13.520 and which, in the judgment of the Director of Public Works, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, nuisance, the Director of Public Works shall require pretreatment prior to discharge to water quality or detention facilities to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public storm sewers. Stormwater pretreatment shall be permitted and monitored through the DEQ. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.540 Notification of spills.
        A.    As soon as any person in charge of a facility or responsible for emergency response for a facility becomes aware of any suspected, confirmed, or unconfirmed release of material, pollutants, or waste creating a risk of discharge to the public stormwater system, such persons shall:

        1.     Begin containment procedures;

        2.     Notify proper emergency personnel in case of an emergency;

        3.     Notify appropriate City and/or State officials regarding the nature of the spill; and

        4.     Follow-up with the City regarding compliance and modified practices to minimize future spills, as appropriate.

        B.     The notification requirements of this section are in addition to any other notification requirements set forth in local, State, or Federal regulations and laws. The notification requirements do not relieve the person of necessary remediation. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.550 Illicit discharges and connections.
        A.    The Public Works Director may require by written notice that any user who makes an illicit connection to the public stormwater system complies with the requirements of this chapter to eliminate the illicit connection or secure approval for the connection by a specified date.

        B.     If, subsequent to eliminating a connection found to be in violation of this chapter, the responsible party can demonstrate that an illicit discharge will no longer occur, that user may request approval to reconnect. The reconnection or reinstallation of the connection shall be at the user’s expense.

        C.     Whenever the City finds that a discharge of pollutants is taking place or has taken place which will result in or has resulted in pollution of stormwater or the stormwater system, the Public Works Director may require by written notice to the responsible party that the pollution is remediated and the affected property restored, to the requirements of this chapter.

        D.    Whenever the Public Works Director determines that any person engaged in any activity which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or illicit discharges to the stormwater system, the Public Works Director may, by written notice, order that the responsible party undertake such monitoring activities and/or analyses and furnish such reports as the Public Works Director may deem necessary to demonstrate compliance with this chapter. The written notice shall be served either by personal delivery or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, and shall set forth the basis for such order and shall particularly describe the monitoring activities and/or analyses and reports required including but not limited to, that which may be undertaken by a third party independent monitor, sampler and/or tester. The recipient of such order shall undertake and provide the monitoring, analyses and reports within the time frames set forth in the order. If the City cannot locate the responsible party and the responsible party is a person other than the owner of the property, the City will notify the owner of the property in writing via personal delivery or certified mail requiring the owner to monitor the property and furnish such reports as the Public Works Director may deem necessary to demonstrate compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.560 Reporting of harmful discharges.
        Businesses are required to accurately report any chemical discharges to the storm sewer system to the Director of Public Works and the DEQ. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.570 Construction—Public works design standards.
        Storm sewers shall be designed in compliance Chapter 12.12 for all public improvements and the Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code for all private plumbing services. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.580 Construction—Construction specifications.
        Storm sewers shall be constructed in compliance Chapter 12.12 for all public improvements. All building storm sewers shall be constructed in compliance with the Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code, except where higher standards apply within the utility code. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.590 Construction—Permit required for storm sewer work.
        No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public storm sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.600 Construction—Erosion prevention and sediment control.
        A.    Purpose. These regulations contained herein, together with the current version of the Molalla Public Works Standards will be referred to herein as “these Standards.” The purpose of these Standards is to establish uniform requirements for land development and construction-related activities in order to control the occurrence of erosion and to prevent the creation, migration and/or transport of erosion at the source during construction and land development.

        B.     Standards. These Standards shall be administered and enforced by the Public Works Director or designee. The Public Works Director shall have the authority to develop and implement procedures, forms, policies, and interpretations for administering the provisions of these Standards.

        C.     ESC Permit Required. An ESC applicant must obtain an ESC permit from the DEQ and a City of Molalla Public Works permit before commencing any ground disturbing activity affecting 500 square feet or greater, cumulatively, throughout the duration of development, redevelopment, or other construction related activity of a parcel or parcels. A copy of the approved DEQ 1200-C permit shall be submitted to the Public Works Director before issuance of any Public Works permit and before any clearing or grading shall be allowed to proceed.

        D.    ESC Plan Required. The ESC applicant shall submit a copy of the approved DEQ ESC plan with and incorporate into all construction plans.

        E.     ESC Implementation. An approved ESC permit shall be implemented and maintained in accordance with DEQ requirements and as follows:

        1.     It shall be the duty of the ESC applicant to inspect the property in conformance with the permit issued to ensure ESC measures are effective.

        2.     The ESC Applicant is responsible to ensure that no visible and measurable erosion and sediment leaves the permitted site.

        3.     The ESC Applicant shall keep a record of inspections with a brief explanation as to any signs of erosion or sediment release and measures taken to prevent future releases as well as any measures taken to clean up the sediment that has left the site. Records must be made available to the City and DEQ upon request and must be submitted to the City upon final completion of work if requested by the City.

        4.     During periods of wet weather, disturbed areas of the site and/or stockpiled soil shall be covered by the ESC applicant by tarps or straws at the end of each day’s operations; all disturbed, unworked areas of the site shall be protected from erosion.

        5.     The ESC applicant shall remove ESC measures, establish permanent groundcover on all exposed soils; clean and remove trash, construction waste and sediment deposits before receiving a final ESC inspection approval.

        F.     Ineffective Measures and ESC Plan Amendment. If the facilities and techniques in the approved ESC Plan are not effective or sufficient to meet the purposes of this chapter, based on an on-site inspection, the Public Works Director or designee may require the ESC applicant to revise the ESC Plan. Such requirement shall be in writing and shall explain the problem. The written requirement shall be presented to the ESC applicant and any other related parties.

        1.     The revised ESC Plan shall be submitted by the ESC applicant not later than three business days of when written notification by the Public Works Director is received. Receipt of such notice shall be deemed complete three days after simultaneous regular mail and certified mail is deposited in the mail or completed the same day as personal delivery.

        2.     The ESC applicant shall implement fully the revised ESC Plan not later than three business days after mailing the revised ESC Plan to the City, or within such other time frame as the Public Works Director may specify.

        3.     In cases where significant erosion is occurring, the Public Works Director or designee may require the ESC Applicant to immediately install interim control measures before submittal of a revised ESC Plan.

        4.     If there is a confirmed or imminent threat of significant off-site erosion, the Public Works Director or designee shall issue a stop work order, upon issuance of which all work on the development site shall halt. The stop work order shall not be lifted until mitigation measures are implemented that comply with the City of Molalla and DEQ’s performance standards for ESC and are approved by the Public Works Director or designee.

        G.    Duty of ESC Responsibilities are With Applicant. It is the duty of the ESC applicant to maintain ESC measures and to comply with the requirements of the DEQ 1200-C permit. The City of Molalla is not responsible for ensuring ESC applicants compliance with DEQ’s permit. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.610 Construction—Cost of installation and connection.
        All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building storm sewer shall be borne by the owner. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, lessee or occupant of a building to maintain the building storm sewer or private collection system in a free-flowing and watertight condition, from the structure served to the public storm sewer. All existing private storm sewers shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.620 Construction—Cleanout specifications.
        At the connection with the public storm sewer and the building storm sewer, there shall be a cleanout of the same material as the public storm sewer connection pipe furnished by the owner. The cleanout shall extend vertically to within six inches of the finished ground surface and shall be sealed with an approved cap or plug. This riser shall be used for inserting a test plug for water or air testing the building storm sewer, and as an auxiliary cleanout. Backfilling around the riser shall be done in such a manner as not to damage the pipe. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.630 Construction—Separate storm sewers for each building.
        Every building storm sewer shall be separate and independent of any other building, whether connecting to a public or private storm sewer. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.640 Construction—Private storm sewer restrictions.
        Private storm sewer lines shall only be allowed where the building or buildings affected are located on a single parcel of land. Private storm sewer connections to public storm sewer shall be subject to the same design and construction standards as public storm sewers of the City and shall be subject to complete review and approval by the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.650 Construction—Leaks and extraneous discharges—Monitoring procedures.
        A.    New and existing private storm sewers, building drains and building storm sewers will be monitored for leaks or discharges of extraneous water. This monitoring may take the form of, but is not limited to:

        1.     Direct visual observation;

        2.     Indirect measurement;

        3.     Tele-inspection; or

        4.     Air or water pressure tests, smoke tests, or exfiltration tests.

        B.     If, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, such monitoring shows a storm sewer to be defective, no further proof is needed for the Director to require the storm sewer to be repaired to current standards. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.660 Construction—Capping and inspection prior to abandonment.
        A.    Before a moving or demolition permit is allowed to be issued, evidence must be presented showing the storm sewer has been properly capped and inspected. No exceptions will be allowed. All building storm sewer shall be capped at the public main in an approved manner by the applicant or the applicant’s contractor and inspected by City forces prior to closure of the excavation.

        B.     Exception. If adequate proof can be given showing a storm sewer service is in usable condition and is to be reused, the inspector may allow the service to be capped at the property line. It is the applicant’s responsibility to ensure that no other structure is connected to the storm sewer service being abandoned. If the line abandoned is serving more than one structure, a service connection for the structure(s) still using the service must be provided. If the Director of Public Works determines that capping at the main will cause undue hazard to the public, or if a street has been recently resurfaced, a variance to this section may be granted to require that the storm sewer be capped as close to the main as practical. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.670 Construction—Public works inspection fees.
        A.    The construction inspection services and fee is mandatory and not subject to request by the property owner. All construction costs must be verified from actual invoices and receipts when the City is not responsible for contract administration.

        B.     The City Council will establish the fees, rates and charges for the City’s inspection services by resolution. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.680 Construction—Bonding and insurance.
        Bonding and insurance for utility construction will be as provided in the Molalla Municipal Code or the Public Works design standards adopted in Chapter 12.12. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.690 Construction—Storm sewer main extensions.
        Whenever a public improvement is to construct or extend a storm sewer main, the following shall apply:

        A.    Extension of all lines will be to the farthest edge of the property requesting service, unless otherwise authorized by the Director of Public Works.

        B.     Minimum pipe sizes shall be in compliance with the Public Works Standards unless otherwise approved by the Director of Public Works.

        C.     When required by the City, the City will share in the cost of storm sewer lines larger than the minimum size provided in Section 13.13.690(B) by paying the difference in cost between a minimum size pipe and the larger size, except:

        1.     When a new development requires a larger line to provide adequate service, as determined by the Director of Public Works;

        2.     Only pipe and fitting materials will be paid by the City unless the line size is greater than 10 inches in diameter.

        D.    The property owner requesting the extension must pay the cost for extending new storm sewer lines. If a property owner requests service from a portion of the storm sewer line provided by the original developer, then the City shall collect a proportionate share of the storm sewer line cost, and reimburse the original developer or assignee that amount, less administrative costs. This reimbursement policy shall continue for 10 years from the date of line construction, and then end. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.700 Violation—Notice.
        Unless otherwise stated in section of this chapter, any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a 14-day time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.710 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person who continues any violation beyond the time limit provided for in Section 13.13.700 shall be guilty of a violation and, on conviction thereof, shall be fined in the amount set by Council resolution or subject to fines established per code Section 1.04.010, general provisions for each violation. Each day in which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. Failure to comply with a written directive or timeline of the City Manager made under the authority of this chapter is a punishable offense and may result in a temporary loss of City water and storm sewer services. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

 

13.13.720 Violators liable to City.
        Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned by the City of Molalla by reason of such violation. (Ord. 2020-05 §1)

Chapter 13.14 SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT CHARGES
13.14.010 Purpose.
        The purpose of the system development charge is to impose a portion of the cost of capital improvements for water, sanitary sewer, stormwater, transportation, and park systems, and any other systems for which system development charges are authorized under Oregon law, upon those developments that create the need for or increase the demands on capital improvements. (Ord. 1999-14 §1; Ord. 1991-6 §1)

 

13.14.020 Scope.
        The system development charge imposed by this chapter is separate from and in addition to any applicable tax, assessment, charge, or fee otherwise provided by law or imposed as a condition of development. (Ord. 1999-14 §1; Ord. 1991-6 §1)

 

13.14.030 Definitions.
        For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings set forth in this section:

        A.    “Capital improvements” means facilities or assets used for:

        1.     Water supply, treatment and distribution;

        2.     Sewer collection, transmission, treatment and disposal;

        3.     Stormwater collection, transmission and disposal;

        4.     Drainage and flood control;

        5.     Transportation;

        6.     Parks and recreation;

        7.     Any other systems for which system development charges are allowable under Oregon law.

        B.     “Development” means building or making a physical change in the use or appearance of a structure or land.

        C.     “Improvement fee” means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be constructed after the date the fee is adopted pursuant to Section 13.14.040.

        D.    “Owner” means the owner or owners of record title or the purchaser or purchasers under a recorded sales agreement, and other persons having an interest of record in the described real property.

        E.     “Parcel of land” means a lot, parcel, block or other tract of land that is occupied or may be occupied by a structure or structures or other use, and that includes the yards and other open spaces required under the zoning, subdivision, or other development chapters.

        F.     “Qualified public improvement” means a capital improvement that is:

        1.     Required as a condition of development approval;

        2.     Identified in the plan adopted pursuant to Section 13.14.080; and either

        a.     Not located on or contiguous to property that is the subject of the development approval; or

 

        b.     Located in whole or in part on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval and required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project to which the improvement fee is related.

        G.    “Reimbursement fee” means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements already constructed or under construction on the date the fee is adopted pursuant to Section 13.14.040.

        H.    “System development charge” means a reimbursement fee, an improvement fee or a combination thereof assessed or collected at the time of increased usage of a capital improvement, at the time of issuance of a development permit or building permit, or at the time of connection to the capital improvement. “System development charge” includes that portion of a sewer or water system connection charge that is greater than the amount necessary to reimburse the City for its average cost of inspecting and installing connections with water and sewer facilities. “System development charge” does not include fees assessed or collected as part of a local improvement district or a charge in lieu of a local improvement district assessment, or the cost of complying with requirements or conditions imposed by a land use decision, expedited land division or limited land use decision. (Ord. 1999-14 §1; Ord. 1991-6 §1)

 

13.14.040 System development charge established.
        A.    System development charges shall be established and may be revised by resolution of the Council.

        B.     Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this chapter or other local or state law, a system development charge is hereby imposed upon all parcels of land within the City, and upon all lands outside the boundary of the City that connect to or otherwise use the capital improvements of the City. (Ord. 1999-14 §1; Ord. 1991-6 §1)

 

13.14.050 Methodology.
        A.    The methodology used to establish the reimbursement fee shall consider the cost of then-existing facilities, prior contributions by then-existing users, the value of unused capacity, rate-making principles employed to finance publicly owned capital improvements, and other relevant factors identified by the Council. The methodology shall promote the objective that future systems users shall contribute no more than an equitable share of the cost of then-existing facilities.

        B.     The methodology used to establish the improvement fee shall consider the cost of projected capital improvements needed to increase the capacity of the systems to which the fee is related.

        C.     The methodology used to establish the improvement fee or the reimbursement fee, or both, shall be contained in a resolution adopted by the Council. (Ord. 1999-14 §1; Ord. 1991-6 §1)

 

13.14.060 Authorized expenditures.
        A.    Reimbursement fees shall be applied only to capital improvements associated with the systems for which the fees are assessed, including expenditures relating to repayment of indebtedness.

        B.     Improvement fees shall be spent only on capacity increasing capital improvements, including expenditures relating to repayment of debt for such improvements.

        1.     An increase in system capacity occurs if a capital improvement increases the level of performance or service provided by existing facilities or provides new facilities. The portion of the capital improvements funded by improvement fees must be related to current or projected development.

        2.     A capital improvement being funded wholly or in part from revenues derived from the improvement fee shall be included in the plan adopted by the City pursuant to Section 13.14.080.

        C.     Notwithstanding subsections A and B of this section, system development charge revenues may be expended on the direct costs of complying with the provisions of this chapter, including the costs of developing system development charge methodologies and providing an annual accounting of system development charge expenditures. (Ord. 1999-14 §1; Ord. 1991-6 §1)

 

13.14.070 Expenditure restrictions.
        A.    System development charges shall not be expended for costs associated with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an incidental part of other capital improvements.

        B.     System development charges shall not be expended for costs of the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements. (Ord. 1999-14 §1; Ord. 1991-6 §1)

 

13.14.080 Improvement plan.
        The Council shall adopt a plan that:

        A.    Lists the capital improvements that may be funded with improvement fee revenues;

        B.     Lists the estimated cost and time of construction of each improvement; and

        C.     Describes the process for modifying the plan. (Ord. 1999-14 §1; Ord. 1991-6 §1)

 

13.14.090 Collection of charge.
        A.    The system development charge is payable upon issuance of:

        1.     A building permit;

        2.     A development permit;

        3.     A permit to connect to the water system; or

        4.     A permit to connect to the sewer system.

        B.     If no building, development, or connection permit is required, the system development charge is payable at the time the usage of the capital improvement is increased.

        C.     If development is commenced or connection is made to the water or sewer systems without an appropriate permit, the system development charge is immediately payable upon the earliest date that a permit was required.

        D.    The City Recorder shall collect the applicable system development charge when a permit that allows building or development of a parcel is issued or when a connection to the water or sewer system of the City is made. However, in lieu of payment under this section, eligible applicants may exercise the right under ORS Chapter 223 to pay the charge in assessments pursuant to the Bancroft Bonding Act. In such case, the charge shall become a first lien against the property served and have the same effect as an assessment lien for a public improvement and shall be duly recorded in the Docket of City Liens.

        E.     The City Recorder shall not issue such permit or allow such connection until the charge has been paid in full or provision has been made to pay the charge under the Bancroft Bonding Act, unless an exemption is granted pursuant to Section 13.14.100. (Ord. 1999-14 §1; Ord. 1991-6 §1)

 

13.14.095 Deferred and installment payments.
        A.    System development charges are immediately due and payable and shall be collected as provided in Section 13.14.090, unless deferred or installment payments are authorized in accordance with this section.

        B.     When the total of City system development charges due is less than $10,000.00, the City Manager may approve deferred payments of system development charges for up to one year. Interest on the balance shall accrue at a rate equal to nine percent per annum. The City will not issue an occupancy permit for the property until the developer executes an approved payment agreement with the City.

        C.     When the total of City system development charges due is equal to or exceeds $10,000.00, the City Manager may approve an agreement with the developer under which the developer will make installment payments equal to not less than one fifth of the original SDC assessment, on an annual basis, for a period not to exceed two years. Interest on the balance shall accrue at a rate equal to nine percent per annum. The City will not issue an occupancy permit for the property until the developer executes an approved installment payment agreement with the City.

        D.    If the developer elects to defer payment of system development charges or to pay the system development charges in installments, the developer or a principle of the developer shall execute a promissory note in favor of the City in an amount equal to not less than the outstanding balance of unpaid charges on the date the note is executed.

        E.     In the event a developer elects to defer payment of system development charges or to pay the system development charges in installments, the City shall cause a lien to be placed upon the property in an amount equal to the balance owed, including interest, until payment has been received in full. Alternatively, the developer may provide the City with an irrevocable stand-by letter of credit in favor of the City in an amount equal to the unpaid balance of system development charges. The City shall release the lien or letter of credit upon full payment of all system development charges owed.

        F.     Failure to pay the system development charges within 60 days of the due date shall result in a penalty equal to 10% of the outstanding balance. Interest on the balance shall accrue from the 61st day following the due date at the rate of nine percent per annum.

        G.    In addition to any other remedy provided in law or equity, when system development charges are delinquent, the City may:

        1.     Refuse to issue development permits to the delinquent party;

        2.     Refuse to issue development permits for the subject property;

        3.     Refuse to honor any system development charge credits held by the delinquent party for any development;

        4.     Condition any development approval requested by the delinquent party on payment in full of the unpaid system development charges, including penalties and interest;

        5.     Remove any previous system development charges due, including penalties and interest, from any offset account held by the City for the delinquent party, in which case the system development charges shall immediately be due, and refuse to issue any new deferrals;

        6.     Withdraw the amount of system development charges due, including penalties and interest, from any offset account held by the City for the delinquent party.

        H.    For purposes of this section, the terms “developer” and “delinquent party” include a person controlling a delinquent corporate permittee and any corporation controlled by a delinquent individual permittee.

        I.      Only one deferral or installment payment agreement between the City and a developer shall be in effect at any time. Upon payment of SDCs owed and termination of a deferral or installment agreement, a new agreement may be sought. (Ord. 2011-02 §1; Ord. 2010-06; Ord. 2008-22)

 

13.14.100 Exemptions.
        A.    Structures and uses established and existing on or before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are exempt from a system development charge, to the extent that such structures and uses are not altered, added to, replaced, or changed in use so as to increase demands on any capital improvement for which systems development charges are imposed.

        B.     Additions to single-family dwellings that do not constitute the addition of a dwelling unit, as defined by the State Uniform Building Code, are exempt from all portions of the system development charge.

        C.     An alteration, addition, replacement or change in use that does not increase the parcel’s or structure’s use of the capital improvement facility is exempt from all portions of the system development charge.

        D.    A project financed by City revenues is exempt from all portions of the system development charge. (Ord. 1999-14 §1; Ord. 1991-6 §1)

 

13.14.110 Credits.
        A.    A system development charge shall be imposed when a change of use of a parcel or structure occurs, but credit shall be given for the computed system development charge to the extent that prior structures existing and services were established on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The credit so computed shall not exceed the calculated system development charge. No refund shall be made on account of such credit.

        B.     A credit shall be given for the cost of a qualified public improvement associated with a development. For qualified public improvements which are located in whole or in part on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval, and are required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development to which the improvement fee is related, credit shall be granted only for the cost of that portion of such improvement that exceeds the minimum standard facility size or capacity needed to serve the particular development project or property. The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that a particular improvement qualifies for credit under this section. The credit provided for by this subsection shall be only for the improvement fee charged for the type of improvement being constructed and shall not exceed the improvement fee even if the cost of the capital improvement exceeds the applicable improvement fee.

        C.     Credit shall not be transferable from one development to another except in compliance with standards adopted by the City Council.

        D.    Credit shall not be transferable from one type of capital improvement to another.

        E.     Credits shall be used not later than 10 years from the date the credit is given. (Ord. 1999-14 §1; Ord. 1991-6 §1)

 

13.14.120 Segregation and use of revenue.
        A.    All funds derived from a particular type of system development charge are to be segregated by accounting practices from all other funds of the City. That portion of the system development charge calculated and collected on account of a specific facility system shall be used for no purpose other than those set forth in Section 13.14.060.

        B.     The City Recorder shall provide the City Council with an annual accounting, based on the City’s fiscal year, for system development charges showing the total amount of system development charge revenues collected for each type of facility and the projects funded from each account. (Ord. 1999-14 §1; Ord. 1991-6 §1)

 

13.14.130 Appeal procedure.
        A.    A person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of system development charge revenues may appeal the decision or the expenditure to the City Council by filing a written request with the City Recorder describing with particularity the decision of the City Recorder and the expenditure from which the person appeals. An appeal of an expenditure must be filed within two years of the date of the alleged improper expenditure.

        B.     Appeals of any other decision required or permitted to be made by the City Recorder under this chapter must be filed within 10 days of the date of the decision.

        C.     After providing notice to the appellant, the Council shall determine whether the City Recorder’s decision or the expenditure is in accordance with this chapter and the provisions of ORS 223.297 to 223.314 and may affirm, modify, or overrule the decisions. If the Council determines that there has been an improper expenditure of system development charge revenues, the Council shall direct that a sum equal to the misspent amount shall be deposited within one year to the credit of the account or fund from which it was spent. (Ord. 1999-14 §1; Ord. 1991-6 §1)

 

13.14.140 Prohibited connection.
        No person may connect to the water or sewer systems of the City unless the appropriate system development charge has been paid. (Ord. 1999-14 §1; Ord. 1991-6 §1)

 

13.14.150 Penalty.
        Violation of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day’s violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1999-14 §1; Ord. 1991-6 §1)

 

13.14.160 Construction.
        The rules of statutory construction contained in ORS Chapter 174 are adopted and by this reference made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 1999-14 §1; Ord. 1991-6 §1)

Chapter 13.16 ADVANCE FINANCING OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
13.16.010 Definitions.
        The following are definitions for the purposes of this chapter and for all the purposes of any advance financing agreement entered into pursuant to this chapter and for any actions taken as authorized pursuant to this chapter or otherwise:

        “Advance finance agreement” means an agreement between a developer and the City, as authorized by the City Council, and executed by the City Manager, which agreement provides for the installation of and payment for advance financed public improvements and which agreement contains improvement guarantees, provisions for reimbursement by the benefiting property owners who may eventually utilize such improvement, inspection guarantees, and the like, as determined in the best interest of the public by the City Council.

        “Advance financing” means a developer’s payment for the installation of one or more public improvements installed pursuant to this chapter which benefiting property owners may utilize upon reimbursing a proportional share of the cost of such improvement.

        “Advance financing resolution” means a resolution passed by the City Council and executed by the City Manager designating a public improvement to be an advance financed public improvement and containing provisions for financial reimbursement by befitting property owners who eventually utilize the improvement and such other provisions as determined in the best interest of the public by the City Council.

        “Benefiting property” means that real property benefiting from an advance financed public improvement.

        “City” means the City of Molalla.

        “City Council” means the City Council of Molalla.

        “Developer” means an individual, a partnership, a joint venture, a corporation, a subdivider, a partitioner of land or any other entity, without limitation, who will bear, under the terms of this chapter, the expense of construction, purchase, installation or other creation of a public improvement.

        “Development” means that real property being developed by the developer and for which property the advance financing resolution is passed.

        “Owner” means the fee holder of record of the legal title to the real property in question. Where such real property is being purchased under a recorded land sales contract, then such purchasers shall also be deemed owners.

        “Public improvement” means the following:

        1.     The construction, reconstruction or upgrading of any water, sanitary sewer or storm sewer system improvements;

        2.     The grading, graveling, paving or other surfacing of any street, or opening, laying out, widening, extending, altering, or changing the grade for construction of any street;

        3.     The construction or reconstruction of sidewalks. (Ord. 2004-02 §1)

 

13.16.020 Receipt of application.
        A developer or other person seeking advance financing for a public improvement shall submit an application therefor to the City Manager on a form provided by the City. The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution by the City Council. The fee will be applied against the City’s administrative costs for reviewing and processing the application, including but not limited to analysis of the proposed advance financing project, notice to affected property owners, recording costs and other related costs. (Ord. 2010-01 §1; Ord. 2004-02 §1)

 

13.16.030 Utility analysis.
        Upon receipt of the advance financing application, the City Manager shall make an analysis of the advance financing proposal and shall prepare a report to be submitted to the City Council for its review and a public hearing. The report shall include a map showing the location of the public improvement, and the location, area and front footage of all benefiting properties, including property owned by the applicant. The report shall also include an estimate of the total cost of the advance financed public improvement and the methodology for allocating the cost of the public improvement to benefiting properties consistent with Section 13.16.070. (Ord. 2010-01 §2; Ord. 2004-02 §1)

 

13.16.040 Public hearing.
        Within a reasonable time after the City Manager has completed his or her analysis, an informational public hearing shall be held in which all parties and the general public shall be given the opportunity to express their views and ask questions pertaining to the proposed advance financed public improvement. Since advance financed public improvements do not give rise to assessments, the public hearing is for information purposes only, and is not subject to mandatory termination due to remonstrances. The City Council has the sole discretion after the public hearing to decide whether an advance financing resolution shall be passed. (Ord. 2004-02 §1)

 

13.16.050 Notification.
        Not less than 10 nor more than 30 days prior to any public hearing being held pursuant to this chapter, the developer and all benefitting property owners shall be notified of such hearing and the purpose thereof. Such notification shall be accomplished by mail. Notice shall be made on the date that the letter of notification is posted. Failure of any owner to be so notified shall not invalidate or otherwise affect any advance financing resolution of the City Council’s action to approve or not approve the same. (Ord. 2012-10 §1; Ord. 2010-01 §3; Ord. 2004-02 §1)

 

13.16.060 Advance financing resolutions and agreements.
        After the public hearing held pursuant to Section 13.16.040, if the City Council desires to proceed with advance financed public improvements, it shall approve the advance financing by resolution. The resolution shall designate the proposed public improvement and provide for the payment of an advance financed reimbursement fee by benefiting property owners pursuant to this chapter. The resolution shall indicate the amount of the reimbursement fee for each benefiting property. The resolution also shall instruct the City Manager to enter into a reimbursement agreement with the applicant to include such guarantee or guarantees as the City Manager deems necessary to protect the public interest and benefiting property owner. The agreement also may include such other provisions as the City Council determines necessary and proper. (Ord. 2012-10 §2; Ord. 2004-02 §1)

 

13.16.070 Advance finance reimbursement.
        A.    An advance financing reimbursement fee is imposed on all benefiting property in an amount established in the advance financing reimbursement resolution and shall be collected as set forth in this section.

        B.     The amount of the advance financed reimbursement fee allocated to each benefiting property shall be calculated as follows:

        The total actual cost of the advance financed public improvement, increased by nine percent annual simple interest, or such other percentage that the City Council may set by resolution, multiplied by a percentage of front footage owned by the benefiting property owner of the total front footage of the public improvement, the area of the benefiting property compared to the total area benefitted by the public improvement, or by such other methodology as is approved by the City Council. Future interest rate changes shall not apply ex post facto to previously executed reimbursement agreements.

        C.     1.     The advance financing reimbursement fee is immediately due and payable by a benefiting property owner upon application for connection to the advance financed public improvement. If connection is made without obtaining the permits required to connect to the public improvement, then the advance financed reimbursement fee is immediately due and payable upon the earliest date that any such permit was required. A permit for connection shall not be issued until the advance-financed reimbursement is paid in full.

        2.     Notwithstanding the requirement in paragraph 13.16.070(C)(1) to pay the reimbursement fee prior to connecting to the public improvement, the City Manager may in his or her sole discretion defer payment of the reimbursement fee to a date prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a structure located on the benefiting property. If the City Manager elects to defer payment under this section, a certificate of occupancy may not be issued until the reimbursement fee is paid in full.

        3.     Whenever the full and correct advance financed reimbursement has not been paid and collected for any reason, the City Manager shall report to the City Council the amount of the uncollected reimbursement, the description of the real property to which the reimbursement was due and the name or names of the benefiting property owners. The City Council shall then set a public hearing and shall direct the City Manager to give notice of the hearing to each benefiting property owner, either in person or by certified mail. If the City Council determines the reimbursement fee is due and has not been paid, the City Council may authorize such action as it determines appropriate to collect the unpaid amounts. However, the City may not impose a lien against the benefiting property or other property for the unpaid amounts. (Ord. 2010-01 §4; Ord. 2004-02 §1)

 

13.16.080 Disposition of advance financed reimbursements.
        Pursuant to the terms of the reimbursement agreement, the City shall collect reimbursement fees as provided in Section 13.16.070 and forward the amounts to the person responsible for the advance-financed public improvement. The City may retain an amount not less than one percent for the cost of administering the payments. The reimbursement fees shall be delivered to the developer for a period of not more than 10 years from and after the date the applicable advance financing agreement has been executed. Payments will be forwarded by the City within 90 days of receipt of the advance-financed reimbursement fees. The City shall incur no liability for any failure to remit advance financing reimbursement fees pursuant to the requirements of this section. (Ord. 2010-01 §5; Ord. 2004-02 §1)

 

13.16.090 Recording.
        All advance financing resolutions shall be recorded by the City in the deed records of Clackamas County, Oregon. Such resolutions shall identify the legal description of the development and benefiting properties. Failure to make such recording shall not affect the legality of an advance financing resolution or agreement. (Ord. 2004-02 §1)

 

13.16.100 Public improvements.
        Public improvements installed pursuant to advance financing agreement shall become and remain the sole property of the city pursuant to the advance financing agreement. (Ord. 2004-02 §1)

 

13.16.110 Multiple public improvements.
        More than one public improvement may be the subject of an advance financing agreement or resolution. (Ord. 2004-02 §1)

Title 14 (RESERVED)

Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 15.04 BUILDING CODE
Chapter 15.08 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Chapter 15.09 MOVING OF BUILDINGS

Chapter 15.04 BUILDING CODE
15.04.010 Administrative rules for the enforcement of the Oregon Building Code adopted by reference.
        The City of Molalla adopts the State Building Code as defined in ORS 455.010(8) to include the combined specialty codes which shall be in full force and effect as part of the Molalla Municipal Code pursuant to ORS Chapter 455. (Ord. 2006-07B)

 

15.04.015 Specialty codes adopted.
        The specialty codes hereby adopted are the:

        A.    Oregon Electrical Specialty Code as adopted by OAR Chapter 918, Division 305;

        B.     Oregon Manufactured Dwelling and Park Specialty Code adopted by OAR Chapter 918, Division 600;

        C.     Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code as adopted by Chapter 918, Division 750;

        D.    Oregon Residential Specialty Code as adopted by OAR Chapter 918, Division 480;

        E.     Oregon Structural Specialty Code as adopted by OAR Chapter 918, Division 460;

        F.     Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code as adopted by OAR Chapter 918, Division 440;

        G.    2014 Oregon Structural Specialty Code, Chapter 1 Scope and Administration. (Ord. 2019-15 §1; Ord. 2006-07B)

Chapter 15.08 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
15.08.010 Inhabitance and use of recreational vehicles.
        Except as provided in Title 10 or 18 of this code, no person shall inhabit or use for more than 10 consecutive days any recreational vehicle, trailer, fifth wheel or other such mobile living unit, without having obtained a permit therefor. (Ord. 1998-2 §2; Ord. 1987-9 §2)

 

15.08.020 Permits.
        Any person desiring to inhabit or use a recreational vehicle, trailer, fifth wheel or other such mobile living unit for more than seven consecutive days shall apply for a permit from the City Manager. The fee for such permit shall be set by the City Council by resolution. Upon receipt of an application for such a permit, the City Manager or designee may issue a permit therefor, for a period not exceeding 30 days, if the unit contains satisfactory sanitary facilities and if the use or inhabitance of the unit will not create a menace to public health or a public nuisance. (Ord. 1987-9 §2)

Chapter 15.09 MOVING OF BUILDINGS
15.09.005 Definitions.
        As used in this Chapter, the following words have the meaning set out below:

        “Building” means an existing structure removed from its foundation which is used or intended for sheltering any use or occupancy.

        “Building permits” include all permits necessary to make a building capable of being legally used or occupied. The permits include those required for work subject to the State Building Code (as that term is defined at ORS 455.010) including, but not limited to, all specialty codes including structural, plumbing, electrical, dwelling, heating and ventilating. In addition, the term includes permits necessary for sewer, water and erosion control.

        “City” means the City of Molalla.

        “Manager” means the City Manager for the City of Molalla or designate.

        “Occupancy” is the purpose for which a building or part thereof is used or intended to be used.

        “Owner” is any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in property or a building.

        “Person” includes any individual, firm, association or corporation of any kind or nature capable of owning real or personal property.

        “Right-of-way” is that area between property lines comprising a street, alley, pedestrian walkway, bike path, easement or other area essentially unobstructed from the ground to the sky deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated for public use and having a width of not less than 10 feet.

        “Structure moving permit” or “SMP” is that permit issued by the City for the transport of a building over City rights-of-way. (Ord. 2011-08 §1)

 

15.09.010 Permit required.
        It is unlawful for any person to move any building over any City right-of-way or to occupy any portion thereof without first obtaining a structure moving permit (SMP). A separate SMP shall be required for each building proposed to be moved. (Ord. 2011-08 §1)

 

15.09.015 Application—Fee deposit.
        A.    Application for a structure moving permit shall be on a form approved by the City, signed by the building’s owner or authorized agent and shall include (at a minimum) information on the following:

        1.     The applicant’s name, address and telephone number;

        2.     The Assessor’s tax map and lot number upon which the building is currently located (if within the City limits);

        3.     The size (square footage) of the building proposed to be moved;

        4.     The building’s occupancy group and/or rating;

        5.     The proposed use of the building at the new location in the City;

        6.     The Assessor’s tax map and lot number to which the building is proposed to be moved, that property’s zoning and ownership (both legal and equitable) if within City limits;

        7.     The route proposed to be taken during the move;

        8.     The length of time required for moving the building;

 

        9.     Whether building permits have been applied for, approved and obtained;

        10.   The name and address of the owner of the building if different than the applicant; and

        11.   The name and address of the property owner if different than the applicant.

        B.     Each application shall be accompanied by an application fee which shall be nonrefundable and is in addition to the financial guarantee, insurance requirements and deposit referenced herein. The amount of the application fee shall be established by the Council in a separate resolution. (Ord. 2011-08 §1)

 

15.09.020 Application review—Insurance requirements—Financial guarantee—Approval.
        A.    The City Manager or designate shall review the application and verify, if appropriate, that all relevant building permits have been obtained, that the zoning at the proposed relocation site allows for the building’s proposed use and that all appropriate fees have been paid. Thereafter, the Manager shall, in consultation with the Public Works Director determine whether the route proposed by the applicant is satisfactory and if not, will inform the applicant. The applicant shall then provide an alternative route for review by the City Manager.

        B.     No structure moving permit may be issued until the applicant has filed with the City a policy or certificate of insurance naming the City, its Councilors, officers, agents, and employees as additional named insureds in a minimum amount of $500,000.00 for injury to one person, $1,000,000.00 for personal injuries from one accident and at least $50,000.00 for property damage. Any insurance shall also contain a provision that it is not cancelable during the term of the permit.

        C.     No structure moving permit shall be issued until the applicant has deposited with the City a financial guarantee (in a form approved of by the City) in a sum sufficient to cover the City’s cost of preparing for the building move and for the repairs, restoration or replacement of the City’s rights-of-way or the improvements located therein or adjacent thereto arising from the moving operation. If the cost exceeds the amount reflected in the financial guarantee, the applicant shall promptly provide the additional monies to the City.

        D.    Provided the Manager is satisfied that the zoning of the proposed site for the building’s location allows for its use or occupancy there and that evidence of all appropriate permit fees, insurance, financial guarantees, building permits and moving route have been either obtained or approved, the Manager is authorized to issue the structure moving permit to the applicant. The permit shall reference the regulations set out below and may include other conditions deemed by the Manager to be reasonable and necessary for the protection of the City’s right-of-way and other facilities (regardless of ownership) that may be impacted by the building’s movement along the rights-of-way. The Manager shall keep a copy of the permit issued along with evidence that the other necessary requirements have been obtained or provided to the City. (Ord. 2011-08 §1)

 

15.09.025 Regulations.
        A.    The moving of a building or structure shall be a continuous day-by-day operation occurring only during the hours specified by the City in the moving permit.

        B.     The move shall continue until complete so as to ensure the least possible obstruction to City rights-of-way and other users thereof.

        C.     It is unlawful to move a building or structure under a permit and leave said building (or any portion thereof) stationary in the right-of-way for a period in excess of two hours during the hours specified in the moving permit unless an emergency exists by reason of unforeseen difficulties encountered in cutting wires, trees, or removing obstructions in the course of the route selected.

        D.    All movement in the right-of-way must be completed within an elapsed time of 12 hours unless application is made for a longer period of time and permission specifically is granted by the Manager prior to the commencement of the move. In the event unforeseen difficulties are encountered and an extension of time is necessitated thereby, the Manager may extend the 12-hour requirement by the additional time he or she believes necessary.

        E.     Lights and other warning devices sufficient to warn and protect traffic shall be displayed in conspicuous places at or on a building being moved during the hours in which street lights are lighted. Additional warning devices may be required if the Manager finds those displayed by the permittee to be insufficient. (Ord. 2011-08 §1)

 

15.09.030 Removal or replacement of overhead wires in moving operation.
        A.    When overhead wires or other aerial facilities in any right-of-way designated in a permit for moving a building or structure might interfere with the moving operation, the applicant shall give the owner of the wire or other aerial facility a minimum of 96 hours’ written notice that he or she desires to have the aerial facility/wire temporarily removed or rearranged so as to accommodate the building’s move. The applicant must provide the City with proof that the facilities’ owners have been notified.

        B.     The applicant shall either pay or tender to the owner of the aerial facility or wire the amount estimated by the owner to be necessary to remove, rearrange and/or replace the same.

        C.     When the City owns the facility, the cost of temporary removal and replacement shall be included in the deposit prerequisite to permit, as provided in this chapter.

        D.    If the applicant disputes the amount demanded by the owner as the advance or tender, the amount shall be determined by the Manager. The applicant shall pay the actual expense of removing and replacing the wire, and as soon as the actual expense can be determined, the applicant shall immediately pay any deficit and the owner shall refund any surplus. Upon receipt or tender of the amount estimated or the amount fixed by the Manager in case of dispute, the owner of the wire shall remove it in time to permit the passage of the building or structure without unnecessary delay. (Ord. 2011-08 §1)

Title 16 (RESERVED)

Title 17 DEVELOPMENT CODE
Division I. Introduction and General Provisions
Division II. Zoning Regulations
Division III. Community Design Standards
Division IV. Application Review Procedures and Approval Criteria
Division V. Definitions

Division I. Introduction and General Provisions
Chapter 17-1.1 INTRODUCTION
17-1.1.010 Introduction
The City of Molalla Development Code (“Code”) is administered by the Planning Official or designee. The Code regulates land use and development within the City of Molalla (“City”), and is organized as follows:

Division I. Division I describes the title, purpose, authority, organization, and general administration of the Code. Division I also explains how City officials interpret and enforce code requirements.

Division II. Division II contains the zoning regulations. Zones are designated by the City of Molalla Zoning Map, consistent with the City of Molalla Comprehensive Plan. The zoning regulations specify allowed land uses, and lot and development standards that are specific to particular land uses or zones. Before commencing a new use or development, changing an existing use or development, or applying for a building permit, the property owner shall complete a Zoning Checklist pursuant to Section 17-4.1.020.

Division III. Division III contains the City’s development design standards, including requirements for street access; pedestrian and vehicle circulation; parking; landscaping, screening, fences, and walls; outdoor lighting; adequate transportation, water, sanitary sewer, and storm drainage facilities; and utility requirements. Division III applies to all development, including land divisions and projects for which no land use application or review is required. Division III is supported by the more detailed engineering design standards in the City’s Public Works Design Standards.

Division IV. Division IV contains the City’s application requirements and review procedures for land use and development decisions, including, but not limited to, procedures for land divisions, property line adjustments, conditional use permits, site design review, master planned developments, and variances.

Division V. Division V contains definitions and other exhibits that the City uses in interpreting and administering the Code. For example, where Division II contains a general list of land uses allowed in each zone, Division V provides examples of uses that are consistent with each general category. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

Chapter 17-1.2 TITLE, PURPOSE, AND AUTHORITY
17-1.2.010 Title
The official name of this title is “The City of Molalla Development Code.” It may also be referred to as “Development Code” and “Code.” (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-1.2.020 Purpose
This Code is enacted to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare; and to encourage the orderly and efficient development and use of land within the City of Molalla, consistent with the City of Molalla Comprehensive Plan and the following principles:

A.    Compact Development, which promotes the efficient provision of public services and infrastructure;

B.     Mixed-Use, which places homes, jobs, stores, parks, and services within walking distance of one another;

C.     Full Utilization of Urban Services (e.g., water, sewer, storm drainage, parks, and transportation facilities), which maximizes the return on public investments in infrastructure;

D.    Transportation Efficiency, or development of an interconnected street system supporting multiple modes of transportation, which yields more direct routes (shorter distances) between local destinations, conserves energy, reduces emergency response times, and provides alternatives to the automobile for those who are unable or choose not to drive a car;

E.     Human-Scale Design, or development in which people feel safe and comfortable walking from place to place because buildings, streetscapes, parking areas, landscaping, lighting, and other components of the built environment are designed foremost with pedestrians in mind;

F.     Environmental Health, which requires adequate light and air circulation, management of surface water runoff, and treatment and disposal of waste; and

G.    Efficient Administration of Code Requirements, consistent with the needs of the City of Molalla. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-1.2.030 Compliance and Scope
A.    Compliance with the Development Code. No structure or lot shall hereinafter be used, developed, or occupied, and no structure or part thereof shall be erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, or otherwise altered except as permitted by this Code. Furthermore, annexations and amendments to the Zoning Map, and amendments to the Development Code shall conform to applicable provisions of this Code.

B.     Obligation by Successor. The requirements of this Code apply to the owner(s) of record, persons undertaking the development or the use of land, and to those persons’ successors in interest.

C.     Transfer of Development Standards Prohibited. Except as otherwise specifically authorized by this Code, no lot area, yard, landscaping, or open space that is used to satisfy a requirement of this Code for one use shall be used to satisfy the same requirement for another use. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-1.2.040 Rules of Code Construction
A.    Provisions of this Code Declared to be Minimum Requirements. The provisions of this Code, in their interpretation and application, are minimum requirements, adopted for the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare.

B.     Highest Standard or Requirement Applies. Where the requirements of this Code vary from another provision of this Code or with other applicable regulations, the highest standard or regulation shall govern. The Planning Official or designee, as applicable, shall determine which Code provision sets the highest standard. Where the applicability of a code provision is unclear, the Planning Director, or upon referral the City Council, may issue a formal interpretation pursuant to Chapter 17-1.5 Code Interpretations.

C.     Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular form includes the plural; and the plural includes the singular.

D.    Requirements Versus Guidelines. The use of the word “shall,” “must,” “required,” or similar directive terms, means the code provision is a requirement. The use of the word “should,” “encouraged,” “recommended,” or similar terms, means the provision is a guideline, which may be imposed as a requirement but only where the applicable code criteria allow the Planning Official to exercise such discretion.

E.     Interpreting Illustrations. This Code contains illustrations and photographs, code “graphics,” which are intended to serve as examples of development designs that either meet or do not meet particular code standard. Except where a graphic contains a specific numerical standard or uses the word “shall,” “must,” “required,” or “prohibited,” strict adherence to the graphic is not required.

F.     Severability. The provisions of this Code are severable. If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase is judged to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, that decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of the Code. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-1.2.050 Development Code Consistency with Comprehensive Plan and Laws
A.    City of Molalla Comprehensive Plan. This Code implements the City of Molalla Comprehensive Plan. Except as otherwise required by applicable state or federal law, all provisions of this Code shall be construed in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan, including any Comprehensive Plan elements or public facility master plans adopted pursuant to the Comprehensive Plan.

B.     Compliance with Other Laws Required. In addition to the requirements of this Code, all uses and development must comply with all other applicable City, State of Oregon, and federal rules and regulations.

C.     References to Other Regulations. All references to other City, state, and federal rules and regulations are for informational purposes only and do not constitute a complete list of such requirements. The references do not imply any responsibility by the City for enforcement of state or federal regulations. Where a proposal, permit, or approval is subject to both City of Molalla requirements and state or federal requirements, the property owner is responsible for contacting the applicable agencies and complying with their rules and regulations.

D.    Current Versions and Citations. All references to the regulations of other jurisdictions refer to the most current version and citation for those regulations, except where this Code, City Council policy, or applicable law require otherwise. Where a referenced regulation has been amended or repealed, the Planning Official, Planning Commission or, upon referral, the City Council, shall interpret this Code and, based on adopted City policy, determine whether an equivalent standard applies. Such determinations, unless made through a legislative process, may be appealed to City Council. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-1.2.060 Development Code and Zoning Map Implementation
A.    Zoning of Areas to be Annexed. Concurrent with annexation of land to the City of Molalla, the City Council, upon considering the recommendation of the Planning Commission, shall enact an ordinance applying applicable zoning designation(s) to the subject land, pursuant to Chapter 17-4.6. The Comprehensive Plan shall guide the designation of zoning for annexed areas.

B.     Land Use Consistent With Development Code. Land and structures in the City of Molalla may be used or developed only in accordance with this Code, including all amendments thereto. A lawful use of land (“use”) is one that is permitted in accordance with this Code, or is allowed as a legal nonconforming use, pursuant to Chapter 17-1.4, provided state or federal law does not prohibit the use.

C.     Development Code and Zoning Map. The City’s Official Zoning Map (“Zoning Map”), which may be published, amended, and filed separately from this Code, is part of this Code. The zoning districts depicted on the Zoning Map correspond to the zoning districts in this Code. In addition, this Code may contain zoning regulations for special areas (i.e., overlay zones), and for certain uses or structures that do not appear on the Zoning Map.

D.    Interpreting the Zoning Map. Except as otherwise specified by this Code, the City’s zoning boundaries are as designated on the Official Zoning Map, which is kept on file at City Hall. The City may adopt and publish supplemental zoning maps where it is impractical to illustrate all regulated features on one map. Examples of regulated features include, but are not limited to, historical landmarks, special street setbacks, base flood (flood plain) elevation, local wetland inventories, and specific area plans. In addition, the City may require field verification and mapping (e.g., survey) of a regulated feature as part of a development application, where the feature is thought to exist on or adjacent to the subject property but its exact location is unknown.

E.     Boundary Lines. Zoning district boundaries are determined pursuant to Section 17-2.1.030.

F.     Changes to Official Zoning Map. Proposed changes to the Official Zoning Map are subject to review and approval under Chapter 17-4.6. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-1.2.070 Zoning Checklists and Coordination of Building Permits
A.    Land Use Approvals and Building Permits. Land use and building approvals are processed by two City officials: The Building Official issues building permits; and the Planning Official administers the Development Code, processes land use approvals, and coordinates with the Building Official on development and building projects to ensure compliance with the Development Code.

B.     Zoning Compliance Required for Building Permits. A building permit shall not be issued until the Planning Official has confirmed that all applicable requirements of this Code are met, or appropriate conditions of approval are in place to ensure compliance.

C.     Zoning Checklist. Where a Zoning Checklist is required prior to issuance of a building permit, pursuant to Section 17-4.1.020, the Planning Official through a Type I procedure shall review the project proposal. The Building Official shall not issue any building permit without an approved Zoning Checklist for the project. If in reviewing the project proposal the Planning Official determines that other permits or approvals are required before development may commence or a building permit may be issued, the Planning Official shall advise the applicant in writing, accordingly. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-1.2.080 Official Action
A.    Official Action. The City of Molalla Planning Official, Planning Commission and City Council are vested with authority to issue permits and grant approvals in conformance with this Code, pursuant to Division IV Application Review Procedures and Approval Criteria. City officials shall issue no permit and grant no approval for any development or use that violates or fails to comply with conditions or standards imposed to carry out this Code.

B.     Void Future Actions. Any permit or approval issued or granted in conflict with the provisions of this Code shall be void, unless the City modifies it in conformance with the Code. The Planning Official shall determine when an approval is void and, as applicable, he or she shall refer it back to the decision body for modification to ensure Code compliance.

C.     Referral to Planning Commission. In addition to those actions that require Planning Commission approval, the Planning Official may refer any question or permit request to the Planning Commission, who then shall take action on the request pursuant to the applicable provisions of this Code. See also Chapter 17-1.5 Code Interpretations and Division IV Application Review Procedures and Approval Criteria.

D.    Notices, Filing, and Validity of Actions. The failure of any person to receive mailed notice or failure to post or file a notice, staff report, or form shall not invalidate any actions pursuant to this Code, provided a good faith effort was made to notify all parties entitled to such notice, staff report, or form. See Chapter 17-4.1 General Review Procedures. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

Chapter 17-1.3 LOT OF RECORD AND LEGAL LOT DETERMINATION
17-1.3.010 Purpose and Intent
The purpose of Chapter 17-1.3 is to establish criteria and a process for determining when a lot of record exists for the purpose of allowing a use or development on a nonconforming lot (e.g., substandard lot that does not meet lot area, setback, or coverage regulations). The owner of a lot of record shall not be denied development of one single-family dwelling per lot of record, provided applicable building codes are met. The City shall accept a legal lot determination as sufficient evidence of a hardship for purposes of approving a variance under Chapter 17-4.7. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-1.3.020 Criteria
A lot of record is a plot of land that meets one or more of the following criteria, pursuant to ORS 92.010 through 92.192:

A.    The plot of land was lawfully created through a subdivision or partition plat in Clackamas County prior to annexation to the City of Molalla;

B.     The plot of land was created through a deed or land sales contract recorded with Clackamas County prior to October 1, 1978; or

C.     The plot of land was created through a deed or land sales contract recorded with Clackamas County prior to January 1, 2007 and the subject plot of land would have complied with the applicable planning, zoning, subdivision, or partition regulations in effect at the time it was created. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-1.3.030 Legal Lot Determination Procedure
The Planning Official, through a Type II procedure, shall process requests to validate a lot of record, pursuant to ORS 92.010 to 92.192. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

Chapter 17-1.4 NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS
17-1.4.010 Purpose and Applicability
Chapter 17-1.4 provides standards and procedures for the continuation of uses and developments that are lawfully established but do not comply with current Code standards (“nonconforming situations”). The Code is intended to protect public health, safety, and general welfare, while allowing reasonable use of private property. The chapter contains three sections, as follows:

A.    Nonconforming uses (e.g., industrial use in residential zone) are subject to Section 17-1.4.020.

B.     Nonconforming developments (e.g., structure does not meet setback or height standards) are subject to Section 17-1.4.030.

C.     Nonconforming lots (e.g., lot is smaller than minimum area standard) are subject to Section 17-1.4.040. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-1.4.020 Nonconforming Use
Where a use of land exists that would not be permitted under the current Code, but was lawful at the time it was established, the use may continue, provided it conforms to the following requirements:

A.    Expansion of Nonconforming Use Limited. Expansion of a nonconforming use shall not exceed 35 percent of the subject site or building, and not more than 2,500 square feet of building area (footprint or floor area), cumulatively, whichever is less, that existed as of November 10, 2017. Where an expansion is proposed, consistent with this section, a Conditional Use Permit shall be required, under Chapter 17-4.4.

B.     Location of Nonconforming Use. A nonconforming use shall not be moved in whole or in part from one lot to another lot, except as to bring the use into conformance with this Code.

C.     Discontinuation or Abandonment of Nonconforming Use. Except as provided by subsection E. A nonconforming use that is discontinued for any reason, other than fire or other catastrophe beyond the owner’s control, for a period of more than 12 months shall be deemed abandoned and shall no longer be an allowed use. For purposes of calculating the 12-month period, a use is discontinued when:

1.     The use of land is physically vacated;

2.     The use ceases to be actively involved in the sale of merchandise or the provision of services; for example, as evidenced by the removal of signs, goods, stock, or office equipment, or the disconnection of telephone or utility service;

3.     Any lease or contract under which the nonconforming use has occupied the land is terminated;

4.     A request for final reading of water and power meters is made to the applicable utility districts;

5.     The owner’s utility bill or property tax bill account became delinquent; or

6.     An event occurs similar to those listed in subsections C.1 through 5, as determined by the Planning Commission.

D.    Application of Code Criteria and Standards to Nonconforming Use. Once the City deems a use abandoned pursuant to subsection C, any subsequent use of the subject lot shall conform to the current standards and criteria of this Code. After the City has deemed a nonconforming use abandoned, the use shall not be allowed to resume, in whole or in part, under the same or different ownership or management; any such activity is a violation of this Code and subject to enforcement proceedings under Chapter 17-1.6. Residential uses in Commercial zones are exempt from this section.

E.     Extension of Nonconforming Status for Discontinued Use. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection C, a nonconforming use that is discontinued shall not be considered abandoned where, through a Type III procedure, the Planning Commission approves an extension for repair, including as applicable ongoing, active renovation and efforts to lease the subject property. The owner must request the extension within the six-month period of discontinuance. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-1.4.030 Nonconforming Development
Section 17-1.4.030 regulates nonconforming development. Nonconforming development includes situations where a development exists on the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Code that could not be built under the terms of the Code today, for example, by reason of restrictions on lot area, lot coverage, location on a lot, setbacks, height, yard, equipment, access, parking, landscaping, or other physical restriction or requirement. If the development was lawful when constructed, it may remain on the site so long as it remains otherwise lawful and complies with the following regulations:

A.    Alterations. Any expansion of a nonconforming development shall not exceed 50 percent of the subject building area or development area, as applicable; for example, such area may include floor area or other surface area, paving, parking spaces, landscaping, outdoor storage, signage, lighting, or other developed areas that existed as of November 10, 2017. Expansion of a nonconforming use requires approval of a Conditional Use Permit under Chapter 17-4.4. A nonconforming development shall not be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity by more than 50 percent. Approval of a variance is required to increase a development’s nonconformity, and not more than one such variance shall be approved to expand the same development. A development or portion thereof may be enlarged or altered in a way that satisfies the current requirements of this Code or moves in the direction of conformity.

B.     Destruction. Should a nonconforming development or nonconforming portion of a development be destroyed by any means to an extent more than 50 percent of its current value as assessed by the Clackamas County Assessor, it shall be reconstructed only in full conformity with this Code. This does not preclude the reestablishment of a nonconforming use after fire or other catastrophe as allowed under Section 17-1.4.020. This section does not apply to the R-5 Historic Residential district.

C.     Roadway Access. The owner of a nonconforming driveway approach or access to a public street or highway, upon receiving land use or development approval, may be required as a condition of approval to bring the nonconforming access into conformance with the standards of the applicable roadway authority.

D.    Relocation or Removal. Once a nonconforming structure or a portion of a nonconforming structure or development is moved it shall thereafter conform to current Code standards. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-1.4.040 Nonconforming Lot
A legal lot or lot of record, as provided by Chapter 17-1.3, with an area or dimensions that do not meet the standards of the zoning district in which the property is located, may be occupied by a use permitted in the zone, subject to other requirements of the zone. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

Chapter 17-1.5 CODE INTERPRETATIONS
17-1.5.010 Code Interpretations
Some terms or phrases within this Code may have two or more reasonable meanings. This section provides a process for resolving differences in the interpretation of the Code text.

A.    Authorization of Similar Uses. Where a proposed use is not specifically identified by this Code, or the Code is unclear as to whether the use is allowed in a particular zone, the Planning Official may find the use is similar to another use that is permitted, allowed conditionally, or prohibited in the subject zone and apply the Code accordingly. However, uses and activities that this Code specifically prohibits in the subject zone, and uses and activities that the Planning Official finds are similar to those that are prohibited, are not allowed. Similar use rulings that require discretion on the part of City officials shall be processed following the Type II procedure of Section 17-4.1.030. The Planning Official may refer a request for a similar use determination to the Planning Commission for its review and decision.

B.     Code Interpretation Procedure. Requests for code interpretations, including, but not limited to, similar use determinations, shall be made in writing to the Planning Official and shall be processed as follows:

1.     The Planning Official within 14 days of the inquiry, shall advise the person making the inquiry in writing as to whether the City will make a formal interpretation.

2.     Where an interpretation does not involve the exercise of discretion, the Planning Official shall advise the person making the inquiry of his or her decision within a reasonable timeframe and without public notice.

3.     Where an interpretation requires discretion, the Planning Official shall inform the person making the request that an application for code interpretation is required and advise the applicant on how to make the request. At a minimum, an application for code interpretation shall include a letter citing the nature and reasons for the request, and, as required, a City fee. The Planning Official then shall review relevant background information, including, but not limited to, other relevant Code sections and previous City land use decisions, and follow the Type II review procedure of Section 17-4.1.030.

C.     Written Interpretation. Following the close of the public comment period on an application for a code interpretation, the Planning Official shall mail or deliver the City’s decision in writing to the person requesting it, to any other person who specifically requested a copy of the decision, and to those who provided public testimony on the application. The decision shall become effective when the appeal period for the decision expires.

D.    Referral to City Council. Where a code interpretation may have significant citywide policy implications, the Planning Official may bypass the procedure in subsection B and refer the request directly to the City Council for its legislative review in a public hearing. Such public hearings shall be conducted following Type IV procedure of Section 17-4.1.050.

E.     Interpretations on File. The City shall keep on file a record of its code interpretations. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

Chapter 17-1.6 ENFORCEMENT
17-1.6.010 Violations
Except as provided under Section 17-1.6.020, any person violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this Code, who fails to abate said violation has committed a Class 1 Civil Infraction. Such person is guilty of a separate violation for each and every day during any portion of which a violation of this Code is committed or continued. A finding of a violation of this Code shall not relieve the responsible party of the duty to abate the violation.

A.    Classification of Violation. Violations shall be identified by the Planning Official under one of the following classifications:

1.     Type I. Violations which represent a serious threat to public health, safety, and welfare, or those unapproved actions deemed potentially to create serious adverse environmental or land use consequences as the result of continued development activity; or

2.     Type II. Violations which do not pose a serious threat to public health, safety, and welfare, but do violate provisions of this Code, including any conditions of approval.

B.     Notice of Violation.

1.     Type I. After receiving a report of an alleged Type I violation, the Planning Official determines whether the violation requires that a citation be issued immediately or whether to provide notice of the violation prior to the issuance of a citation. Notice shall be in writing and shall be provided to the owner of record for tax purposes or to the person in charge of the property. Such a notice shall indicate:

a.     The location and nature of the violation;

b.     The provision or provisions of this Code or conditions of approval which allegedly have been violated; and

c.     Whether immediate enforcement will be sought or if a specified time period will be allowed to correct or remove the violation.

2.     Type II. After receiving a report of an alleged Type II violation from the Planning Official, the City Attorney shall, upon determining that a Civil Infraction exists, promptly give notice of the alleged violation by certified first-class mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service, to the owner of record for tax purposes and to the person in charge of the property; however, a defect in the notice of violation with respect to this notice delivery provision shall not prevent enforcement of this Code. Such a notice shall indicate:

a.     The location and nature of the violation;

b.     The provision or provisions of this Code or conditions of approval, which allegedly have been violated;

c.     Whether immediate enforcement shall be sought or if 15 days will be allowed to correct or remove the violation; and

d.     The date when the notice was personally served or, if the notice was sent by first-class mail, the date three days after mailing if the address to which it was mailed is within this state and seven days after mailing if the address to which it was mailed is outside this state.

C.     City Attorney to Pursue Enforcement. When the compliance deadline expires, the City Attorney shall proceed with any action deemed appropriate, unless:

1.     The City Attorney finds that the violation has been corrected, removed, or will not be committed; or

2.     A court of competent jurisdiction has halted enforcement pending the outcome of a proceeding concerning the violation.

D.    Penalties. Code violations may be subject to criminal, civil, or other sanctions authorized under ordinances of the City.

1.     Criminal Penalties. Unless specified otherwise, every violation of the terms of this Code is a Class A infraction, punishable by a fine of up to $500.00. Each day such violation continues, it shall be considered a separate offense.

2.     Civil Penalties and Remedies. In addition to, or in lieu of, criminal actions, a violation of this Code or a permit issued hereunder may be the subject of a civil action in the nature of a debt or of any appropriate remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction, including mandatory and prohibitory injunctions and orders of abatement. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-1.6.020 Other Remedies
The City, in addition to finding a Code violation is a Class 1 Civil Infraction, may use any of the other remedies available to it, including, but not limited to, the following:

A.    Stop Work Order. The City may issue a stop work order.

B.     Public Nuisance. The City may find a violation of this Code is a public nuisance in violation of City Code.

C.     Mediation. The City and property owner may agree to engage in mediation. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

Division II. Zoning Regulations
Chapter 17-2.1 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
17-2.1.010 Purpose and Classification of Zoning Districts
Chapter 17-2.1 establishes zoning districts, consistent with the City of Molalla Comprehensive Plan. Every unit of land (parcel, lot, and tract) within the City of Molalla is designated with a zoning district or “zone,” and may also be designated with one or more overlay zones. The use of land is limited to the uses allowed by the applicable zone(s). (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.1.020 Classification of Zoning Districts
Zoning designations are as depicted on the City of Molalla Zoning Map. The Planning Official maintains official copies of the Zoning Map and Comprehensive Plan. Where a conflict between documents arises, the Comprehensive Plan shall govern.

A.    Residential (R) Districts (R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-5). Four residential zoning districts are intended to accommodate a mix of residential uses at planned densities, consistent with the housing needs of the City; promote the orderly development and improvement of neighborhoods; facilitate compatibility between dissimilar land uses; allow residences in proximity, and with direct connections, to schools, parks, and community services; and to ensure efficient use of land and public facilities. The following summarizes the purpose of each residential district. See also Chapter 17-2.2 Zoning District Regulations and Chapter 17-2.3 Special Use Standards.

1.     The Residential Low Density (R-1) district permits residential uses at densities between four and eight dwelling units per net buildable acre. Permitted residential uses consist primarily of detached single-family housing and duplex housing subject to special use standards, and community service uses such as churches, schools, and parks.

2.     The Residential Medium Density (R-2) district permits residential uses at densities between six and 12 dwelling units per net buildable acre. Permitted residential uses consist of detached (e.g., single-family and duplex) housing and attached (e.g., townhouse and multifamily) housing. The R-2 district also allows, subject to special use standards, parks, schools, places of worship, and certain community service uses.

3.     The Residential Medium-High Density Residential (R-3) district permits single-family dwellings on small lots, duplex dwellings, and multifamily dwellings. Permitted dwellings include detached housing and attached (e.g., townhouse and multifamily) housing. The R-3 district also permits community service uses such as schools, parks, religious institutions/places of worship; and public and semipublic structures such as fire stations and utilities.

4.     The Historic Residential (R-5) district permits residential uses similar to those permitted in the R-3 district. The R-5 district also allows, subject to special use standards, some commercial and employment uses.

B.     Commercial Districts (C-1 and C-2). Commercial zoning districts accommodate a mix of commercial services, retail, and civic uses, with existing residences permitted to continue, and some new residential uses permitted. Two commercial zoning districts, one for the central commercial/traditional downtown area (C-1, Central Commercial) and one for the general commercial (C-2, General Commercial) area, provide for the full range of commercial land uses within the City. The zoning district regulations are intended to promote the orderly development and improvement of walkable commercial areas; facilitate compatibility between dissimilar land uses; provide employment opportunities in proximity, and with direct connections, to housing; and to ensure efficient use of land and public facilities.

C.     Industrial Districts (M-1 and M-2). Industrial zoning districts accommodate a mix of intensive and less intensive uses engaged in manufacturing, processing, warehousing, distribution, and similar activities. Two industrial zoning districts, one for Light Industry (M-1, Light Industrial) and one for Heavy Industry (M-2, Heavy Industrial) provide for the full range of planned industrial land uses within the City. Both districts are intended to provide for efficient use of land and public services, provide a high quality environment for business, offer a range of parcel sizes and locations for industrial site selection, avoid encroachment by incompatible uses, provide transportation options for employees and customers, and facilitate compatibility between dissimilar uses. The Heavy Industrial district additionally provides suitable locations for intensive industrial uses, such as those with processing, manufacturing, assembly, packaging, distribution, or other activities.

D.    Public Facilities, Semi-Public District (PSP). See also Chapter 17-2.2 Zoning District Regulations and Chapter 17-2.3 Special Use Standards. The Public Facilities, Semi-Public (PSP) district provides for public and semi-public uses, including, but not limited to, schools, government offices, fire stations, police stations, libraries, public works yards, reservoirs, and other public facilities, consistent with adopted public facility master plans. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.1.030 Determination of Zoning District Boundaries
Where due to the scale, lack of scale, lack of detail, or illegibility of the Zoning Map, or due to any other reason, there is uncertainty, contradiction, or conflict as to the intended location of a zoning district boundary, the Planning Official or, upon referral, the Planning Commission or City Council, shall determine the boundary as follows:

A.    Right-of-Way. Boundaries that approximately follow the centerlines of a street, highway, alley, bridge, railroad, or other right-of-way shall be construed to follow such centerlines. Whenever any public right-of-way is lawfully vacated, the lands formerly within the vacated right-of-way shall automatically be subject to the same zoning district designation that is applicable to lands abutting the vacated areas. In cases where the right-of-way formerly served as a zoning district boundary, the vacated lands within the former right-of-way shall be allocated proportionately to the abutting zoning districts.

B.     Parcel, Lot, Tract. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the boundaries of a parcel, lot, or tract shall be construed as following such boundaries.

C.     Jurisdiction Boundary. Boundaries indicated as approximately following a City or County boundary, or the Urban Growth Boundary, shall be construed as following said boundary.

D.    Natural Feature. Boundaries indicated as approximately following a river, stream, topographic contour, or similar feature not corresponding to any feature listed in subsections A through C, shall be construed as following such feature. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

Chapter 17-2.2 ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
17-2.2.010 Purpose
Chapter 17-2.2 regulates allowed land uses (“uses”) and sets forth lot and development standards, including minimum dimensions, area, density, coverage, structure height, and other provisions that control the intensity, scale, and location of development. The regulations of this chapter are intended to implement the City of Molalla Comprehensive Plan and the purposes of this Code, per Section 17-1.2.020. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.2.020 Applicability
All real property in the City of Molalla is subject to the zoning regulations of Chapter 17-2.2. Certain types of land uses are also subject to the Special Use regulations in Chapter 17-2.3. In addition, some properties are subject to both the general (“base zone”) regulations of Chapter 17-2.2 and the Overlay Zone regulations of Chapter 17-2.4. Property owners, realtors, project proponents, and others are advised to verify the regulations that apply to a particular property before beginning a new project, purchasing real estate, or marketing a property for sale. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.2.030 Allowed Uses
A.    Uses Allowed in Base Zones. Allowed uses include those that are permitted, those that are permitted subject to special use standards, and those that are allowed subject to approval of a conditional use permit, as identified by Table 17-2.2.030. Allowed uses fall into four general categories: Residential, Public and Institutional, Commercial, and Other. If Table 17-2.2.030 does not list a specific use, and Division V Definitions does not identify the use or include it as an example of an allowed use, the City may find that use is allowed, or is not allowed, by following the procedures of Section 17-1.5.010 Code Interpretations. Uses not listed in Table 17-2.2.030 and not found to be similar to an allowed use are prohibited.

B.     Permitted Uses and Uses Permitted Subject to Special Use Standards. Uses listed as “Permitted (P)” are allowed provided they conform to Section 17-2.2.040 Lot and Development Standards. Uses listed as “Permitted Subject to Special Use Standards (S)” are allowed, provided they conform to the Chapter 17-2.3 Special Use Standards and Section 17-2.2.040 Lot and Development Standards. Uses listed as “Not Allowed (N)” are prohibited. Uses not listed but similar to those allowed may be permitted pursuant to Section 17-1.5.010.

C.     Conditional Uses. Uses listed as “Conditional Use Permit Required (CU)” are allowed subject to the requirements of Chapter 17-4.4 Conditional Use Permits.

D.    Uses Regulated by Overlay Zones. Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 17-2.2, additional standards may apply to uses within overlay zones. In addition, an overlay zone may allow exceptions to some standards of the underlying zone. See Chapter 17-2.4.

E.     Master Planned Developments. Uses that are not otherwise allowed by the underlying zone may be permitted through the Master Planned Development procedure under Chapter 17-4.8.

F.     Accessory Uses. Uses identified as “Permitted (P)” are permitted as primary uses and as accessory uses. For information on other uses that are customarily allowed as accessory, please refer to the description of the Use Categories in Division V Definitions.

G.    Mixed-Use. Uses allowed individually are also allowed in combination with one another, in the same structure, or on the same site, provided all applicable development standards and building code requirements are met.

H.    Outdoor Uses and Unenclosed Activities. Notwithstanding the provisions of Table 17-2.2.030, any use, except for an allowed accessory use, that occurs primarily outside (i.e., not within a permitted building) requires a Conditional Use Permit under Chapter 17-4.4. Examples of outdoor uses and unenclosed activities that may or may not be considered accessory uses, depending on their location and size relative to other uses on the same property, include, but are not limited to, automotive services, vehicle and equipment repair, fueling, drive-in restaurants, drive-up windows and similar drive-through facilities, automatic teller machines, kiosks, outdoor assembly and theaters, outdoor markets, and similar uses.

I.      Temporary Uses. Temporary uses occur for not longer than 45 days, in any calendar year. Uses may be permitted on a temporary basis, subject to review and approval under Chapter 17-4.2 Site Design Review. Special Use Standards listed in Chapter 17.2.3 may also apply to temporary uses.

J.      Disclaimer. Property owners are responsible for verifying whether a specific use is allowed on a particular site. Submittal of a Zoning Checklist for review and approval by the Planning Official shall be required in order to determine whether a use is allowed on a given site, and whether further land use review is required.

 

Table 17-2.2.030 Uses Allowed by Zoning District

Key:

        P = Permitted Use

        S = Permitted with Special Use Standards

        CU = Conditional Use Permit Required

        N = Not Allowed

 

 

Uses

Residential Zones

Commercial Zones and Industrial Zones

Public Use

Special Use Standards

 

R-1

R-2

R-3

R-5

C-1

C-2

M-1

M-2

PSP

 

A. Residential Uses

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Single-Family Dwelling, Non-Attached

P

P

P

P

N

N

N

N

N

 

Single-Family Dwelling, Attached (Townhome)

CU

S

S

S

CU

N

N

N

N

Ch. 17-2.3

Accessory Dwellings

S

S

S

S

S

S

N

N

S

Ch. 17-2.3

Boarding or Rooming House

CU

P

P

N

P

P

N

N

N

 

Duplex Dwelling on Corner Lot

S

S

S

S

N

N

N

N

N

Ch. 17-2.3

Duplex Dwelling on Interior Lot

S

S

S

S

N

N

N

N

N

Ch. 17-2.3

Golf Course

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

CU

 

Manufactured Home

S

S

S

S

N

N

N

N

N

Ch. 17-2.3

Manufactured Dwelling Park

N

N

S

N

N

N

N

N

N

Ch. 17-2.3

Multifamily Dwelling

N

S

S

S

S

S

N

N

N

Ch. 17-2.3

Family Daycare

S

S

S

S

S

S

N

N

N

Ch. 17-2.3

Residential Care Home

S

S

S

S

S

N

N

N

N

Ch. 17-2.3

Residential Care Facility

N

S

S

S

S

S

N

N

N

Ch. 17-2.3

Senior Housing

P

P

P

P

P

P

N

N

N

 

Home Occupation

S

S

S

S

S

S

N

N

N

Ch. 17-2.3

Micro-Generation; wind, solar, or geothermal energy (household use)

P

P

P

P

P

P

N

N

N

 

Cottage Cluster Housing

S

S

S

S

S

S

N

N

N

Ch. 17-2.3

Single-family, Duplex, or Multifamily above Commercial Use

N

N

N

N

P/S

P/S

N

N

N

 

B. Public and Institutional Uses

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cemetery, including Crematorium

CU

CU

CU

CU

CU

CU

CU

CU

CU

 

Child Daycare Center

CU

CU

CU

CU

P

P

CU

CU

N

 

Club Lodge, Fraternal Organization (Does not include those having a chief activity carried on for monetary gain)

N

N

CU

CU

P

CU

CU

CU

N

 

Community Service; includes Governmental Offices

CU

CU

CU

CU

P

P

CU

N

P

 

Community Garden

P

P

P

P

P

P

N

N

P

 

News Stands

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

Emergency Services; includes Police, Fire, Ambulance

CU

CU

CU

CU

CU

CU

CU

P

P

 

Hospital, including Acute Care Center

N

N

CU

N

CU

CU

CU

CU

N

 

Non-Profit Member Organization Offices

N

N

CU

N

P

P

CU

N

N

 

Public Parks and Open Space, including Playgrounds, Trails, Nature Preserves, Athletic Fields, Courts, and similar uses

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

Public Works Utilities Storage Yards; includes Vehicle and Equipment Storage, Maintenance, and Repair

N

N

N

N

N

N

CU

P

CU

 

Railroad Facilities

N

N

N

N

N

N

CU

P

N

 

Religious Institutions and Houses of Worship

CU

CU

CU

CU

CU

CU

CU

N

N

 

School, Preschool-Kindergarten, Primary

CU

CU

CU

CU

CU

N

N

N

P

 

School, Secondary

CU

CU

CU

CU

CU

N

CU

N

P

 

School, College or Vocational

CU

CU

CU

CU

P

CU

CU

N

P

 

Solid Waste Disposal or Recycling, except as accessory to permitted use

N

N

N

N

N

N

CU

CU

N

 

Transportation Facilities; includes construction, operation, and maintenance of facilities located within right-of-way controlled by a public agency, consistent with the Transportation System Plan / Comprehensive Plan.

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

Utility Structures and Facilities, City Planned Projects; i.e., utilities identified by an adopted City master plan or development review approval

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

Utility Structures and Facilities, Regional Projects; project is not part of an adopted City master plan or development review approval

CU

CU

CU

CU

CU

CU

CU

CU

CU

 

Wireless Communication Facilities

CU/S

CU/S

CU/S

CU/S

CU/S

CU/S

CU/S

CU/S

CU/S

Ch. 17-2.3

C. Commercial Uses

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Amusement, Entertainment, and Commercial Recreation; includes theaters, bowling alleys, miniature golf, concert venues, arcades, similar uses

N

N

N

N

P

CU

CU

N

CU

 

Artisanal and Light Manufacture Uses in Commercial zones – includes craftsman studios; and uses providing instruction and/or retail sales related to painting, sculpting, photography, picture framing, knitting, sewing, literature, theater, music, specialty foods or catering, or similar uses

N

N

N

N

S

S

N

N

N

Ch. 17-2.3

Automobile Parking, Commercial Parking

N

N

N

N

CU

CU

CU

P

CU

 

Automotive Repair and Service, includes fueling station, car wash, tire sales and repair or replacement, painting, and other repair for automobiles, motorcycles, aircraft, boats, RVs, trucks, etc. (No junking, salvage operations)

N

N

N

N

N

P

P

P

N

 

Automotive Sales and Rental; includes motorcycles, boats, recreational vehicles, and trucks (No junking, salvage operations)

N

N

N

N

N

CU

CU

N

N

 

Bars and Taverns (those established after 2010 shall not be located within 500 feet of another bar or tavern)

N

N

N

N

CU

CU

CU

N

N

 

Bed and Breakfast Inn

N

S/CU

S/CU

S/CU

S/CU

N

N

N

N

Ch. 17-2.3

Breweries, Distilleries and Wineries (Small Scale)

N

N

N

N

S

S

S

S

N

Ch. 17-2.3

Commercial Retail Sales and Services

N

N

N

N

P

P

N

N

N

 

Commercial Retail Sales and Services, in Conjunction with a Permitted Industrial Use, as an accessory use

N

N

N

N

N

P

P

P

N

 

Customer Call Center

N

N

N

N

P

P

P

CU

N

 

Drive-Through Service, accessory to primary use, not including restaurants

N

N

N

N

N

S/CU

N

N

N

Ch. 17-2.3

Hotels, Motels, and Similar Overnight Accommodations

N

N

N

N

P

P

N

N

N

 

Kennel (See also “Veterinary Clinic”)

N

N

N

N

N

N

P

P

N

 

Lumber Yard and Similar Sales of Building or Contracting Supplies, or Heavy Equipment

N

N

N

N

N

N

P

P

N

 

Medical Clinic, Outpatient

N

N

N

N

P

P

N

N

N

 

Medical or Recreational Marijuana Dispensary

N

N

N

N

S

S

N

N

N

 

Mobile Food Units, Permanent

N

N

N

N

S

S

S

N

N

Ch. 17-2.3

Mobile Food Units, Temporary

N

N

N

N

N

S

S

S

N

Ch. 17-2.3

Offices

N

N

N

N

P

P

P

CU

N

 

Recreational Vehicle Park

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

 

Self-Service Storage, Commercial

N

N

N

N

N

P

P

CU

N

 

Veterinary Clinic (small animal)

N

N

N

P

P

P

P

P

N

 

D. Industrial and Employment Uses

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Artisanal and Light Manufacture Uses in Industrial Zones

N

N

N

N

N

N

S

S

N

Ch. 17-2.3

Auction Yard

N

N

N

N

N

N

CU

CU

N

 

Beverage and Bottling Facility, except as allowed for Commercial Uses

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

CU

N

 

Bulk Storage of Flammable Liquids or Gases; Petroleum Products Storage and Distribution; Wood or Biomass Fuel Dealers

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

CU

N

 

Cement, Glass, Clay, and Stone Products Manufacture; except as allowed for Artisanal and Light Manufacture Uses

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

CU

N

 

Chemical, Fertilizer, Insecticide, Paint Product Manufacture, or Similar Uses

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

CU

N

 

Concrete or Asphalt Batch Plants

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

CU

N

 

Dairy Products Manufacture, e.g., Butter, Milk, Cheese, Ice Cream; except as allowed for Artisanal and Light Manufacture Uses

N

N

N

N

N

N

CU

CU

N

 

Data Center or Server Farm

N

N

N

N

N

N

CU

CU

N

 

Dwelling for a caretaker or watchman

N

N

N

N

N

N

CU

CU

N

 

Finished Textile and Leather Products Manufacture; except as allowed for Artisanal and Light Manufacture Uses

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

P

N

 

Food Processing, including Canning, Freezing, Drying and Similar Food Processing and Preserving; except as allowed for Artisanal and Light Manufacture Uses. Rendering Plants are prohibited.

N

N

N

N

N

N

CU

P

N

 

Freight Terminals, including Loading Docks, Storage, Warehousing, Wholesale Distribution, Cold Storage; except Self-service Storage or Mini-storage Warehouses

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

P

N

 

Machine Shop, and Sales, Service and Repair of Machinery; except as allowed for Artisanal and Light Manufacture Uses. Must be wholly enclosed in buildings.

N

N

N

N

C-1

CU

CU

P

N

 

Medical Marijuana Producers, Marijuana Producers, Marijuana Processors and Marijuana Wholesalers

N

N

N

N

N

N

S

S

N

 

Metal Plating

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

P

N

 

Metal Manufacture, Welding; except as allowed for Artisanal and Light Manufacture Uses

N

N

N

N

N

N

CU

P

N

 

Newspaper, Periodical, Publishing and Printing; except Artisanal and Light Manufacture Uses

N

N

N

N

N

N

P

P

N

 

Special Trade Contracting Facilities, such as Floor Laying, Masonry, Stone, Plumbing, Electrical, Metal Work, Roofing, Heating and Air Conditioning, Cabinet making, and Carpentry

N

N

N

N

N

N

CU

P

N

 

Wood Products Manufacture, such as Sawmills, Paper and Allied Products, and Secondary Wood Products; except Artisanal and Light Manufacture Uses

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

CU

N

 

Wrecking, Demolition, Junk Yards, Recycling Centers

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

CU

N

 

(Ord. 2020-10 §3; Ord. 2018-13 §2; Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.2.040 Lot and Development Standards
A.    Development Standards. Section 17-2.2.040 provides the general lot and development standards for each of the City’s base zoning districts. The standards of Section 17-2.2.040 are organized into two tables: Table 17-2.2.040.D applies to residential zones, and Table 17-2.2.040.E applies to non-residential zones.

B.     Design Standards. City standards for Access, Circulation, Site and Building Design, Parking, Landscaping, Fences and Screening, and Public Improvements, among others, are located in Division III. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 17-2.2.040 and Division III, different standards may apply in specific locations, such as at street intersections, within overlay zones, adjacent to natural features, and other areas as may be regulated by this Code or subject to state or federal requirements. For requirements applicable to the City’s overlay zones, please refer to Chapter 17-2.4.

C.     Disclaimer. Property owners are responsible for verifying whether a proposed development meets the applicable standards of this Code. Submittal of a Zoning Checklist for review and approval by the Planning Official may be required in order to determine whether use is allowed on a given site, and whether further land use review is required.

D.    Lot and Development Standards for Residential Districts. The development standards in Table 17-2.2.040.D apply to all new development as of November 10, 2017 in residential zones.

 

Table 17-2.2.040.D Lot and Development Standards for Residential Zones



Standard

R-1 

R-2 

R-3

R-5 

Residential Density 

Min 4 DU and a Max 8 DU 

Min 6 DU and a Max 12 DU 

Min 8 DU and a Max 24 DU 

Min 6 DU and a Max 24 DU 

Minimum Lot Area (square feet) Single-Family, not attached

5,000 

3,600 

3,000 

3,000 

Minimum Lot Area (square feet) Single-Family, common-wall dwellings

2,500

2,200 

2,200 

2,200 

Minimum Lot Area (square feet) Duplex (per duplex)

6,000 

5,800 

4,500 

4,500 

Minimum Lot Area (square feet) Multifamily (per unit)

NA

3,000 

2,000 

1,500 

Minimum Lot Area (square feet) Non-Residential Uses

2,500 

2,500 

2,500 

2,500 

Minimum Lot Width

 



 

Single-Family, Not Attached:

 

 

 

 

Corner Lot

60 ft

50 ft

48 ft

48 ft

Interior Lot

50 ft

46 ft

44 ft

44 ft

Single-Family, Attached or Common Wall:

 

 

 

 

Corner Lot

25 ft

25 ft

25 ft

25 ft

Interior Lot

25 ft

22 ft

22 ft

22 ft

Duplex

60 ft

56 ft

56 ft

50 ft

Multifamily (3 or more dwelling units on a lot, where allowed)

NA

80 ft

80 ft

80 ft

Non-Residential Uses

60 ft

60 ft

50 ft

50 ft

Minimum Lot Depth

 

 

 

 

Single-Family, Not Attached, Duplex, and Non-Residential Uses

80 ft

80 ft

80 ft

80 ft

Single-Family Attached or Common Wall, Corner or Interior Lot

NA

60 ft

60 ft

60 ft

Multifamily

NA

NA

NA

NA

Street frontage width may be less than minimum lot width where Flag Lots are allowed, per Section 17-4.3.050.

 

 

 

 

Building or Structure Height. See also Sections 17-2.2.050 Setback Yard Exceptions, 17-2.2.080 Height Measurement, Exceptions, and Transitions, 17-3.3.030.G Vision Clearance, and 17-3.4.040 Fences and Walls.

30 ft

40 ft

45 ft

35 ft

Fences and Non-Building Walls

 

 

 

 

Max. Height. – Front Yard

4 ft

4 ft

4 ft

4 ft

Max. Height. – Interior Side

6 ft

6 ft

6 ft

6 ft

Max. Height – Rear Yard

6 ft

6 ft

6 ft

6 ft

Max. Height – Street-Side; or Reverse Frontage Lot (rear)

6 ft

6 ft

6 ft

6 ft

(See also Section 17-3.4.040.)

 

 

 

 

Lot Coverage. Maximum Lot Coverage (foundation plane area as % of site area)

 

 

 

 

Single-Family, Not Attached

40%

50%

50%

50%

Single-Family, Attached/Common Wall

60%

70%

70%

70%

Duplex

60%

60%

75%

75%

Multifamily or Cottage Cluster

60%

60%

80%

80%

Nonresidential Uses

60%

60%

60%

60%

The Planning Official, subject to review through a Type II procedure, may approve an adjustment to the lot coverage standards, above, pursuant to Section 17-2.2.070.

Minimum Landscape Area (% lot area). Landscape area may include plant areas and some non-plant areas as allowed under Section 17-3.4.030.

20%

20%

20%

20%

Minimum Setbacks (feet). See also Sections 17-2.2.050 Setback Yard Exceptions, 17-2.2.080 Height Measurement, Exceptions, and Transition, 17-3.3.030.G Vision Clearance, and 17-3.4.040 Fences and Walls.

Front and Street-Side Setback Yards

 

 

 

 

Standard Setback

10 ft

10 ft

10 ft

10 ft

Garage or Carport Opening

16 ft

16 ft

16 ft

16 ft

Porch or Similar Open Structure (e.g., balcony, portico, patio, wall) where structure is less than 50% enclosed. Porch steps are exempt from measurement.

5 ft

5 ft

5 ft

5 ft

Accessory structure (must be set back equal to the front setback but shall not project in front of the primary structure)

15 ft

15 ft

15 ft

15 ft

Exception (0 ft for wheelchair ramp)

 

 

 

 

Interior Side Setback Yards

 

 

 

 

Structure >24′ height (total of 2 interior sides, with no setback yard less than 3 ft)

15 ft

10 ft

10 ft

10 ft

Structure 12′-24′ height (total of 2 interior sides, with no setback yard less than 3 ft)

10 ft

10 ft

10 ft

10 ft

Structure </=12′ height (total of 2 interior sides, with no setback yard less than 3 ft)

6 ft

10 ft

10 ft

10 ft

Garage or Carport Opening, except alley

20 ft

20 ft

20 ft

20 ft

Exceptions:

 

 

 

 

Alley

5 ft

5 ft

5 ft

5 ft

Porch or Similar Open Structure (e.g., balcony, wheelchair ramp, portico, patio, wall) where structure is less than 50% enclosed

5 ft

5 ft

5 ft

5 ft

Common Walls or Zero Lot Line Developments

N/A

0 ft one side;
8 ft other side

0 ft one side;
6 ft other side

0 ft one side;
8 ft other side

Note: Always locate utilities and utility easements before construction.

Rear Setback Yard

 

 

 

 

Structure >24′ height

15 ft

15 ft

15 ft

15 ft

Structure 12′-24′ height

10 ft

10 ft

10 ft

10 ft

Structure <12′ height

5 ft

5 ft

5 ft

5 ft

Garage or Carport Opening, except alley

20 ft

20 ft

20 ft

20 ft

Exceptions:

 

 

 

 

Alley

5 ft

5 ft

5 ft

5 ft

Porch or Similar Open Structure (e.g., balcony, portico, patio wall) where structure is <50% enclosed

5 ft

5 ft

5 ft

5 ft

Common Walls or Zero Lot Line

3 ft

3 ft

3 ft

3 ft

Build-To Line Maximum (feet):

Applies to New Buildings Only, except does not apply to detached single-family dwelling:

1) At least one primary building entrance shall be built no farther from the street right-of-way than the build-to line; except that where a greater setback is required for a Planned Street Improvement, the build-to line increases proportionately.

2) The City may also approve exceptions to the build-to line through Site Design Review where pedestrian amenities are provided between a primary building entrance and the street right-of-way. (See also Section 17-3.2.050 Civic Space and Pedestrian Amenities.)

Not Applicable

20 ft; may be increased when pedestrian amenities are provided between a primary building entrance and street

20 ft; may be increased when pedestrian amenities are provided between a primary building entrance and street

20 ft; may be increased when pedestrian amenities are provided between a primary building entrance and street

Special Setback for Planned Street Improvements: New structures or additions on lots abutting an existing public street that do not meet the minimum standards of Section 17-3.6.020 for right-of-way width shall provide setbacks sufficient to allow for the future widening of the right-of-way, plus the minimum required yard setback. Building permits shall not be issued for new structures or additions that do not meet this standard unless a variance is approved.

 

E.     Lot and Development Standards for Non-Residential Districts. The development standards in Table 17-2.2.040.E apply to all new development as of November 10, 2017 in the City’s non-residential zones, as follows.

 

Table 17-2.2.040.E Lot and Development Standards for Non-Residential Zones

(Except as provided by 17-4.3.050, Chapter 17-4.7 Adjustments and Variances, or as approved under Chapter 17-4.8 Master Planned Developments.)

 

 

Standard

C Zones

I Zones

PSP

Minimum Lot Area (square feet) *Development must conform to lot width, depth, yard setback, and coverage standards.

None

None

None

Minimum Lot Width and Depth

None

None

None

Building and Structure Height

 

 

 

Standard maximum height

55 ft

55 ft

55 ft

*[Height Increase. The City may increase the standard height, above, for specific projects with approval of a Conditional Use Permit (CUP), per Chapter 17-4.4.]

Yes

Yes

Yes

Fences and Non-Building Walls

 

Same as for C zones, except where City requires screens

Maximum Height – Front Yard

4 ft

Maximum Height – Interior Side

6 ft

Maximum Height – Rear Yard

6 ft

Maximum Height – Street-Side or Reverse Frontage Lot (rear)

4 ft, or 6 ft with 5 ft landscape buffer

(See also Section 17-3.4.040.)

Lot Coverage. Maximum Lot Coverage (foundation plane as % of site area)

100%

100%

NA

Minimum Landscape Area (% site area), includes required parking lot landscaping and any required screening. This standard does not apply to individual, detached single-family dwellings. Landscape area may include street trees and civic space improvements in some zones, per Sections 17-3.2.050 and 17-3.4.030.

5%

5%

10%

 

Table 2.2.040.E Lot and Development Standards for Non-Residential Zones

(Except as provided by 17-4.3.050, Chapter 17-4.7 Adjustments and Variances, or as approved under Chapter 17-4.8 Master Planned Developments.)

 

 

Standard

C Zones

I Zones

PSP

Minimum Setback Yards (feet): (See also Section 17-2.2.050)

 

 

 

Front, Street-Side, Interior Side, and Rear property lines, except garage or carport, or as required by other code provisions

0 ft

0 ft

0 ft

Garage or Carport Entry, set back from street

20 ft

20 ft

20 ft

Alley

3 ft

3 ft

3 ft

Adjacent to R Districts

10 ft

10 ft

10 ft

Build-To Line (feet):

New Buildings Only: At least one primary building entrance shall be built no farther from the street right-of-way than the build-to line; except where a greater setback is required for a Planned Street Improvement, then the build-to line increases proportionately. The build-to line may also be increased through Site Design Review when pedestrian amenities are provided between a primary building entrance and the street right-of-way. To avoid encroachment into the right-of-way, doorways are not required to be flush with the build-to line.

0 ft; may be increased when pedestrian amenities are provided between a primary building entrance and street

Not Applicable

Special Setback for Planned Street Improvements: Except as waived by the City Engineer, new structures or additions on lots abutting an existing public street that does not meet the right-of-way standards of Section 17-3.6.020, shall provide setbacks sufficient to allow for the future planned right-of-way, plus the minimum required yard setback.

Note: Always locate utilities and utility easements before construction.

(Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.2.050 Setback Yards Exceptions
A.    Encroachments.

1.     Except as otherwise restricted by applicable building codes, building elements such as eaves, chimneys, bay windows, overhangs, heating, cooling and ventilation systems, and similar incidental structures, may extend into the required setback yards by no more than 36 inches, provided that a setback of not less than 36 inches is maintained, all applicable building codes are met, and the vision clearance standards in Section 17-3.3.030.G are met.

2.     Porches, decks, patios, steps and similar features not exceeding 30 inches in height may encroach into setbacks, provided a minimum setback of not less than 36 inches is maintained and all applicable building codes are met.

3.     Fences may be placed within setback yards, subject to the standards of Sections 17-2.2.040, 17-2.2.050, and 17-3.4.040.

B.     Reverse Frontage Lots. Buildings on reverse-frontage lots (through lots) are required to meet the build-to line standard on only one street. Reverse frontage lots are subject to the fence height and setback requirements of Sections 17-2.2.040 and 17-2.2.050, and the design standards (e.g., materials and landscape buffer requirements) of Section 17-3.4.040.

C.     Flag Lots. Where a flag lot is proposed, the Planning Official shall designate the front yard of a flag lot to ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses, based on existing development patterns and location of adjacent driveways, utilities, and natural features, as either:

1.     Front yard parallel to the street providing automobile access; or

2.     Front yard parallel to the flagpole from which driveway access is received.

Flag lots shall comply with Section 17-4.3.050. The City may impose reasonable conditions to ensure flag lot development is compatible with adjacent uses. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.2.060 Residential Density Standards
To ensure efficient use of buildable lands and to provide for a range of needed housing in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan, all new developments in the residential districts shall conform to the minimum and maximum densities prescribed in Table 17-2.2.040.D, except as provided below in subsections A through E:

A.    Residential care homes and facilities, senior housing, accessory dwellings, and subdivisions where the average slope exceeds 15 percent are exempt from the minimum density standard.

B.     The density standards may be averaged over more than one development phase (i.e., as in a master planned development). Duplex lots used to comply with the density standard shall be so designated on the final subdivision plat. Density standards shall be listed in conditions of approval to ensure proposed density is met.

C.     Partitions and construction of single-family homes on lots exceeding 20,000 square feet shall be located and constructed so that future division of such lots can occur and planned public facilities can be extended based on the minimum lot size and other applicable City standards.

D.    Minimum and maximum housing densities are calculated by multiplying the total net buildable area by the applicable density standard. Net buildable area is defined as the area of a site for residential or non-residential development, excluding street rights-of-way and other publicly dedicated improvements such as parks, open space, and stormwater detention and retention facilities. “Net buildable area” is expressed either in acres or square feet.

E.     Areas reserved for flag lot access (flag poles) are not counted for the purpose of calculating density. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.2.070 Lot Coverage
Lot Coverage Calculation. The maximum allowable lot coverage, as provided in Tables 17-2.2.040.D and 17-2.2.040.E, and is calculated as the percentage of a lot or parcel covered by buildings and structures (as defined by the foundation plan area) at 30 inches or greater above the finished grade. It does not include paved surface-level developments such as driveways, steps, parking pads, and patios that do not meet the minimum elevation of 30 inches above grade. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.2.080 Height Measurement, Exceptions, and Transition
A.    Building Height Measurement. Building height is measured pursuant to the State of Oregon Structural Specialty Code.

B.     Exception from Maximum Building Height Standards. Except as required pursuant to Federal Aviation Administration regulations, chimneys, bell towers, steeples, roof equipment, flag poles, and similar features not for human occupancy are exempt from the maximum building heights, provided that all applicable fire and building codes are met. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

Chapter 17-2.3 SPECIAL USE STANDARDS
17-2.3.010 Purpose
Special uses included in Chapter 17-2.3 are uses which, due to their effect on surrounding properties, must be developed in accordance with special conditions and standards. These special use standards may differ from the development standards established for other uses in the same zoning district. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.3.020 Applicability
All uses designated as Special (“S”) Uses in Table 17-2.2.030, and uses the City determines to be similar to such uses, are subject to the standards of Chapter 17-2.3. The standards of this chapter supplement the other requirements of this Code. When a dimensional standard for a special use differs from that of the underlying district, the standard for the special use shall apply. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.3.030 Review Process
The City uses the procedures for Site Design Review, under Chapter 17-4.2, in reviewing proposed uses for compliance with the requirements of Chapter 17-2.3. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.3.040 Artisanal and Light Manufacture Uses
A.    Purpose. The following provisions are intended to encourage mixed-use development, including cottage industries and business incubators, by integrating small-scale manufacturing with commercial uses. For the purposes of this section, artisanal uses are those that blend manufacturing and retail uses such as brewpubs, winery tasting rooms, artist studios, cabinet makers, and similar uses, on the same site.

B.     Applicability. The following standards apply where manufacturing uses are allowed in commercial zones and where retail uses are allowed in industrial zones. The standards are applied through Site Design Review or Conditional Use Permit review, as applicable.

C.     Standards.

1.     Where a manufacturing use is allowed in a commercial zone, it shall be permitted only in conjunction with a primary commercial use.

2.     Where a manufacturing use is allowed in a commercial zone, it shall be wholly enclosed in a building, unless unenclosed operations are authorized by a Conditional Use Permit.

3.     Where a manufacturing use is allowed in a commercial zone and the subject site is located within 100 feet of a residential zone, the City may limit the hours of operation of the commercial or industrial uses to between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. where it has identified concerns about noise, parking, or other impacts related to the use.

4.     Where a commercial use is allowed in an industrial zone, it shall be permitted only in conjunction with the primary industrial use and shall not exceed the floor area of the primary industrial use. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.3.050 Drive-Through Service
Drive-through service uses shall comply with the design standards of Section 17-3.2.060. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.3.060 Duplex Dwellings
A.    Purpose. The following provisions are intended to promote compatibility between duplex dwellings and single-family dwellings in the R zones.

B.     Applicability. The following standards apply where a duplex is proposed adjacent to a single-family dwelling where the duplex lot and single-family lot share a common property line. The standards are applied through a Type I Zoning Checklist review procedure, prior to submittal of building plans to the Building Official.

C.     Standards. Where new duplex construction is proposed the duplex shall meet all of the following standards:

1.     The duplex, if located on a corner lot and containing two garages, shall have each garage entrance orient to a different street or alley.

2.     The duplex shall have no blank wall oriented to a street. This standard is met if any elevation facing a street is composed of not less than 30 percent windows and door surface area. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.3.070 Townhomes, Attached Single-Family Dwellings
A.    Purpose. The following provisions are intended to promote a compatible building scale where attached single-family dwellings are proposed, while minimizing the impact of garages along street fronts and creating a streetscape that is conducive to walking.

 

B.     Applicability. The following standards apply to new attached single-family dwellings. The standards are applied through Zoning Checklist review, pursuant to Section 17-4.1.020, prior to issuance of building permits.

C.     Standards. Where attached single-family dwellings are proposed, the structure(s) shall meet all of the following standards:

1.     Each building shall contain not more than four consecutively attached dwelling units and not exceed an overall length or width of 100 feet.

2.     The primary entrance of each dwelling unit shall orient to a street or an interior courtyard that is not less than 24 feet in width.

3.     Where the subject site is served by an existing or planned alley, vehicle access shall be from the alley and all garage entrances shall orient to the alley.

4.     The development standards of Chapter 17-2.2 and the building and site design standards of Division III shall be met. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.3.080 Multifamily Development
A.    Purpose. The following standards are intended to ensure that multifamily developments are planned with adequate open space and are designed to prevent conflicts between residential uses, on-site recreation, and vehicle circulation and parking areas. The standards supplement the design standards of Division III.

B.     Applicability. This section applies to new multifamily developments.

C.     Standards.

1.     Common Open Space and Landscaping. A minimum of 15 percent of the site area in in a multifamily development shall be designated and permanently reserved as common area or open space, in accordance with all of the following criteria:

a.     “Site area” for the purposes of this section is defined as the subject lot or lots after subtracting any required dedication of street right-of-way.

b.     The common area or open space shall contain one or more of the following: outdoor recreation area, tree grove (e.g., existing mature trees), turf play fields or playgrounds, sports courts, swim pool, walking fitness course, natural area with picnic benches, or similar open space amenities as appropriate for the intended residents.

c.     In order to be counted as eligible toward the minimum open space area, such areas shall have dimensions of not less than 20 feet.

d.     Open space and common areas not containing recreational facilities shall be landscaped.

e.     Buildings located in the C-1 zone are exempt from this section.

2.     Private Open Space. Private open space areas shall be required for dwelling units based on the following criteria:

a.     A minimum of 40 percent of all ground-floor dwelling units shall have front or rear patios or decks containing at least 48 square feet of usable area. Ground floor housing means the housing unit entrance (front or rear) is within five feet of the finished ground elevation (i.e., after grading and landscaping). This section does not apply to buildings within the C-1 zone.

b.     A minimum of 40 percent of all upper-floor housing units shall have balconies or porches containing at least 48 square feet of usable area. Upper-floor housing means housing units with a first floor elevation that is more than five feet above the finished grade.

3.     Building Orientation and Design, Access and Circulation, Landscaping and Screening, Parking and Loading, and Public Facilities. The standards of Chapters 17-3.2 through 17-3.6 shall be met.

4.     Trash Storage. Trash receptacles, recycling, and storage facilities shall be oriented away from building entrances, set back at least 10 feet from any public right-of-way and adjacent residences, and shall be screened with an evergreen hedge or solid fence or wall of not less than six feet in height. Receptacles must be accessible to trash pick-up trucks. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.3.090 Dwellings in Commercial and Industrial Zones
A.    Purpose. This section provides standards for residential uses in the C-1, C-2 and M-1, M-2 zones.

B.     Applicability. This section applies to dwellings in the C-1, C-2 and M-1, M-2 zones.

C.     Standards. Residential uses in the C-1, C-2 and M-1, M-2 zones shall conform to all of the following standards:

1.     New residential uses shall not be located in a ground building floor space in the C-1 zone along Highway 211.

2.     Single-family dwellings lawfully existing as of November 10, 2017 may continue as permitted uses; and in the event of involuntary damage or destruction due to fire or other event beyond the owner’s control, such single-family use may be rebuilt and reestablished pursuant to Section 17-2.030 and applicable building codes. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.3.100 Family Daycare
Family daycare uses are limited to on-site care for not more than 16 children, and shall conform to the state licensing requirements and standards under ORS 657A.250 and ORS 657A.440(4). Family daycare uses must also have a current City of Molalla business license. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.3.110 Residential Care Homes and Residential Care Facilities
Residential care homes and residential care facilities, where allowed, shall conform to all of the following standards and procedures. Residential care facilities are not the same as acute care facilities, which are classified as community service uses, and they are not the same as senior housing facilities that provide limited or no medical care, which are classified as multifamily housing.

A.    Licensing and State Requirements. Residential care homes and residential care facilities shall be licensed by the State of Oregon and comply with state requirements, pursuant to ORS 197.660 through 197.670.

B.     Residential Care Homes. Residential care homes may provide residential care alone, or in conjunction with treatment or training, for five or fewer individuals who need not be related. Staff required to meet state licensing requirements is not counted in the number of facility residents and need not be related to each other or the residents. The same Development Code standards that apply to single-family dwellings also apply to residential care homes, except where state law supersedes City standards.

C.     Residential Care Facilities. Residential care facilities may provide residential care alone, or in conjunction with treatment or training, for between six and 15 individuals who need not be related. Staff required to meet state licensing requirements is not counted in the number of facility residents and need not be related to each other or the residents. The same Development Code standards that apply to multifamily dwellings also apply to residential care homes, except where state law supersedes City standards.

D.    Access. The access and circulation standards of Chapter 17-3.3 shall be met.

E.     Parking. The parking standards of Chapter 17-3.5 shall be met.

F.     Landscaping. Residential care facilities are required to comply with the landscaping and screening standards of Chapter 17-3.4. The City may require the installation of a landscape hedge or fence on the property line separating a residential care facility from an abutting lot containing a single-family dwelling for the purposes of visual screening and privacy between uses. The landscaping standards do not apply to building permits for individual residential care homes.

G.    Building Design Standards. Residential care facilities are required to comply with the building orientation and design standards for multifamily housing, pursuant to Chapter 17-3.2; except where a state requirement conflicts with a City standard, the state requirement, not the City standard, shall apply. The building design standards do not apply to residential care homes.

H.    Review Procedure. Residential care homes are subject to review and approval through a Type I Zoning Checklist review procedure under Section 17-4.1.020 prior to issuance of building permits. Residential care facilities are subject to a Type III (public hearing) review and approval under Section 17-4.1.040. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.3.120 Home Occupations
A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to encourage those who are engaged in small commercial ventures that could not necessarily be sustained if it were necessary to lease commercial quarters, or which by the nature of the venture are appropriate in scale and impact to be operated within a residence.

B.     Applicability. This section applies to home occupation uses in residential zones. A home-based business in a commercial zone is considered a commercial use and is not subject to the standards of this section.

C.     Home Occupation in Residential Zones. Home occupations of less than 1,000 square feet of lot area are permitted, provided the owner completes a Zoning Checklist and obtains a City of Molalla business license. Home occupations greater than 1,000 square feet of lot area are allowed, subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit. For the purpose of this section, “lot area” includes building floor area, areas within accessory structures, and all other portions of a lot.

D.    Home Occupation Standards. Home occupations shall conform to all of the standards below, except the City may approve adjustments to the standards through the Conditional Use Permit approval, provided all uses and structures on the subject property conform to applicable City regulations, including, but not limited to, building codes and nuisance regulations.

1.     Appearance of Residence.

a.     The home occupation shall be restricted to lawfully built enclosed structures and be conducted in such a manner as not to give an outward appearance of a business.

b.     The home occupation shall not result in any structural alterations or additions to a structure that will change its primary use or building code occupancy classification.

c.     The home occupation shall not violate any conditions of development approval (i.e., prior land use development permit or approval).

d.     No products or equipment produced or used by the home occupation may be displayed to be visible from outside any structure.

2.     Storage.

a.     Outside storage visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent properties that exceeds what is customary for a single-family residence in the vicinity is prohibited.

b.     On-site storage of hazardous materials (including toxic, explosive, noxious, combustible, or flammable material) beyond those normally incidental to residential use is prohibited.

c.     Storage of inventory or products and all other equipment, fixtures, and activities associated with the home occupation shall be enclosed in a structure or otherwise screened from view from adjacent properties and public right-of-way.

3.     Employees.

a.     Other than people residing within the dwelling located on the home occupation site, there shall be no more than two employees at the home occupation site at any given time. As used in this chapter, the term “home occupation site” means the legal lot on which the home occupation is conducted.

b.     Additional individuals may be employed by or associated with the home occupation, so long as they do not report to work, pick up, or deliver at the home occupation site.

c.     The home occupation site shall not be used as a headquarters for the assembly of employees for instruction or other purposes, including dispatch of employees to other locations.

4.     Advertising and Signs. Signs shall not exceed a total of four square feet of surface area on each side of one or two faces.

5.     Vehicles, Parking, and Traffic.

a.     Not more than one commercially licensed vehicle associated with the home occupation is allowed at the home occupation site in the same 24-hour period. Vehicles shall be of a size that would not overhang into the public right-of-way when parked.

b.     There shall be no commercial vehicle deliveries between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

6.     Business Hours. There shall be no restriction on business hours, except that clients or customers are permitted at the home occupation only from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.

7.     Prohibited Home Occupation Uses.

a.     Any activity that produces radio, TV, or other electronic interference; noise, glare, vibration, smoke, or odor beyond allowable levels as determined by local, state, or federal standards, or that can be detected beyond the property line, is prohibited.

b.     Any activity involving on-site retail sales, including garage sales exceeding the thresholds of a temporary use, is prohibited, except that the sale of items that are incidental to a permitted home occupation is allowed. For example, the sale of lesson books or sheet music from music teachers, art or craft supplies from arts or crafts instructors, computer software from computer consultants, and similar incidental items for sale by the home business is allowed.

c.     The following uses, and uses with similar objectionable impacts because of motor vehicle traffic, noise, glare, odor, dust, smoke, or vibration, are prohibited:

(1)    Ambulance service.

(2)    Animal hospital, veterinary services, kennels, or animal boarding.

(3)    Auto and other vehicle repair, including auto painting.

(4)    Repair, reconditioning, or storage of motorized vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles, airplanes, or large equipment on-site.

8.     Enforcement. With cause, the City’s designated Code Enforcement Officer may visit a home occupation site to inspect the site and enforce the provisions of this Code. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.3.130 Manufactured Home on a Single-Family Lot
Manufactured homes are permitted on individual lots, subject to all of the following design standards. Manufactured homes relocated into the City of Molalla shall conform to City standards. The following standards do not apply to dwellings lawfully established and existing within the City prior to November 10, 2017.

A.    Residential Building Materials. The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which in color, material, and appearance are similar to the exterior siding and roof material used on nearby residences; horizontal wood or horizontal wood-appearance siding and composite roofing is also permitted.

B.     Garages and Carports. If the manufactured home has a garage or carport, the garage or carport shall be constructed of materials like those used on the home.

C.     Thermal Envelope. The manufactured home shall be certified by the manufacturer to meet the thermal envelope requirements equivalent to those for a single-family dwelling constructed under the state Building Code. Evidence demonstrating that the manufactured home meets “Super Good Cents” energy efficiency standards, or an equivalent standard, is deemed to satisfy the exterior thermal envelope certification requirement.

D.    Placement. The manufactured home shall be placed on an excavated and back-filled foundation and enclosed at the perimeter such that the manufactured home is located not more than 16 inches above grade, and complies with the minimum set-up standards of the adopted state Administrative Rules for Manufactured Dwellings, OAR Chapter 918. Where the building site has a sloped grade, no more than 16 inches of the enclosing material shall be exposed on the uphill side of the home.

E.     Floodplain. Manufactured homes shall comply following standards:

1.     The stand shall be a minimum of 12 inches above Base Flood Elevation (BFE) unless the foundation wall is opened on one side or end so that floodwater cannot be trapped.

2.     The bottom of the longitudinal chassis frame beam in A zones, and the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member supporting the dwelling in V zones shall be a minimum of 12 inches above BFE.

3.     The manufactured dwelling shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement during the base flood. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (Reference FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for anchoring techniques.

4.     Electrical crossover connections shall be a minimum of 12 inches above BFE.

F.     Foundation Skirt. The foundation area of the manufactured home shall be fully skirted with concrete, horizontal wood or vinyl siding, or other materials, pursuant to applicable building codes.

G.    Prohibited. The manufactured home shall not be located in a designated historic district, except where the historic district regulations specifically provide for manufactured homes. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.3.140 Manufactured Dwelling Parks
Mobile home and manufactured dwelling parks (not including recreational vehicles) are permitted on parcels of one acre or larger, subject to compliance with subsections A through C:

A.    Permitted Uses. Single-family residences, manufactured dwelling park manager’s office, home occupations, and accessory structures that are necessary for the operation and maintenance of the manufactured dwelling park (e.g., landscape maintenance).

B.     Development Standards. Development of manufactured dwelling parks, including placement of manufactured dwellings within a park, shall comply with applicable building codes and state requirements for manufactured dwelling parks in ORS Chapter 446.

C.     Perimeter Landscaping. When manufactured dwellings are oriented with their back or side yards facing a public right-of-way, the City may require installation of fencing and planting of a landscape buffer of five to 10 feet in width between the right-of-way and a manufactured dwelling park for the privacy and security of park residents or for privacy of adjacent residences. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.3.150 Temporary Uses
Temporary uses are characterized by their short term or seasonal nature and by the fact that permanent improvements are not made to the site. Temporary uses include, but are not limited to: construction trailers, leasing offices, temporary carnivals and fairs, parking lot sales, retail warehouse sales, seasonal sales such as Christmas tree sales and vegetable stands, and similar uses. This Code contains permit procedures for three types of temporary uses, Seasonal and Special Events, Temporary Sales Offices and Model Homes, and Temporary Buildings, Trailers, Kiosks, and Other Structures, as follows:

A.    Seasonal and Special Events. Through a Type II procedure, pursuant to Section 17-4.1.030, the City shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny a temporary use application for a Seasonal or Special Event, based on the following criteria:

1.     The use is permitted in the underlying zone, and does not violate any conditions of approval for the property (e.g., prior development permit approval).

2.     The use occurs for not longer than 45 consecutive days and 45 days between occurrences.

3.     The use is permitted in the underlying land use district and does not violate any conditions of approval for the property (e.g., prior development permit approval).

4.     The applicant, if different than the property owner, has proof of the owner’s permission to place the use on the property.

5.     Ingress and egress are adequate and do not raise safety concerns when the proposed use is combined with the other uses of the site, pursuant to Chapter 17-3.3 Access and Circulation.

6.     The use does not conflict (i.e., create a nonconformity) with the provisions of Chapter 17-3.4 Landscaping, Fences and Walls, Outdoor Lighting.

7.     There is sufficient parking to accommodate the temporary use and other uses existing on the site, pursuant to the Chapter 17-3.5 Parking and Loading.

8.     The use does not conflict (i.e., create a nonconformity) with the provisions of Chapter 17-3.6 Public Facilities.

9.     The use does not create adverse off-site impacts including vehicle traffic, noise, odors, vibrations, glare, or lights that affect an adjoining use in a manner in which other uses allowed outright in the district do not affect the adjoining use.

10.   The use is adequately served by sewer or septic system and water, as applicable.

11.   The applicant shall be responsible for maintaining all required licenses and permits.

B.     Temporary Sales Office or Model Home. Through a Type II procedure, pursuant to Section 17-4.1.030, the City shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny a temporary use application for a Temporary Sales Office or Model Home, based on the following criteria:

1.     Temporary Sales Office. The use of any real property within the City as a temporary sales office, office for the purpose of facilitating the sale of real property, shall meet all of the following criteria:

a.     The temporary sales office shall be located within the boundaries of the subdivision or tract of land in which the real property is to be sold.

b.     The property to be used for a temporary sales office shall not be permanently improved for that purpose.

c.     Public health, safety, and welfare shall be protected through conditions imposed by the City, regarding temporary utility connections.

2.     Model House. The use of any real property within the City for a model home, including a model home in any subdivision or on any tract of land within the City, shall meet all of the following criteria:

a.     Where the model house is located in a residential zone, it shall be located within the boundaries of the subdivision or tract of land where the real property to be sold is situated.

b.     A model house located in a residential zone shall be designed as a permanent structure that meets all relevant requirements of this Code and other applicable codes and permit requirements.

c.     A model house located in a non-residential zone, as with a manufactured home sales display lot, shall be removed when the use of the subject site for home sales ends.

C.     Temporary Buildings, Trailers, Kiosks, and Other Structures. Through a Type II procedure, pursuant to Section 17-4.1.030, the City shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a placement and use of a temporary building, trailer, kiosk, or other structure, based on following criteria:

1.     The use is permitted in the underlying zone and does not violate any conditions of approval for the property (e.g., prior development permit approval).

2.     The applicant, if different than the property owner, has proof of the owner’s permission to place the use on the property.

3.     The lot development standards of Section 17-2.2.040 are met.

4.     Ingress and egress are adequate and do not raise safety concerns when the proposed use is combined with the other uses of the site, pursuant to Chapter 17-3.3 Access and Circulation.

5.     The use does not conflict (i.e., create a nonconformity) with the provisions of Chapter 17-3.4 Landscaping, Fences and Walls, Outdoor Lighting.

6.     There is sufficient parking to accommodate the temporary use and other uses existing on the site, pursuant to the Chapter 17-3.5 Parking and Loading.

7.     The temporary use does not conflict (i.e., create a nonconformity) with the provisions of Chapter 17-3.6 Public Facilities.

8.     The use does not create adverse off-site impacts including vehicle traffic, noise, odors, vibrations, glare, or lights that affect an adjoining use in a manner in which other uses allowed outright in the district do not affect the adjoining use.

9.     The use is adequately served by sewer or septic system and water, as applicable.

10.   The structure complies with applicable building codes.

11.   Except where specifically authorized by the Planning Official the length of time that the temporary structure may remain on a site shall not exceed six consecutive months.

12.   The applicant has obtained and will maintain all required licenses and permits.

13.   Public health, safety, and welfare are protected through the installation of a water meter, if necessary, and other improvements, pursuant to Chapter 17-3.6 Public Facilities, as necessary. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.3.160 Accessory Dwellings
Accessory dwellings are subject to review and approval through a Type II procedure, pursuant to Section 17-4.1.030, and shall conform to all of the following standards:

A.    One Unit. A maximum of one accessory dwelling unit is allowed per legal lot.

B.     Floor Area. An accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 800 square feet of floor area, or 40 percent of the primary dwelling unit’s floor area, whichever is smaller. The unit may be a detached cottage, a unit attached to a dwelling, or in a portion of an existing dwelling. The floor area of any garage associated with the primary dwelling is not included in the calculation of maximum floor area.

C.     Building Design. The accessory dwelling shall comply with applicable Oregon Structural Specialty Code requirements.

D.    Building Height. The height of an accessory dwelling shall not exceed the height of the primary dwelling. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.3.170 Bed and Breakfast Inns
Bed and breakfast inns, where allowed, are subject to review and approval through a Type II procedure, pursuant to Section 17-4.1.030, and shall conform to all of the following standards:

A.    Accessory Use. The use must be accessory to a permitted residential use.

B.     Maximum Size. A maximum of six bedrooms for guests, and a maximum of 12 guests are permitted per night.

C.     Length of Stay. The maximum length of stay is 28 days per guest; any stay longer is classified as a hotel or commercial lodging use.

D.    Employees. The inn shall have not more than two non-resident employees on-site at any one time. There is no limit on residential employees.

E.     Food Service. Food service shall be provided only to overnight guests of the business, except where a restaurant use is also an allowed use.

F.     Screening and Buffering. The City may require a landscape hedge or fence be installed on the property line separating a detached accessory dwelling from an abutting single-family dwelling for the purposes of visual screening and privacy between uses. Screening and buffering shall conform to the standards of Chapter 17-3.4. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.3.180 Wireless Communication Facilities
Telecommunication facilities are to:

Protect the health and safety of citizens from adverse affects from radio frequency emissions;

Preserve the quality of living in residential areas which are in close proximity to telecommunications facilities and systems;

Preserve the opportunity for continued growth and service from the telecommunications industry.

A.    Development Standards. The following development standards apply to telecommunication facilities:

1.     Support. Support towers shall be self-supporting.

2.     Height Limitation. Support tower and antenna heights shall not exceed the maximum heights provided below.

a.     If the property is zoned M-1 or M-2, and no adjacent parcel is zoned residential, the maximum height of a support tower, including antennas, is 120 feet.

b.     If the property is zoned M-1 or M-2, and an adjacent parcel is zoned residential, the maximum height of a support tower, including antennas, is 100 feet.

c.     For all other zoning districts, the maximum height of a support tower, including antennas, is 75 feet.

3.     Co-Location. New support towers shall be designed to accommodate co-location of additional providers.

a.     New support towers of a height greater than 75 feet shall be designed to accommodate co-location of a minimum of two additional providers either outright or through future modification of the tower.

b.     New support towers of a height between 60 feet and 75 feet shall be designed to accommodate co-location of a minimum of one additional provider either outright or through future modification of the tower.

c.     The applicant shall provide a signed statement to the City, stating that the applicant shall allow co-location with other users, provided that all reasonable safety, structural, technical and monetary requirements are met. This agreement shall also state that any future owners or operators of this site shall be required, as a condition of a sale or transfer, to allow such co-location on the tower, and to provide the City with such a co-location statement.

4.     Setbacks. For support towers, auxiliary support equipment, and perimeter fencing shall be measured from property lines, not the lease area. The base of a tower must be set back from property lines at a distance equal to or greater than the height of the tower.

5.     Auxiliary Support Equipment. The following standards shall be required:

a.     If the property is zoned C-1, C-2, M-1, or M-2, the auxiliary support equipment footprint shall not exceed an area of 340 square feet and 15 feet in height at the peak.

b.     In all other zoning districts, the auxiliary support equipment shall be located in an underground vault to the maximum extent practicable.

c.     Only one auxiliary accessory cabinet shall be allowed per service provider located on a support structure.

6.     Landscaping. In all zoning districts, existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable. Screening of a site is mandatory.

a.     If the property is zoned M-1 or M-2, and no adjacent parcel is zoned residential, landscaping shall not be required if water quality issues are addressed and appropriate screening around the facility is proposed;

b.     Landscaping shall be placed completely around the perimeter of the telecommunications facility, except as required to gain access. The minimum planting height shall be a minimum of six feet at the time of planting, densely placed so as to screen the facility. The landscaping shall be compatible with vegetation in the surrounding area, and shall be kept healthy and well maintained as long as the facility is in operation. Failure to maintain the site will be grounds to revoke the ability to operate the facility.

7.     Noise Reduction. Noise generating equipment shall be baffled to reduce sound level measured at the property line to the following levels except during short durations for testing and operation of generators in emergency situations:

a.     For any property where no adjacent parcel is zoned residential, the sound level at the property line shall not be greater than 50 decibels.

b.     For all other cases, the sound level shall not be greater than 40 decibels when measured at the nearest residential property line.

8.     Lighting.

a.     Unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration or the Oregon Department of Aviation, artificial lighting of telecommunication towers and antennas shall be prohibited.

b.     Strobe lighting is prohibited unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration. Security lighting for equipment shelters or cabinets and other on-the-ground auxiliary equipment shall be initiated by motion detecting lighting. The lighting shall be the minimum necessary to secure the site, shall not cause illumination on adjacent properties in excess of a measurement of 0.5 foot candles at the property line, and shall be shielded to keep direct light within the site boundaries.

9.     Color. Unless otherwise required by the Federal Aviation Administration, all support towers and antennas shall have a non-glare finish and blend with the natural background.

10.   Signage. Support towers and antenna(s) shall not be used for signage, symbols, flags, banners, or other devices or objects attached to or painted on any portion of a telecommunication facility.

11.   Access Drives.

a.     On a site with an existing use, access shall be achieved through use of the existing drives to the greatest extent practicable. If adequate intersection sight distance is unavailable at the existing access intersection with a City street, an analysis of alternate access sites shall be required.

b.     Sites shall be serviced by an access adequate to ensure fire protection of the site.

c.     New access drives shall be paved a minimum of 20 feet deep from the edge of the right-of-way using materials to be as pervious as practicable to minimize stormwater runoff.

d.     New access drives shall be reviewed for adequate intersection sight distances.

12.   The grouping of towers on a site, and the co-location of facilities on a single tower, is required where technically feasible. The applicant shall provide evidence to the City that such grouping or co-location is not technically feasible before any new towers may be approved.

B.     Informing the City. All service providers with facilities within the City shall be required to report in writing to the Planning Official any changes in the status of their operation.

1.     An annual written statement shall be filed with the Planning Official no later than January 15th of each year verifying continued use of each facility in the City’s jurisdiction as well as continued compliance with all state and federal agency regulations.

2.     The report shall include any of the following changes:

a.     Changes in or loss of Federal Communication Commission license from the Federal Communication Commission to operate;

b.     Receipt of notice of failure to comply with the regulations of any other authority over the business or facility;

c.     Change in ownership of the company that owns the telecommunication facility or provides telecommunications services;

d.     Loss or termination of lease with the telecommunications facility for a period of six months or longer.

C.     Exemptions. The following are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:

1.     Two-way communication transmitters used on a temporary basis by “911” emergency services, including fire, police, and ambulance service.

2.     Temporary telecommunication facilities of all types that are used by a public agency solely for emergency communications in the event of a disaster, emergency preparedness, or public health or safety purposes.

3.     Telecommunications that were legally established prior to August 2002.

4.     Any maintenance or repair of previously approved telecommunication facilities provided that such activity does not increase the height, width, or mass of the facility.

5.     Dish antennas used for residential purposes.

6.     VHF and UHF receive-only television antennas provided they are 15 feet or less above the existing or proposed roof.

7.     Amateur radio operator antennas located on a licensed amateur radio operator’s property.

D.    Removal of Discontinued Service. Any telecommunications facility that has not provided service for six months may, at the Planning Official’s discretion, be deemed a nuisance and shall be subject to removal under the nuisance abatement provisions of this Code.

E.     Fees. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, the Planning Official may require, as part of the application fees for land use permits, an amount sufficient to recover all of the City’s costs in retaining consultants to verify statements made in conjunction with the permit application, to the extent that verification requires telecommunication experts. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.3.190 Wineries, Distilleries and Breweries
Where allowed, small-scale wineries, breweries, or distilleries are permitted provided all of the following are met:

A.    Primary Use. The primary use on-site is winery, brewery, or distillery.

B.     Floor Area for Retail Sales, Eating, and Drinking. The floor area devoted to retail sales, eating and drinking, and similar customer uses is at least 20 percent of the total floor area.

C.     Floor Area for Production and Storage. The floor area devoted to production, storage, and related uses does not exceed 5,000 square feet. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.3.200 Medical and Recreational Dispensaries
A.    Applicability. The following standards apply where medical and recreational marijuana dispensaries are allowed in commercial zones. In addition to the standards below; Section 17-4.1 General Review Procedures apply.

B.     Standards.

1.     Must be located on real property adjacent to, or with legal access through property adjacent to: (a) the public right-of-way on W. Main St. between OR HWY 213 and Industrial Way; (b) the public right-of-way on OR 213 between Toliver Rd. and City boundary furthest to the south; (c) the public right-of-way on Molalla Ave. between Heintz St. and S. 3rd St.; or (d) the public right-of-way on W. Main St. (OR HWY 211) between Molalla Ave. and Hart St. Furthermore, location shall not be within 1,000 feet of the real property comprising another medical or recreational marijuana dispensary.

 

2.     In addition, any and all medical and recreational marijuana dispensaries must be registered respectively with the Oregon Health Authority under ORD 475.314 and comply with all OHA rules and the Oregon Liquor Control Commission and comply with all OLCC rules.

3.     Must adhere to the Marijuana District Map Overlay.

 

Figure 1. Marijuana District Map Overlay



(Ord. 2018-13 §2)

 

17-2.3.210 Medical Marijuana Producers, Marijuana Producers, Marijuana Processors and Marijuana Wholesalers
A.    Applicability. The following standards apply where medical marijuana producers, marijuana producers, marijuana processors and marijuana wholesalers are allowed in industrial zones. In addition to the standards below; Section 17-4.1 General Review Procedures apply.

B.     Standards.

1.     Must be located on real property west of Molalla Forest Rd. All medical marijuana producers, marijuana producers, marijuana processors and marijuana wholesalers must be registered with the Oregon Health Authority or the Oregon Liquor Control Commission, as applicable, and comply with all applicable OHA and OLCC rules.

2.     Use not allowed in the Employment Zone.

3.     Must adhere to the Marijuana District Map Overlay in Section 17-2.3.200. (Ord. 2018-13 §2)

 

17-2.3.220 Mobile Food Units
A.    Applicability.

1.     No mobile food unit may operate within the City limits of Molalla except as permitted in this chapter, or as authorized by an event permit issued by the City of Molalla.

2.     Mobile food unit owners, mobile food unit licensees, and the owner(s) of property upon which mobile food units operate are jointly and severally liable for noncompliance with this section.

B.     Mobile Food Units Generally. The following standards apply to all mobile food units operating within the City of Molalla whether temporary or permanent:

1.     Accessory Use. Mobile food units shall be permitted as an accessory use in all zones in which they are “Permitted Subject to Special Use Standards (S),” provided they conform to all provisions of this section and all relevant provisions of the Molalla Development Code (MMC Title 17).

2.     Public Facilities, Self-Containment, Waste, and Utilities.

a.     Waste in General. Except as permitted by the City of Molalla, a mobile food unit owner and the property owner of the site where the mobile food unit is operating are expressly prohibited from allowing any type of discharge, drainage, leakage, solid waste, or liquid waste associated with a mobile food unit to:

(1)    Enter the stormwater or wastewater systems; or

(2)    Be dumped or otherwise spilled on the ground, streets, or sidewalks.

b.     Self-Containment. Notwithstanding MMC Section 17-3.6.040, all temporary mobile food units, and all mobile food units operating on a site approved for three or less permanent mobile food units shall be totally self-contained and connect to individual wastewater and potable water tanks at all times.

(1)    Mobile food units operating on a site approved for four or more permanent mobile food units may choose between self-containment, connecting to City water, connecting to City sewer, or a combination of self-containment and City water and/or sewer. All City water and sewer connections are subject to MMC Section 17-3.6.040 and MMC Chapter 13.14.

(2)    All mobile food units on a given site shall be uniform in regard to self-containment or connection to one or more City services (e.g., all connected to water, all connected to sewer).

c.     Solid Waste. All solid wastes associated with the mobile food unit, or its patronage, must be kept at all times fully enclosed in a trash bin or recycling receptacle, as applicable.

(1)    Solid wastes must be disposed of on a schedule at least as often as that offered by the City’s solid waste franchise. Disposal must be by lawful means.

d.     Utility Lines and Tanks. All utility lines and tanks shall be placed underground or otherwise screened, covered, or hidden from view from the right-of-way as to minimize visual impacts and prevent unsafe conditions.

(1)    Power may not be connected by overhead wires to the individual mobile food units.

e.     Public Right-of-Way. No portion of the mobile food unit, equipment, customer service areas, or any other associated object may be located within the public right-of-way.

3.     Condition of Unit and Site.

a.     Mobile food units must be equipped with wheels and the wheels may not be removed.

b.     Mobile food units must be kept in a state of good repair, including, but not limited to:

(1)    An exterior that is clean and free from rust, peeling paint, and visibly worn or broken exterior equipment; and

(2)    Any other defect that reasonably detracts from the public’s aesthetic appreciation of the unit or the site.

c.     The site area adjacent to the unit must be kept in a state of good repair, including, but not limited to:

(1)    Free from trash, waste, broken or visibly worn equipment and furnishings; and

(2)    Any other defect that reasonably detracts from the public’s aesthetic appreciation of the site.

d.     Site Surfacing.

(1)    Temporary mobile food units may only operate on a paved parking area.

(2)    Permanent mobile food units may only operate on a site with a hard surface sufficient in size to minimize dust and facilitate all mobile food unit operations, and related customer activities such as eating, ingress, and egress.

(1)    Gravel and soil surfaces are prohibited.

(3)    The surfacing requirement does not apply to permanent mobile food units that pre-exist the date of the ordinance codified in this section was adopted unless and until the mobile food unit moves from the site for a period of 30 or more days.

e.     Separation and Setbacks. All mobile food units on a site shall be located a minimum of:

(1)    Five feet from any structure or mobile food unit;

(2)    10 feet from any front or street-side lot line;

(3)    Five feet from any side or rear lot line;

(4)    20 feet from any lot line abutting a residential zone.

4.     Nature of Operations and Right to Inspect.

a.     Mobile food units shall primarily sell food items.

b.     Mobile food units may not sell, offer, provide or in any way transfer cannabis in any form.

c.     At all times mobile food units are subject to inspection by City of Molalla Code Enforcement, City of Molalla Police Department, and Molalla Fire District personnel on official business.

5.     Legal Requirements.

a.     Licensing.

(1)    All mobile food units must possess and display a valid Clackamas County mobile food unit license.

(2)    Temporary mobile food units must possess and display a valid City of Molalla temporary mobile food unit license.

(3)    Permanent mobile food units must possess and display a valid City of Molalla business license.

b.     Compliance with Laws. Mobile food units and the property upon which they operate must maintain continuous compliance with all applicable laws and rules of the federal, State, County, and City, governments.

C.     Temporary Mobile Food Units. The provisions of this subsection apply to all mobile food units operating in the City of Molalla in any part on a site or sites that have not been approved for placement of a permanent mobile food unit or units, and to the sites upon which temporary mobile food units are allowed to operate.

1.     Zoning. Temporary mobile food units may only operate in the following zones:

a.     General Commercial (C-2), Light Industrial (M-1), and Heavy Industrial (M-2) zones.

2.     Placement.

a.     No more than three temporary mobile food units may be present on one property at any time unless it is for the sole purpose of storing the unit(s). Temporary mobile food units may not be stored upon any property upon which they operate.

b.     Temporary mobile food units may not be placed in any location that hinders access for emergency vehicles or impacts the traffic pattern on any public roadway.

c.     Temporary mobile food units must not be placed in a way that results in a violation of Federal, State, County, or City laws, or any condition of a land use or permitting action.

3.     Accessory Items and Structures.

a.     Development and improvements related to temporary mobile food unit operations are strictly prohibited except that a paved parking lot may be expanded, subject to the provisions of the Molalla City Code, to facilitate such operations.

b.     Temporary tables, chairs, lighting, and shelter may be provided during temporary mobile food unit operations but must be removed upon cessation of operations at the site each day.

c.     Trash receptacles for customer use must be provided and maintained within 10 feet of the temporary mobile food unit and must be removed upon cessation of operations each day.

4.     Operating Hours.

a.     Temporary mobile food units may only operate for 14 or less hours per calendar day, and only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.

b.     Temporary mobile food units must vacate all properties upon which they operate immediately upon cessation of operations.

D.    Permanent Mobile Food Units. The provisions of this subsection apply to all permanent mobile food unit sites and mobile food units that operate thereon in any part.

1.     Zoning. Permanent mobile food unit sites may only be approved in the following zones:

a.     Central Commercial (C-1), General Commercial (C-2), and Light Industrial (M-1) zones.

b.     Licensed permanent mobile food units may operate as a temporary mobile food unit but must first submit and gain approval of a list of addresses upon which they intend to operate as a temporary mobile food unit.

(1)    Licensed permanent mobile food units operating outside the permanent mobile food unit site for which they are licensed must comply with all of the provisions of subsections B and C of this section, except that they need not obtain a temporary mobile food unit license.

2.     Development Code. Except as specifically delineated in this section, all permanent mobile food unit sites must comply with the applicable provisions of MMC Title 17 in general and specifically for commercial activities classified as Retail Sales and Commercial Service.

3.     Fencing.

a.     Permanent mobile food unit sites with approval for four or more permanent mobile food units shall be fully enclosed by a fence, wall, exterior building wall, or combination thereof.

b.     Notwithstanding MMC Section 17-3.4.040, the design and dimensions of fences or walls used to satisfy the requirement of this section are subject to approval by the Planning Official.

(1)    The planning official shall base their approval of a proposed wall or fence on a balance of the Community Design Standards in MMC Section 17-3.4.040, the location of the parcel and surrounding uses, and the aesthetics of the proposal.

(2)    Clear vision standards may only be waived by variance.

4.     Sanitation Facilities.

a.     A permanent mobile food unit site authorized for three or less mobile food units:

(1)    Shall have at least one toilet and one hand washing facility available to employees and the public at all times of operation.

(A)   The toilet and hand washing facilities may be portable, part of an existing building on site, or constructed in accordance with the Molalla City Code and Oregon Specialty Building Code.

(B)   No more than one portable toilet per permanent mobile food unit is allowed.

b.     A permanent mobile food unit site authorized four or more mobile food units:

(1)    Shall have at least two toilets and two hand washing facilities available to employees and the public at all times of operation.

(A)   The toilet and hand washing facilities may be portable, part of an existing building on site, or constructed in accordance with the Molalla City Code and Oregon Specialty Building Code.

(B)   No more than one portable toilet per permanent mobile food unit is allowed.

5.     Liquid Waste Collection. All permanent mobile food units must provide a liquid waste collection plan outlining:

a.     How liquid waste will be collected and disposed of;

b.     How often liquid waste will be removed from the site and disposed of;

c.     What company will collect and dispose of the liquid waste.

E.     Process.

1.     Temporary Mobile Food Units. Prior to operation, a temporary mobile food unit owner must submit to City Hall a temporary mobile food unit license application including a list of addresses upon which they intend to operate, and the appropriate fee. These licenses expire on December 31st of each year and must be renewed.

a.     Temporary mobile food units may only operate on premises approved on their application, and only with property owner consent.

b.     Additional addresses may be added by filing an addendum at City Hall, subject to approval by city staff. Approved additional address addendums become part of the approved license and must be kept with the original license approval.

c.     The temporary mobile food unit license fee will be set from time to time by resolution of the City Council.

d.     Temporary mobile food unit licenses run with the owner and must be reapplied for upon a change of ownership.

2.     Permanent Mobile Food Unit Site. Prior to beginning mobile food unit operations, a property owner must submit a Zoning Checklist in accordance with MMC Section 17-4.1.020, and comport with all required land use and permitting requirements in MMC Title 17.

3.     Permanent Mobile Food Units. Prior to operation, a permanent mobile food unit owner must submit to City Hall, and receive approval of, a City of Molalla business license application and the associated fee in accordance with the provisions of MMC Title 5.

F.     Enforcement and Penalties.

1.     Violations of development related provisions of this section shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of MMC Title 17.

2.     All other violations shall be subject to the general penalty in MMC Section 1.04.010.

G.    Severability. In the event any provisions of this chapter shall be held invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not invalidate or render unenforceable any other provision. (Ord. 2020-10 §1; Ord. 2020-09 §1)

 

Chapter 17-2.4 OVERLAY ZONES
17-2.4.010 Support Commercial (SC) Overlay
A.    Purpose. The purpose of the Support Commercial (SC) Overlay District allows support commercial uses in designated transitional industrial areas. This zone is applied over the base M-2 Industrial District in those areas where small parcels are unlikely to be used for heavy industrial purposes.

B.     Use and Dimensional Standards. The list of permitted and conditional uses, as well as the lot size and dimensional standards of the M-2 District shall apply to land within the SC Overlay District. This zone should allow for support type commercial uses which serve the industrial zone.

C.     Minimum Lot Sizes. No lot shall be reduced to less than one-half acre in size. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.4.020 Public/Semi-Public Uses (PSP) Overlay
A.    Purpose. The purpose of the Public/Semi-Public District is to accommodate the sighting of public or semi-public facilities. This chapter ensures that these facilities are properly located and that they are compatible with surrounding neighborhoods.

B.     Principle Uses Permitted Outright.

1.     City and other public parks and ancillary facilities.

2.     Public buildings, including schools, City administration, library, protective services, community facilities, spectator/participant facilities with 15,000 square feet of floor space or less.

3.     Public facilities/structures/uses including water, sewer drainage facilities, and similar uses.

4.     Public/semi-public open space uses including playgrounds and similar uses.

5.     Government buildings and administrative or protective services.

6.     Governmental structure or use including public parks, playground, recreation building, fire station, police station, museum, or library.

7.     Public or semi-public building serving as a library, museum, or other similar purpose.

8.     Public parks, playground, or recreational area, and buildings used in connection therewith.

9.     Government building and administrative or protective service.

10.   Indoor recreation facilities which are 15,000 square feet of floor space and under.

C.     Accessory Uses Permitted Outright.

1.     Agricultural or horticultural activities of a public/nonprofit nature.

2.     Uses customarily incidental and subordinate to a principle use permitted outright, including parking.

D.    Conditional Uses Permitted.

1.     Approval of a conditional use shall not be granted unless a specific proposal meets the criteria listed in Chapter 17-4.4.

2.     Camping facilities.

3.     Indoor recreation facilities over 15,000 square feet.

4.     Manufactured home or other structures used as a permanent residence for a night watchman or caretaker.

5.     Outright permitted uses in excess of the height limitations.

6.     Public buildings, including schools, City administration, library, protective services, community facilities, spectator/participant facilities exceeding 15,000 square feet of floor space.

7.     Public or semi-public administrative offices.

8.     Private nursery school, kindergarten, or daycare center.

9.     Recreational vehicle camping facilities.

10.   Recreational vehicle camping parks.

11.   Telecommunications facilities.

12.   Public use facilities 15,000 square feet or greater of total floor space. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.4.030 Water Resources (WR) Overlay
A.    Purpose. The Water Resources (WR) Overlay District is intended to protect and enhance significant wetlands, stream corridors and floodplains identified on the Molalla Natural Features Inventory by:

1.     Conserving significant riparian corridors, undeveloped floodplains and locally significant wetlands in keeping with the requirements of State Planning Goal 5 (Natural Resources) and applicable state statutes and administrative rules, and the Molalla Comprehensive Plan;

2.     Protecting and enhancing water quality;

3.     Preventing property damage during floods and storms;

4.     Limiting development activity in designated riparian corridors;

5.     Protecting native plant species;

6.     Maintaining and enhancing fish and wildlife habitats; and

7.     Conserving associated scenic and recreational values.

B.     Boundaries and Setbacks. The general location of the WR Overlay District is shown on the Molalla Comprehensive Plan Map (for areas within the UGB) and the Molalla Zoning Map (for areas within the City limits) and includes:

1.     Locally significant wetlands identified on the Molalla Local Wetlands Inventory or the Natural Features Inventory.

2.     The riparian corridor extending upland 50 feet from the tops-of-bank of Bear Creek, Creamery Creek, and the Molalla River tributary as shown on the Natural Features Map.

a.     Where a significant wetland is located fully or partially within the riparian corridor, the riparian corridor shall extend 50 feet from the upland edge of the wetland;

b.     The riparian buffer for isolated wetlands shall extend 25 feet from the edge of the wetland.

3.     The 100-year floodplain on properties identified as vacant or partly vacant on the 2007 Molalla Buildable Lands Inventory.

C.     The Department of State Lands Notification. The Oregon Department of State Lands (DSL) shall be notified in writing of all applications to the City of Molalla for development activities, including applications for plan authorizations, development permits, or building permits, and of development proposals within the Molalla UGB, that may affect any wetlands, creeks or waterways identified in the Local Wetlands Inventory or Natural Features Inventory.

D.    Site Plan Required. When a use or activity that requires the issuance of a building permit or approval of a land use application is proposed on a parcel within, or partially within the WR Overlay District, the property owner shall submit a scaled site plan to the City that that shows the precise location of:

1.     Topography;

2.     The stream top-of-bank;

3.     The 100-year flood elevation;

4.     The delineated wetland boundary with documentation of concurrence by the Oregon Division of State Lands;

5.     The required riparian setback;

6.     Existing vegetative cover and type; and

7.     Existing and proposed site improvements.

E.     Modification of Boundaries. The boundaries of the WR Overlay District may be modified under the following circumstances:

1.     The approval authority may modify the boundary of a significant stream corridor or wetland, and by extension the required riparian setback, based on:

a.     A wetland delineation prepared by a professional wetland scientist;

b.     Written concurrence by the Department of State Lands; and

c.     A site survey, prepared by a registered land surveyor, showing the precise location of the stream top-of-bank or delineated wetland edge.

2.     The approval authority may modify the boundary of the 100-year floodplain based on a report from a registered civil engineer demonstrating the floodplain has been improperly mapped.

3.     The approval authority may modify the boundaries of an isolated significant wetland (i.e., a wetland that is not within 50 feet of the top-of-bank of a significant stream) when all of the following criteria are satisfied:

a.     The proposed use or alteration of the wetland is approved by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Oregon Division of State Lands;

b.     The wetland can be altered without substantial adverse impact on the natural character of the area and function of the wetland;

c.     The wetland does not support rare or endangered species of fish, wildlife, or vegetation;

d.     Elimination, alteration, or relocation does not significantly alter water movement, including normal levels or rates of runoff into and from wetlands;

e.     The benefit to the public from the proposed use clearly outweighs the public good from retaining the wetland area;

f.      Disturbance of the wetland will not require any public costs, including maintenance due to secondary impacts; and

g.     The disturbance to the wetland will be the minimum necessary to accommodate reasonable development of the property. Efforts should be made to integrate the wetland area into the proposed development.

4.     The approval authority may reduce the stream corridor boundary in highly disturbed areas by up to 25 feet when all of the following criteria are satisfied:

a.     The average stream corridor setback for the subject property shall remain at 50 feet;

b.     The applicant has prepared a mitigation plan demonstrating that there will be no net reduction in the water resource values, as identified in the Local Wetlands Inventory or Natural Features Inventory, whichever applies;

c.     The mitigation plan shall include specific mitigation measures such as restoration of riparian areas, enhanced buffer treatment within the protected stream corridor, or measures to increase water quality;

d.     The plan shall ensure removal of invasive plant species and replacement with suitable native plant species within one year of project approval;

e.     The plan shall include provisions for monitoring and replacement of native plants; and

f.      A riparian conservation easement shall be required for the protected stream corridor.

F.     Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted within the WR Overlay District:

1.     Trails.

2.     Passive recreation uses and activities.

3.     Maintenance of existing structures, lawns and gardens.

4.     Normal maintenance and expansion of existing public facilities.

5.     Construction of public facilities projects identified in adopted public facilities master plans.

6.     Construction of transportation facilities identified in the adopted Transportation System Plan.

G.    Development Regulations. In addition to the requirements of the underlying zone, the following restrictions and exceptions shall apply within the WR Overlay District:

1.     Removal of Native Vegetation. The removal of vegetation from the WR Overlay District is prohibited except for the following:

a.     Perimeter mowing of a wetland for fire protection purposes;

b.     Removal of non-native vegetation and replacement with native plan species;

c.     For the development of water-related or water-dependent uses, provided they are designed and constructed to minimize impact on the existing riparian vegetation;

d.     Removal of emergent in-channel vegetation that has the potential to cause flooding; and

e.     Hazardous Tree Removal. Hazardous trees are those that pose an imminent health, safety, or welfare threat to persons or property.

2.     Building, Paving, Grading, and Fill. Within the WR Overlay District, the placement of structures or impervious surfaces, including grading and the placement of fill is prohibited except for the following:

a.     Replacement of existing structures with structures located on the original building footprint that do not disturb additional wetland or riparian corridor surface area;

b.     Streets, roads and paths that are included in the Molalla Transportation System Plan;

c.     Water-related and water-dependent uses, including drainage facilities, water and sewer facilities, flood control projects, drainage pumps, public paths, access ways, trails, picnic areas or interpretive and educational displays and overlooks, including benches and outdoor furniture;

d.     Routine maintenance or replacement of existing public facilities projects and public emergencies, including emergency repairs to public facilities; and

e.     In-channel erosion or flood control measures that have been approved by the Oregon Division of State Lands (DSL), the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or another state or federal regulatory agency, that utilize bio-engineering methods (rather than rip rap).

3.     The following uses and activities are prohibited within the WR Overlay District:

a.     New residential, commercial, industrial, or public/semi-public construction;

b.     Expansion of existing buildings or structures;

c.     Expansion of areas of pre-existing non-native ornamental landscaping such as lawn and gardens; and

d.     Dumping, piling, or disposal of refuse, yard debris, or other material.

4.     Site Maintenance. Any use, sign or structure, and the maintenance thereof, lawfully existing on the date of adoption of this ordinance, is permitted within the WR Overlay District.

a.     Such use, sign or structure may continue at a similar level and manner as existed on the date of the adoption of this ordinance.

b.     The maintenance and alteration of pre-existing ornamental landscaping is permitted within the WR Overlay District as long as no additional native vegetation is disturbed.

c.     Maintenance of lawns, planted vegetation and landscaping shall be kept to a minimum and not include the spraying of pesticides or herbicides.

d.     Vegetation that is removed or diseased shall be replanted with native species.

e.     Maintenance trimming of existing trees shall be kept at a minimum and under no circumstances can the trimming maintenance be so severe as to compromise the tree’s health, longevity, and resource functions.

f.      Vegetation within utility easements shall be kept in a natural state and replanted when necessary with native plant species. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-2.4.040 Historic Resources (HR) Overlay
A.    Designation Procedure. The purpose of this section is to designate and preserve sites or structures in the City of Molalla that have historical significance. The Planning Commission together with the Molalla Historical Society will identify and designate sites or structures in the City, that are significant due to their historical, architectural or social character. The Planning Commission and Historical Society shall make recommendations to the City Council concerning possible historic designations. At a regularly scheduled Council meeting, the City Council shall consider the recommendations and make findings justifying its decision. Type II notice shall be given and include the following information:

1.     The date, time and location of the hearing.

2.     A description of the subject property adequate to provide the actual location and which includes a legal description from the tax maps of the Clackamas County assessor.

3.     The nature of the proposed hearing.

B.     Land Use Adjacent to Sites. To prevent conflicts between designated historic sites and other land uses, the following shall be considered when land use actions are proposed adjacent to such sites.

1.     Setbacks greater than those required in the subject zoning district; and

2.     Adequate buffering and screening of the adjacent property from the historic site.

3.     No restrictions shall be placed on the adjacent properties that deny the reasonable use of the property. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

Division III. Community Design Standards
Chapter 17-3.1 DESIGN STANDARDS ADMINISTRATION
17-3.1.010 Purpose
Division III contains design standards for the built environment. The standards are intended to protect the public health, safety, and welfare through multimodal accessibility and interconnectivity, and through the provision of parking, landscaping, and adequate public facilities. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.1.020 Applicability
The provisions of Division III apply to permits and approvals granted under this Code, and other City actions, as summarized in Table 17-3.1.020.

 

Table 17-3.1.020 Applicability of Design Standards to Approvals and Permits

 

 

Approvals

17-3.2

17-3.3

17-3.4

17-3.5

17-3.6

Building Design

Access Circulation

Landscaping, Fences and Walls, Outdoor Lighting

Parking & Loading

Public Facilities

Zoning Checklist Review

Review and determine whether land use application is required.

Access or Approach Permit

N

Y

N

Y

Y

Adjustment

Individual chapters may apply, depending on the adjustment request.

Annexation

N

N

N

N

Y

Building Permit

The City reviews building plan proposals through a Type I (Zoning Checklist) procedure and determine which standards apply.

Code Interpretation

Standards are subject to City interpretation under Chapter 17-1.5.

Code Text Amendment

Chapters apply where amendment affects design standards.

Comprehensive Plan Map Amendment

N

N

N

N

Y

Conditional Use Permit

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Home Occupation

N

N

N

N

N

Legal Lot Determination

N

Y

N

N

Y

Master Planned Development

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Modification to Approval or Condition of Approval

Individual chapters may apply, depending on the modification request.

Nonconforming Use or Structure, Expansion of

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Partition or Replat of 2 to 3 lots (See also Chapter 17-4.3)

Y (if bldg exists)

Y

Y (for flag lot)

Y (if use exists)

Y

Property Line Adjustments, including Lot Consolidations (See also Chapter 17-4.3)

Y (if bldg exists)

Y

Y (for flag lot)

Y (if use exists)

Y

Site Design Review (See also Chapter 17-4.2)

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Subdivision or Replat of >3 lots (See also Chapter 17-4.3)

Y (if bldg exists)

Y

Y (for flag lot)

Y (if use exists)

Y

Adjustments

Individual chapters may apply, depending on the variance request.

Zoning District Map Change

N

N

N

N

Y

N

(Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

Chapter 17-3.2 BUILDING ORIENTATION AND DESIGN
17-3.2.010 Purpose
Chapter 17-3.2 regulates the placement, orientation, and design of buildings. The regulations are intended to protect public health, safety, and welfare through clear and objective standards that promote land use compatibility and livability, while protecting property values and ensuring predictability in the development process. In summary, Chapter 17-3.2 is intended to create and maintain a built environment that:

A.    Is conducive to walking and bicycling;

B.     Provides natural surveillance of public spaces, or “eyes on the street,” for crime prevention and security;

C.     Reduces dependency on the automobile for short trips, thereby conserving energy and reducing unwanted congestion;

D.    Encourages the use of water-conserving landscaping;

E.     Allows for the integration of surface water management facilities within parking lots and landscape areas; and

F.     Creates a sense of place that is consistent with the character of the community, including historical development patterns and the community vision. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.2.020 Applicability
Chapter 17-3.2 applies to all new buildings, including single-family detached homes, and exterior alterations to existing buildings. The Planning Official, through a Type II procedure, may grant adjustments to Chapter 17-3.2, pursuant to the criteria of Chapter 17-4.7 Adjustments and Variances. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.2.030 Residential Buildings
A.    Purpose. The following requirements are intended to create and maintain a built environment that is conducive to walking; reduces dependency on the automobile for short trips; provides natural surveillance of public spaces; addresses the orientation and design of garages; and creates a human-scale design, e.g., with buildings placed close to public ways and large building walls divided into smaller planes with detailing.

B.     Building Orientation. Residential buildings that are subject to the provisions of this chapter, pursuant to Section 17-3.2.020, shall conform to all of the following standards in subsections B.1 through 3, below, as generally illustrated in Figure 17-3.2-1. Figure 17-3.2-2 provides examples of non-compliance.

1.     Building Orientation to Street. Except as provided below, dwelling units shall orient toward a street, have a primary entrance opening toward the street, and be connected to the right-of-way with an approved walkway or residential front yard.

a.     A dwelling may have its primary entrance oriented to a yard other than the front or street yard where the only permitted access to the property is from a shared driveway or flag lot drive and orienting the dwelling entrance to the street is not practical due to the layout of the lot and driveway.

b.     Where there is no adjacent street to which a dwelling may be oriented, or it is not practical to orient a dwelling to an adjacent street due to lot layout, topographic, or other characteristics of the site, the dwelling may orient to a walkway, courtyard, open space, common area, lobby, or breezeway (i.e., for multifamily buildings).

c.     Where a flag lot is permitted, building orientation shall conform to the provisions for flag lots under Chapter 17-4.3.

2.     Limitation on Parking Between Primary Entrance and Street. Off-street parking is not allowed between a primary building entrance and the street to which it is oriented, except that assisted living facilities, group care facilities, and similar institutional-residential uses serving clients with disabilities may have one driveway located between the primary building entrance and an adjacent street as required to serve as a drop-off or loading zone, provided the primary building entrance shall connect to an adjacent street by a pedestrian walkway that conforms to the standards of Section 17-3.3.040. The intent of this exception is to provide for one drop-off or loading zone while maintaining a direct, convenient, and safe pedestrian access to a primary building entrance.

3.     Build-To Line. Where a new building is proposed in a zone that requires a build-to line per Section 17-2.2.040, the building shall comply with the build-to line standard and the development shall meet the standards for pedestrian access under Section 17-3.3.040.

 



Figure 17-3.2-1 Examples of Code Compliant Features

 



Figure 17-3.2-2 Examples of Non-Compliant Features

 

C.     Garages. The following standards apply to all types of vehicle storage, including, but not limited to, buildings, carports, canopies, and other permanent and temporary structures. The standards are intended to balance residents’ desire for a convenient, safe, and private vehicle access to their homes with the public interest in maintaining safe and aesthetically pleasing streetscapes. The standards therefore promote pedestrian safety and visibility of public ways, while addressing aesthetic concerns associated with street-facing garages.

1.     Alleys and Shared Drives. Where a dwelling abuts a rear or side alley, or a shared driveway, including flag lot drives, the garage or carport opening(s) for that dwelling shall orient to the alley or shared drive, as applicable, and not a street.

2.     Setback for Garage Opening Facing Street. No garage or carport opening shall be placed closer than 16 feet to a street right-of-way. On corner lots, garages facing a side street (i.e., not the same street as the front entrance) may be located closer than 16 feet to a street right-of-way.

3.     Width of Garage Openings Facing Street. Where one or more garage openings face a street, the total width of all garage openings on that building elevation shall not exceed 50 percent of the width of that elevation; except this standard does not apply where the garage opening is recessed behind the front elevation of the dwelling by not less than four feet for its entire width, or where all garage openings are placed behind the primary entrance to the dwelling. An arbor, portico, or similar architectural feature extending the entire width of the garage may be used as the basis of measuring the garage recess. A garage opening is considered to be facing a street where the opening is parallel to, or within 45 degrees of, the street right-of-way line.

4.     Three-Car and Wider Garages. Where three or more contiguous garage parking bays are proposed facing the same street, the garage opening closest to a side property line shall be recessed at least two feet behind the adjacent opening(s) to break up the street-facing elevation and diminish the appearance of the garage from the street. Side-loaded garages, on interior lots, i.e., where the garage openings are turned away from the street, are exempt from this requirement.

5.     Garages for Duplex Dwellings. Duplex design shall conform to Section 17-2.3.060.

D.    Architecture. The following standards require variation in architectural plans to avoid monotony in new developments. The standards support the creation of architecturally varied neighborhoods, whether a neighborhood develops all at once or one lot at a time, avoiding homogeneous street frontages that detract from the community’s appearance. The standards are applied through the Site Design Review process for new townhome dwellings and new multifamily dwellings, and through the Zoning Checklist (Type I) review process prior to issuance of building permits for new single-family dwellings and new duplex dwellings. In addition to the following requirements, duplexes, townhomes, and multifamily projects shall conform to the special use standards of Chapter 17-2.3.

1.     Detailed Design. Dwelling designs shall incorporate not fewer than four architectural features per dwelling unit from subdivisions a through k, as generally illustrated in this chapter. Applicants are encouraged to use those elements that best suit the proposed building style and design.

a.     Covered front porch: not less than six feet in depth and not less than 30 percent of the width of dwelling, excluding the landing for dwelling entrance.

b.     Dormers: minimum of two required for each single-family dwelling and two each for other dwellings; must be a functional part of the structure, for example, providing light into a living space.

c.     Recessed entrance: not less than four feet deep.

d.     Windows: not less than 30 percent of surface area of all street-facing elevation(s).

e.     Window trim: minimum four-inch width (all elevations).

f.      Eaves: overhang of not less than 12 inches.

g.     Offset: offset in façade and/or roof (see subsection 2, “Articulation”); counts twice if both façade and roof offsets are provided.

h.     Bay window: projects from front elevation by 12 inches.

i.      Balcony: one per dwelling unit facing street.

j.      Decorative top: e.g., cornice or pediment with flat roof or brackets with pitched roof.

k.     Other: feature not listed but providing visual relief or contextually appropriate design similar to subdivisions a through j, as approved by the Planning Official through a Type I procedure.



Figure 17-3.2-3 Duplex Dwelling Design

 



Figure 17-3.2-4 Single-Family Dwelling Design – Extra-Large Garage

 



Figure 17-3.2-5 Multifamily Dwelling Design

 

2.     Articulation. Plans for residential buildings shall incorporate design features such as varying rooflines, offsets, balconies, projections (e.g., overhangs, porches, or similar features), recessed or covered entrances, window reveals, or similar elements that break up otherwise long, uninterrupted elevations. Such elements shall occur at a minimum interval of 40 feet, and each floor shall contain at least two elements from the following options, as generally illustrated in this Section 17-3.2.030.

a.     Recess (e.g., porch, courtyard, entrance balcony, or similar feature) that has a minimum depth of four feet;

b.     Extension (e.g., floor area, porch, entrance, balcony, overhang, or similar feature) that projects a minimum of two feet and runs horizontally for a minimum length of four feet; or

c.     Offsets or breaks in roof elevation of two feet or greater in height.

3.     House Plan Variety. This subsection applies to land divisions and new developments with five or more residential buildings. No two directly adjacent or opposite dwelling units in a single-family development, or buildings in a multifamily development, may possess the same front or street-facing elevation. This standard is met when front or street-facing elevations differ from one another by no fewer than three of the elements listed in subdivisions a through g. Where façades repeat on the same block face, they must have at least three intervening lots between them that meet the above standard. Land division approvals will be conditioned to assure compliance with this subsection.

a.     Materials. The plans specify different exterior cladding materials, a different combination of materials, or different dimensions, spacing, or arrangement of the same materials. This criterion does not require or prohibit any combination of materials; it only requires that plans not repeat or mirror one another. Materials used on the front façade must turn the corner and extend at least two feet deep onto the side elevations.

b.     Articulation. The plans have different offsets, recesses, or projections; or the front building elevations break in different places. For example, a plan that has a stoop entry (recess) varies from one that has an entry under a front porch (projection). For this criterion to apply, a recess must have a minimum depth of four feet and a projection or offset must be at least four feet in depth.

c.     Variation in Roof Elevation. The plans have different roof forms (e.g., gable versus gambrel or hip), different roof height (by at least 10 percent), different orientation (e.g., front-facing versus side-facing gable), or different roof projections (e.g., with and without dormer or shed, or different type of dormer or shed).

d.     Entry or Porch. The plans have different configuration or detailing of the front porch or covered entrance.

e.     Fenestration. The plans have different placement, shape, or orientation of windows or different placement of doors.

f.      Height. The elevation of the primary roofline (along the axis of the longest roofline) changes by not less than four feet from building to building, or from dwelling unit to dwelling unit (e.g., townhome units), as applicable. Changes in grade of eight feet or more from one lot to the adjacent lot are counted toward change in height for purposes of evaluating façade variation.

g.     Color Palette. Variation in color palette. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.2.040 Non-Residential Buildings
A.    Purpose and Applicability. The following requirements apply to non-residential development, including individual buildings and developments with multiple buildings such as shopping centers, office complexes, mixed-use developments, and institutional campuses. The standards are intended to create and maintain a built environment that is conducive to pedestrian accessibility, reducing dependency on the automobile for short trips, while providing civic space for employees and customers, supporting natural surveillance of public spaces, and creating human-scale design. The standards require buildings placed close to streets, with storefront windows (where applicable), with large building walls divided into smaller planes, and with architectural detailing.

B.     Building Orientation. The following standards apply to new buildings and building additions that are subject to Site Design Review. The Planning Official may approve adjustments to the standards as part of a Site Design Review approval, pursuant to Chapters 17-4.2 and 17-4.7, respectively.

1.     Buildings subject to this section shall conform to the applicable build-to line standard in Table 17-2.2.040.E, as generally illustrated in Figure 17-3.2-6. The standard is met when at least 50 percent of the abutting street frontage has a building placed no farther from at least one street property line than the build-to line in Table 17-2.2.040.E; except in the Central Commercial C-1 zone, at least 80 percent of the abutting street frontage shall have a building placed no farther from at least one street property line than the required build-to-line. The Planning Official, through Site Design Review, may waive the build to line standard where it finds that one or more of the conditions in subdivisions a through g occurs.

a.     A proposed building is adjacent to a single-family dwelling, and an increased setback promotes compatibility with the adjacent dwelling.

b.     The standards of the roadway authority preclude development at the build-to line.

c.     The applicant proposes extending an adjacent sidewalk or plaza for public use, or some other pedestrian amenity is proposed to be placed between the building and public right-of-way, pursuant to Section 17-3.2.050 and subject to Site Design Review approval.

d.     The build-to line may be increased to provide a private open space (e.g., landscaped forecourt), pursuant to Section 17-3.2.050, between a residential use in a mixed-use development (e.g., live-work building with ground floor residence) and a front or street property line.

e.     A significant tree or other environmental feature precludes strict adherence to the standard and will be retained and incorporated in the design of the project.

f.      A public utility easement or similar restricting legal condition that is outside the applicant’s control makes conformance with the build-to line impracticable. In this case, the building shall instead be placed as close to the street as possible given the legal constraint, and pedestrian amenities (e.g., plaza, courtyard, landscaping, outdoor seating area, etc.) shall be provided within the street setback in said location pursuant to Section 17-3.2.050.

g.     An existing building that was lawfully created but does not conform to the above standard is proposed to be expanded and compliance with this standard is not practicable.



Figure 17-3.2-6 Non-Residential Building Orientation

 

2.     Except as provided in subsections C.5 and 6, all buildings shall have at least one primary entrance (i.e., tenant entrance, lobby entrance, breezeway entrance, or courtyard entrance) facing an abutting street (i.e., within 45 degrees of the street property line); or if the building entrance must be turned more than 45 degrees from the street (i.e., front door is on a side or rear elevation) due to the configuration of the site or similar constraints, a pedestrian walkway must connect the primary entrance to the sidewalk in conformance with Section 17-3.3.040.

3.     Off-street parking, trash storage facilities, and ground-level utilities (e.g., utility vaults), and similar obstructions shall not be placed between building entrances and the street(s) to which they are oriented. To the extent practicable, such facilities shall be oriented internally to the block and accessed by alleys or driveways.

4.     Off-street parking shall be oriented internally to the site to the extent practicable, and shall meet the Access and Circulation requirements of Chapter 17-3.3, the Landscape and Screening requirements of Chapter 17-3.4, and the Parking and Loading requirements of Chapter 17-3.5.

5.     Where a development contains multiple buildings and there is insufficient street frontage to meet the above building orientation standards for all buildings on the subject site, a building’s primary entrance may orient to plaza, courtyard, or similar pedestrian space containing pedestrian amenities and meeting the requirements under Section 17-3.2.050, subject to Site Design Review approval. When oriented this way, the primary entrance(s), plaza, or courtyard shall be connected to the street by a pedestrian walkway conforming to Section 17-3.3.040.

C.     Large-Format Developments. Plans for new developments, or any phase thereof, with a total floor plate area (ground floor area of all buildings) greater than 35,000 square feet, shall meet all of the following standards in subsections C.1 through 9, as generally illustrated in Figure 17-3.2-7. The Planning Official may approve adjustments to the standards as part of a Site Design Review approval, pursuant to Chapters 17-4.2 and 17-4.7, respectively.

1.     The site plan or preliminary subdivision plan, as applicable, shall comply with the street connectivity standards of Section 17-3.6.020. The plan approval shall bind on all future phases of the development, if any, to the approved block layout.

2.     Except as provided by subsections C.6 through 9, the site shall be configured into blocks with building pads that have frontage onto improved streets meeting City standards, and shall contain interior parking courts and with interconnected pedestrian walkways.

3.     The build-to line standards in Table 17-2.2.040.E shall be met across not less than 75 percent of the site’s street frontage, consistent with subsection 17-3.2.040.B, except the build-to standard does not apply where a railroad, expressway, water body, topographic constraint, or similar physical constraint makes it impractical to orient buildings to a particular street or highway.

4.     Walkways shall connect the street right-of-way to all primary building entrances, and shall connect all primary building entrances to one another, including required pedestrian crossings through interior parking areas, if any, in accordance with Section 17-3.3.040. The Planning Official may condition development to provide facilities exceeding those required by Section 17-3.3.040, including a requirement for lighting, stairways, ramps, and midblock pedestrian access ways (e.g., to break up an otherwise long block) to ensure reasonably safe, direct, and convenient pedestrian circulation. Development in the right-of-way shall be approved by the City Engineer.

5.     Buildings placed at a block corner shall have a primary entrance oriented to the block corner. That entrance shall be located no more than 20 feet from the corner, as measured from the street curb and shall have a direct and convenient pedestrian walkway connecting to the corner sidewalk.

6.     All buildings shall orient to a street, pursuant to subsection B. Where it is not practical to orient all buildings to streets due to existing parcel configuration or a similar site constraints, buildings may orient to a “shopping street” providing, at a minimum, on-street parking (parallel or angled parking), 10-foot sidewalks (which shall include a four-foot zone for street trees and furnishings such as benches and other street furniture), and pedestrian-scale lighting. Shopping street dimensions do not apply to the public right-of-way.

7.     Each building that is proposed as orienting to a shopping street shall comply with the orientation standards of subsection B in reference to the shopping street, and shall have at least one primary entrance oriented to the shopping street.

8.     Where a building fronts both a shopping street and a public street, that building shall contain at least one primary entrance oriented to each street; except that an entrance is not required where the public street is not improved with a sidewalk and the City determines that sidewalk improvements to the public street cannot be required as a condition of approval.

9.     All other provisions of this Code apply to large-format developments.



Figure 17-3.2-7 Large-Format Developments

D.    Primary Entrances and Windows. The following standards, as generally illustrated in Figures 17-3.2-8 and 17.3.2-9, apply to new buildings and building additions that are subject to Site Design Review. The Planning Official may approve adjustments to the standards as part of a Site Design Review approval, pursuant to Chapters 17-4.2 and 17-4.7, respectively.

1.     All Elevations of Building. Architectural designs shall address all elevations of a building. Building forms, detailing, materials, textures, and color shall to contribute to a unified design with architectural integrity. Materials used on the front façade must turn the building corners and include at least a portion of the side elevations, consistent with the overall composition and design integrity of the building.

2.     Pedestrian Entrances. Ground level entrances oriented to a street shall be at least partly transparent for natural surveillance and to encourage an inviting and successful business environment. This standard may be met by providing a door with a window or windows, a transom window above the door, or sidelights beside the door. Where ATMs or other kiosks are proposed on any street-facing elevation, they shall be visible from the street for security and have a canopy, awning, or other weather protection shelter.

3.     Corner Entrances. Buildings on corner lots are encouraged to have corner entrances. Where a corner entrance is not provided, the building plan shall provide an architectural element or detailing (e.g., tower, beveled corner, art, special trim, etc.) that accentuates the corner location.

4.     Street Level Entrances. All primary building entrances shall open to the sidewalk and shall conform to Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements, as applicable. Primary entrances above or below grade may be allowed where ADA accessibility is provided.

5.     Windows—General. Except as approved for parking structures or accessory structures, the front/street-facing elevations of buildings shall provide display windows, windowed doors, and where applicable, transom windows to express a storefront character.

6.     Storefront Windows. Storefront windows shall consist of framed picture or bay windows, which may be recessed. Framing shall consist of trim detailing such as piers or pilasters (sides), lintels or hoods (tops), and kick plates or bulkheads (base)—or similar detailing—consistent with a storefront character. The ground floor, street-facing elevation(s) of all buildings shall comprise at least 60 percent transparent windows, measured as a section extending the width of the street-facing elevation between the building base (or 30 inches above the sidewalk grade, whichever is less) and a plane 72 inches above the sidewalk grade.

7.     Defined Upper Story(ies). Building elevations shall contain detailing that visually defines street level building spaces (storefronts) from upper stories. The distinction between street level and upper floors shall be established, for example, through the use of awnings, canopies, belt course, or similar detailing, materials, or fenestration. Upper floors may have less window area than ground floors, but shall follow the vertical lines of the lower level piers and the horizontal definition of spandrels and any cornices. Upper floor window orientation shall primarily be vertical, or have a width that is no greater than height. Paired or grouped windows that, together, are wider than they are tall, shall be visually divided to express the vertical orientation of individual windows.

8.     Buildings Not Adjacent to a Street. Buildings that are not adjacent to a street or a shopping street, such as those that are setback behind another building and those that are oriented to a civic space (e.g., internal plaza or court), shall meet the 60 percent transparency standard on all elevations abutting civic space(s) and on elevations containing a primary entrance.

9.     Side and Rear Elevation Windows. All side and rear elevations, except for zero lot line or common wall elevations, where windows are not required, shall provide not less than 30 percent transparency.

10.   Window Trim. At a minimum, windows shall contain trim, reveals, recesses, or similar detailing of not less than four inches in width or depth as applicable. The use of decorative detailing and ornamentation around windows (e.g., corbels, medallions, pediments, or similar features) is encouraged.

11.   Projecting Windows, Display Cases. Windows and display cases shall not break the front plane of the building (e.g., projecting display boxes are discouraged). For durability and aesthetic reasons, display cases, when provided, shall be flush with the building façade (not affixed to the exterior) and integrated into the building design with trim or other detailing. Window flower boxes are allowed, provided they do not encroach into the pedestrian through-zone.

12.   Window Exceptions. The Planning Official may approve an exception to the above standards where existing topography makes compliance impractical. Where it is not practicable to use glass, windows for parking garages or similar structures, the building design must incorporate openings or other detailing that resembles window patterns (rhythm and scale).

 



 

Figure 17-3.2-8 Small Commercial Building Design



Figure 17-3.2-9 Large Commercial/Mixed-Use Building Design

 

E.     Articulation and Detailing. The following standards apply to new buildings and building additions that are subject to Site Design Review. The Planning Official may approve adjustments to the standards as part of a Site Design Review approval, pursuant to Chapters 17-4.2 and 17-4.7, respectively.

1.     Articulation. All building elevations that orient to a street or civic space shall have breaks in the wall plane (articulation) of not less than one break for every 30 feet of building length or width, as applicable, pursuant to the following standards, which are generally illustrated in Figures 17-3.2-10, 17-3.2-11, and 17-3.2-12.

a.     A “break” for the purposes of this subsection is a change in wall plane of not less than 24 inches in depth. Breaks may include, but are not limited to, an offset, recess, window reveal, pilaster, frieze, pediment, cornice, parapet, gable, dormer, eave, coursing, canopy, awning, column, building base, balcony, permanent awning or canopy, marquee, or similar architectural feature.

b.     The Planning Official through Site Design Review may approve detailing that does not meet the 24-inch break-in-wall-plane standard where it finds that proposed detailing is more consistent with the architecture of historically significant or historic-contributing buildings existing in the vicinity.

c.     Changes in paint color and features that are not designed as permanent architectural elements, such as display cabinets, window boxes, retractable and similar mounted awnings or canopies, and other similar features, do not meet the 24-inch break-in-wall-plane standard.

d.     Building elevations that do not orient to a street or civic space need not comply with the 24-inch break-in-wall-plane standard but should complement the overall building design.

2.     Change in Materials. Elevations should incorporate changes in material that define a building’s base, middle, and top, as applicable, and create visual interest and relief. Side and rear elevations that do not face a street, public parking area, pedestrian access way, or plaza may utilize changes in texture and/or color of materials, provided that the design is consistent with the overall composition of the building.

3.     Horizontal Lines. New buildings and exterior remodels shall generally follow the prominent horizontal lines existing on adjacent buildings at similar levels along the street frontage. Examples of such horizontal lines include, but are not limited to: the base below a series of storefront windows, an awning or canopy line, a belt course between building stories, a cornice, or a parapet line. Where existing adjacent buildings do not meet the City’s current building design standards, a new building may establish new horizontal lines.

4.     Ground Floor and Upper Floor Division. A clear visual division shall be maintained between the ground level floor and upper floors, for example, through the use of a belt course, transom, awning, canopy, or similar division.

5.     Vertical Rhythms. New construction or front elevation remodels shall reflect a vertical orientation, either through breaks in volume or the use of surface details.



 

Figure 17-3.2-10 Articulation of Multi-Story Building and Typical Pedestrian Shelter

 



Figure 17-3.2-11 Articulation of Single-Story Buildings and Typical Pedestrian Shelters

 



Figure 17-3.2-12 Articulation of Horizontal Lines, Ground Floor and Upper Floor Division

 

F.     Pedestrian Shelters. The following standards apply to new buildings and building additions that are subject to Site Design Review. The Planning Official may approve adjustments to the standards as part of a Site Design Review approval, pursuant to Chapters 17-4.2 and 17-4.7, respectively.

1.     Minimum Pedestrian Shelter Coverage. Permanent awnings, canopies, recesses, or similar pedestrian shelters shall be provided along at least 75 percent of the ground floor elevation(s) of a building where the building abuts a sidewalk, civic space, or pedestrian access way. Pedestrian shelters used to meet the above standard shall extend at least five feet over the pedestrian area; except that the Planning Official, through Site Design Review, may reduce the above standards where it finds that existing right-of-way dimensions, easements, or building code requirements preclude standard shelters. In addition, the above standards do not apply where a building has a ground floor dwelling, as in a mixed-use development or live-work building, and the dwelling has a covered entrance. The Planning Official shall waive the above standards if the pedestrian shelter would extend into the right-of-way and the roadway authority does not allow encroachments in the right-of-way.

2.     Pedestrian Shelter Design. Pedestrian shelters shall comply with applicable building codes, and shall be designed to be visually compatible with the architecture of a building. If mezzanine or transom windows exist, the shelter shall be below such windows where practical. Where applicable, pedestrian shelters shall be designed to accommodate pedestrian signage (e.g., blade signs), while maintaining required vertical clearance.

G.    Mechanical Equipment.

1.     Building Walls. Where mechanical equipment, such as utility vaults, air compressors, generators, antennae, satellite dishes, or similar equipment, is permitted on a building wall that abuts a public right-of-way or civic space, it shall be screened pursuant to Chapter 17-3.4. Standpipes, meters, vaults, and similar equipment need not be screened but shall not be placed on a front elevation when other practical alternatives exist; such equipment shall be placed on a side or rear elevation where practical.

2.     Rooftops. Except as provided below, rooftop mechanical units shall be set back or screened behind a parapet wall so that they are not visible from any public right-of-way or civic space. Where such placement and screening is not practicable, the Planning Official may approve painting of mechanical units in lieu of screening; such painting may consist of colors that make the equipment visually subordinate to the building and adjacent buildings, if any.

3.     Ground-Mounted Mechanical Equipment. Ground-mounted equipment, such as generators, air compressors, trash compactors, and similar equipment, shall be limited to side or rear yards and screened with fences or walls constructed of materials similar to those on adjacent buildings. Hedges, trellises, and similar plantings may also be used as screens where there is adequate air circulation and sunlight, and irrigation is provided. The City may require additional setbacks and noise attenuating equipment for compatibility with adjacent uses.

H.    Civic Space. Commercial development projects shall provide civic space pursuant to Section 17-3.2.050.

I.      Drive-Up and Drive-Through Facilities. Drive-up and drive-through facilities shall comply with the requirements of Section 17-3.2.060. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.2.050 Civic Space and Pedestrian Amenities
A.    Purpose. This section provides standards for civic spaces where such areas are required or provided voluntarily. Civic spaces allow for light and air circulation, visual relief, pedestrian resting areas, and opportunities for socialization in the most densely developed parts of the City. The code allows projects to meet minimum landscape area standards of Chapter 17-3.4 by providing civic space adjacent to street frontages or in courtyards or plazas between buildings, instead of with planted areas elsewhere on a lot as is typically done for residential developments.

B.     Applicability. All new commercial and mixed use developments with more than 10,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area within the Central Commercial C-1 and General Commercial C-2 zones are required to meet the standards of this section.

C.     Standards.

1.     Civic Space Standards. Except as provided by subsections C.3 and 4, at least three percent of every development site shall be designated and improved as civic space (plaza, landscaped courtyard, or similar space) that is accessible to the general public, pursuant to all of the following standards in subdivisions a through e, and as generally illustrated in Figure 17-3.2-12:

a.     The highest priority locations for civic space improvements are those with the highest pedestrian activity (e.g., street corners and pedestrian access ways), as generally illustrated.

b.     Civic spaces shall abut a public right-of-way or otherwise be connected to and visible from a public right-of-way by a sidewalk or pedestrian access way. Access ways shall be identifiable with a change in paving materials (e.g., pavers inlaid in concrete or a change in pavement scoring patterns or texture).

c.     Where public access to a civic space is not practical due to existing development patterns, physical site constraints, or other hardship presented by the applicant, the City may allow a private area, such as an outdoor eating area attached to a restaurant, in finding the project complies with the standard.

d.     All civic spaces shall have dimensions that allow for reasonable pedestrian access. For example, by extending the width of an existing sidewalk by four feet, a developer might provide space for an outdoor eating area; whereas a larger development at a street corner could meet the standard by creating a plaza adjacent to a building entrance.

e.     Civic space improvements shall conform to Chapter 17-3.4 Landscaping, Fences and Walls, Outdoor Lighting.

2.     Pedestrian Improvements in Civic Spaces. Except as provided by subsections C.3 and 4, where this section requires the provision of civic space, such space shall be improved with pedestrian amenities, pursuant to the following standards in subdivisions a through e:

a.     Pedestrian amenities shall be provided in an amount equal to or greater than one-half of one percent of the estimated construction cost of the proposed building(s). A licensed architect, landscape architect, or other qualified professional, shall prepare cost estimates for civic space improvements, which shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning Official.

b.     Pedestrian amenities include plaza surfaces (e.g., pavers, landscapes, etc.), sidewalk extensions (e.g., with outdoor café space), street furnishings (e.g., benches, public art, pedestrian-scale lighting, water fountains, trash receptacles, bus waiting shelters, shade structures, or others), way-finding signs, or similar amenities, as approved by the Planning Official.

c.     Where a civic space adjoins a building entrance it should incorporate a permanent weather protection canopy, awning, pergola, or similar feature, consistent with Section 17-3.2.040.F.

d.     The City may accept pedestrian amenities proposed within a public right-of-way (e.g., street corner or mid-block pedestrian access way) and grant the developer credit toward fulfilling the above improvement standard.

e.     The cost of a proposed public parking facility may be subtracted from building costs used in the assessment of civic space improvements.



Figure 17-3.2-12 Civic Spaces

 

3.     Exception for Minor Projects. Building additions and remodels are not required to provide civic space where the estimated cost of the proposed building improvement is less than 50 percent of the existing assessed value of improvements on the subject site. Cost estimates are based on those used to estimate building permit fees, or other independent and credible source, subject to review and approval by the Planning Official. Assessed values shall be the market value of record at the Clackamas County Assessor’s Office.

4.     Exception for In Lieu Fee. Where the City finds that the creation of civic space is not practicable based on the project location or other relevant factors, it may accept an in lieu fee, to be paid to the City of Molalla Parks Improvement Fund, which shall be proportionate to the estimated cost of land and improvements (on-site) that otherwise would have been required. In such case, a licensed architect, landscape architect, or other qualified professional, shall prepare cost estimates for civic space improvements, which shall be subject to review and approval by the City Planning Official. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.2.060 Drive-Up and Drive-Through Uses and Facilities
A.    Purpose. Where drive-up or drive-through uses and facilities are allowed, they shall conform to all of the following standards, which are intended to calm traffic, provide for adequate vehicle queuing space, prevent automobile turning movement conflicts, and provide for pedestrian comfort and safety.

B.     Standards. Drive-up and drive-through facilities (i.e., driveway queuing areas, customer service windows, teller machines, kiosks, drop-boxes, or similar facilities) shall meet all of the following standards, as generally illustrated in Figure 17-3.2-13:

1.     The drive-up or drive-through facility shall orient to and receive access from a driveway that is internal to the development and not a street, as generally illustrated.

2.     The drive-up or drive-through portion of the establishment or drive-through window shall not be oriented to street corner.

3.     The entry into a drive-up or drive-through portion of the establishment or drive-through window shall be located a sufficient distance from a street right-of-way so as not to allow for queue into a street right-of-way during any time of the year. Applicant shall provide a section within the Traffic Impact Analysis or supply the City with a traffic engineer’s report demonstrating that the drive-up or drive-through will have no impact to the street right-of-way.

4.     Drive-up and drive-through queuing areas shall be designed so that vehicles will not obstruct any street, fire lane, walkway, bike lane, or sidewalk.

5.     In the General Commercial C-2 district, a new drive-up or drive-through facility must comply with the access control distance requirements identified in the City’s Transportation System Plan in relation to existing drive-up or drive-through facilities.

 



Figure 17-3.2-13 Drive-Up and Drive-Through Uses

(Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.2.070 R-5 Historic District Design Standards
A.    Applicability. The following design standards are required in the R-5 Historic Residential zone and supplement the standards found elsewhere in this Code. Where a standard in this section conflicts with another code provision, this section shall apply.

B.     Standards. All new developments, including additions and remodels to existing structures, shall conform to the early 1900s style of development, as found in “A Field Guide to American Houses” by Virginia and Lee McAlester (Knopf Doubleday, Expanded Edition, 2015).

1.     Landscape materials shall be of native species, or as approved by the Planning Official.

2.     Individual trees along walkways and along sidewalks in the internal portions of projects shall be planted in tree wells or planter boxes. These types of plantings must first be approved by the Planning Official.

3.     Open stormwater detention facilities shall be incorporated into project landscaping and open space where geographically feasible. These facilities shall be fenced, landscaped, and screened.

4.     Natural timber, brick, and/or stone shall be used on the portion of the building visible from the public right-of-way.

5.     New buildings, as well as additions and remodeling to existing buildings, shall conform to the existing pattern of design elements including:

a.     Rhythm of solids and voids in front façades, building lines, materials, textures and colors;

b.     Architectural details;

c.     Roof shape; and

d.     Porches.

6.     On housing, brick and/or stone shall be used from the top of the foundation to the first floor window. In cases where exposed half floors at ground level exist, that area shall be brick but shall count toward the minimum requirement.

7.     Natural timbers shall be used in at least one of the following ways:

a.     As pillars for a porch;

b.     Timbers wrapping on the corner fascia;

c.     Cedar siding, unpainted (a protective wood preservative shall be used), as a cap on top of the brick fascia and shall be a minimum of 12 inches tall.

8.     All doors and windows shall be trimmed with timber fascia.

9.     Sidewalks may be increased beyond the width specified in the Public Works Standards and Transportation System Master Plan in order to provide outdoor seating.

10.   All single-family residences shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet.

11.   A brick look shall be incorporated into sidewalks. Stamped concrete shall be allowed.

12.   Light posts resembling the early 1900s light posts, as approved by the City, shall be used within the development.

13.   Alleys are intended for pedestrian use. Alleys shall not have sidewalks or pedestrian access ways. All garage access shall occur off of alleys on new development or remodels.

14.   Where alleys are available, all garages shall be built off the alleys.

15.   Porches/Covered Entries. All residential development shall have a front porch. In the case of single-family residences, porches shall meet the following standards:

a.     A minimum of six feet on each side of the entry door;

b.     A minimum of six feet deep; and

c.     Steps shall not encroach any closer than three feet to the sidewalk. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

Chapter 17-3.3 ACCESS AND CIRCULATION
17-3.3.010 Purpose
Chapter 17-3.3 contains standards for vehicular and pedestrian access, circulation, and connectivity. The standards promote safe, reasonably direct, and convenient options for walking and bicycling, while accommodating vehicle access to individual properties, as needed. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.3.020 Applicability
Chapter 17-3.3 applies to new development and changes in land use necessitating a new or modified street or highway connection. Except where the standards of a roadway authority other than the City supersede City standards, Chapter 17-3.3 applies to all connections to a street or highway, and to driveways and walkways. The Planning Official, through a Type II procedure, may grant adjustments to Chapter 17-3.3, pursuant to the criteria of Chapter 17-4.7 Adjustments and Variances. For street improvement requirements, refer to Section 17-3.6.020. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.3.030 Vehicular Access and Circulation
A.    Purpose and Intent. Section 17-3.3.030 implements the street access policies of the City of Molalla Transportation System Plan. It is intended to promote safe vehicle access and egress to properties, while maintaining traffic operations in conformance with adopted standards. “Safety,” for the purposes of this chapter, extends to all modes of transportation.

B.     Permit Required. Vehicular access to a public street (e.g., a new or modified driveway connection to a street or highway) requires an approach permit approved by the applicable roadway authority.

C.     Traffic Study Requirements. The City, in reviewing a development proposal or other action requiring an approach permit, may require a traffic impact analysis, pursuant to Section 17-3.6.020, to determine compliance with this Code.

D.    Approach and Driveway Development Standards. Approaches and driveways shall conform to all of the following development standards:

1.     The number of approaches on higher classification streets (e.g., collector and arterial streets) shall be minimized; where practicable, access shall be taken first from a lower classification street.

2.     Approaches shall conform to the spacing standards of subsections E and F, below, and shall conform to minimum sight distance and channelization standards of the roadway authority.

3.     Driveways shall be paved and meet applicable construction standards. Where permeable paving surfaces are allowed or required, such surfaces shall conform to applicable Public Works Design Standards.

4.     The City Engineer may limit the number or location of connections to a street, or limit directional travel at an approach to one-way, right-turn only, or other restrictions, where the roadway authority requires mitigation to alleviate safety or traffic operations concerns.

5.     Where the spacing standards of the roadway authority limit the number or location of connections to a street or highway, the City Engineer may require a driveway extend to one or more edges of a parcel and be designed to allow for future extension and inter-parcel circulation as adjacent properties develop. The City Engineer may also require the owner(s) of the subject site to record an access easement for future joint use of the approach and driveway as the adjacent property(ies) develop(s).

6.     Where applicable codes require emergency vehicle access, approaches and driveways shall be designed and constructed to accommodate emergency vehicle apparatus and shall conform to applicable fire protection requirements. The City Engineer may restrict parking, require signage, or require other public safety improvements pursuant to the recommendations of an emergency service provider.

7.     As applicable, approaches and driveways shall be designed and constructed to accommodate truck/trailer-turning movements.

8.     Except where the City Engineer and roadway authority, as applicable, permit an open access with perpendicular or angled parking, driveways shall accommodate all projected vehicular traffic on-site without vehicles stacking or backing up onto a street.

9.     Driveways shall be designed so that vehicle areas, including, but not limited to, drive-up and drive-through facilities and vehicle storage and service areas, do not obstruct any public right-of-way.

10.   Approaches and driveways shall not be wider than necessary to safely accommodate projected peak hour trips and turning movements, and shall be designed to minimize crossing distances for pedestrians.

11.   As it deems necessary for pedestrian safety, the City Engineer, in consultation with the roadway authority, as applicable, may require that traffic-calming features, textured driveway surfaces (e.g., pavers or similar devices), curb extensions, signage or traffic control devices, or other features, be installed on or in the vicinity of a site as a condition of development approval.

12.   Construction of approaches along acceleration or deceleration lanes, and along tapered (reduced width) portions of a roadway, shall be avoided; except where no reasonable alternative exists and the approach does not create safety or traffic operations concern.

13.   Approaches and driveways shall be located and designed to allow for safe maneuvering in and around loading areas, while avoiding conflicts with pedestrians, parking, landscaping, and buildings.

14.   Where sidewalks or walkways occur adjacent to a roadway, driveway aprons constructed of concrete shall be installed between the driveway and roadway edge. The roadway authority may require the driveway apron be installed outside the required sidewalk or walkway surface, consistent with Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements, and to manage surface water runoff and protect the roadway surface.

15.   Where an accessible route is required pursuant to ADA, approaches and driveways shall meet accessibility requirements where they coincide with an accessible route.

16.   The City Engineer may require changes to the proposed configuration and design of an approach, including the number of drive aisles or lanes, surfacing, traffic-calming features, allowable turning movements, and other changes or mitigation, to ensure traffic safety and operations.

17.   Where a new approach onto a state highway or a change of use adjacent to a state highway requires ODOT approval, the applicant is responsible for obtaining ODOT approval. The City Engineer may approve a development conditionally, requiring the applicant first obtain required ODOT permit(s) before commencing development, in which case the City will work cooperatively with the applicant and ODOT to avoid unnecessary delays.

18.   Where an approach or driveway crosses a drainage ditch, canal, railroad, or other feature that is under the jurisdiction of another agency, the applicant is responsible for obtaining all required approvals and permits from that agency prior to commencing development.

19.   Where a proposed driveway crosses a culvert or drainage ditch, the City Engineer may require the developer to install a culvert extending under and beyond the edges of the driveway on both sides of it, pursuant to applicable Public Works Design Standards.

20.   Except as otherwise required by the applicable roadway authority or waived by the City Engineer temporary driveways providing access to a construction site or staging area shall be paved or graveled to prevent tracking of mud onto adjacent paved streets.

21.   Development that increases impervious surface area shall conform to the storm drainage and surface water management requirements of Section 17-3.6.050.

E.     Approach Separation from Street Intersections. Except as provided by subsection H, minimum distances shall be maintained between approaches and street intersections consistent with the current version of the Public Works Design Standards and Transportation System Plan.

F.     Approach Spacing. Except as provided by subsection H or as required to maintain street operations and safety, the following minimum distances shall be maintained between approaches consistent with the current version of the Public Works Design Standards and Transportation System Plan.



Figure 17-3.3-1 Approach Spacing

G.    Vision Clearance. No visual obstruction (e.g., sign, structure, solid fence, or shrub vegetation) greater than 2.5 feet in height shall be placed in “vision clearance areas” at street intersections.. The minimum vision clearance area may be modified by the Planning Official through a Type I procedure, upon finding that more or less sight distance is required (i.e., due to traffic speeds, roadway alignment, etc.). Placement of light poles, utility poles, and tree trunks should be avoided within vision clearance areas.



Figure 17-3.3-2 Vision Clearance

 

H.    Exceptions and Adjustments. The City Engineer may approve adjustments to the spacing standards of subsections E and F, above, where an existing connection to a City street does not meet the standards of the roadway authority and the proposed development moves in the direction of code compliance. The Planning Official through a Type II procedure may also approve a deviation to the spacing standards on City streets where it finds that mitigation measures, such as consolidated access (removal of one access), joint use driveways (more than one property uses same access), directional limitations (e.g., one-way), turning restrictions (e.g., right-in/right-out only), or other mitigation alleviate all traffic operations and safety concerns.

I.      Joint Use Access Easement and Maintenance Agreement. Where the City approves a joint use driveway, the property owners shall record an easement with the deed allowing joint use of and cross access between adjacent properties. The owners of the properties agreeing to joint use of the driveway shall record a joint maintenance agreement with the deed, defining maintenance responsibilities of property owners. The applicant shall provide a fully executed copy of the agreement to the City for its records, but the City is not responsible for maintaining the driveway or resolving any dispute between property owners. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.3.040 Pedestrian Access and Circulation
A.    Purpose and Intent. Section 17-3.3.040 implements the pedestrian access and connectivity policies of the City of Molalla Transportation System. It is intended to provide for safe, reasonably direct, and convenient pedestrian access and circulation.

B.     Standards. Developments shall conform to all of the following standards for pedestrian access and circulation as generally illustrated in Figure 17-3.3-3:

1.     Continuous Walkway System. A pedestrian walkway system shall extend throughout the development site and connect to adjacent sidewalks, if any, and to all future phases of the development, as applicable.

2.     Safe, Direct, and Convenient. Walkways within developments shall provide safe, reasonably direct, and convenient connections between primary building entrances and all adjacent parking areas, recreational areas, playgrounds, and public rights-of-way conforming to the following standards:

a.     The walkway is reasonably direct when it follows a route that does not deviate unnecessarily from a straight line or it does not involve a significant amount of out-of-direction travel.

b.     The walkway is designed primarily for pedestrian safety and convenience, meaning it is reasonably free from hazards and provides a reasonably smooth and consistent surface and direct route of travel between destinations. The Planning Official may require landscape buffering between walkways and adjacent parking lots or driveways to mitigate safety concerns.

c.     The walkway network connects to all primary building entrances, consistent with the building design standards of Chapter 17-3.2 and, where required, Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements.

3.     Vehicle/Walkway Separation. Except as required for crosswalks, per subsection 4, below, where a walkway abuts a driveway or street it shall be raised six inches and curbed along the edge of the driveway or street. Alternatively, the Planning Official may approve a walkway abutting a driveway at the same grade as the driveway if the walkway is physically separated from all vehicle-maneuvering areas. An example of such separation is a row of bollards (designed for use in parking areas) with adequate minimum spacing between them to prevent vehicles from entering the walkway.

4.     Crosswalks. Where a walkway crosses a parking area or driveway (“crosswalk”), it shall be clearly marked with contrasting paving materials (e.g., pavers, light-color concrete inlay between asphalt, or similar contrasting material). The crosswalk may be part of a speed table to improve driver-visibility of pedestrians. Painted or thermo-plastic striping and similar types of non-permanent applications are discouraged, but may be approved for lesser used crosswalks not exceeding 24 feet in length.

5.     Walkway Width and Surface. Walkways, including access ways required for subdivisions pursuant to Chapter 17-4.3, shall be constructed of concrete, asphalt, brick or masonry pavers, or other durable surface, as approved by the City Engineer, and not less than six feet wide. Multi-use paths (i.e., designed for shared use by bicyclists and pedestrians) shall be concrete or asphalt and shall conform to the current version of the Public Works Design Standards and Transportation System Plan.

6.     Walkway Construction (Private). Walkway surfaces may be concrete, asphalt, brick or masonry pavers, or other City-approved durable surface meeting ADA requirements. Walkways shall be not less than six feet in width in commercial and mixed use developments and where access ways are required for subdivisions under Division IV.

7.     Multi-Use Pathways. Multi-use pathways, where approved, shall be a minimum width and constructed of materials consistent with the current version of the Public Works Design Standards and Transportation System Plan.



 

Figure 17-3.3-3 Access and Circulation

(Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

Chapter 17-3.4 LANDSCAPING, FENCES AND WALLS, OUTDOOR LIGHTING
17-3.4.010 Purpose
Chapter 17-3.4 contains standards for landscaping and screening, fences, and accessory walls, and outdoor lighting. The regulations are intended to protect public health, safety, and welfare by reducing development impacts (e.g., glare, noise, and visual impacts) on adjacent uses; minimizing erosion; slowing the rate of surface water runoff, thereby reducing infrastructure costs; buffering pedestrians from vehicle maneuvering areas; cooling buildings and parking lots in summer months with shade; and enhancing the City’s appearance. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.4.020 Applicability
A.    Section 17-3.4.030 establishes design standards for landscaping and screening. Projects requiring Site Design Review or Land Division approval shall meet the landscape standards of the applicable zone, including the standards in Tables 17-2.2.040.D and 17-2.2.040.E and any Special Use requirements under Chapter 17-2.3, and the requirements of Section 17-3.4.030. Property owners are required to maintain landscaping and screening pursuant to Section 17-3.4.030.G.

B.     Section 17-3.4.040 establishes design standards for when a fence, or a wall not attached to a building, is to be erected, extended, or otherwise altered. It also applies to situations where this Code requires screening or buffering (e.g., outdoor or unenclosed storage uses). The standards of Section 17-3.4.040 supplement the development standards in Tables 17-2.2.030 and 17-2.2.040 and any applicable Special Use requirements under Chapter 17-2.3.

C.     Section 17-3.4.050, Outdoor Lighting, applies to all new outdoor lighting, i.e., lighting that is installed after November 10, 2017.

D.    The Planning Official, through a Type II procedure, may grant adjustments to Chapter 17-3.4, pursuant to the criteria of Chapter 17-4.7 Adjustments and Variances. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.4.030 Landscaping and Screening
A.    General Landscape Standard. All portions of a lot not otherwise developed with buildings, accessory structures, vehicle maneuvering areas, or parking shall be landscaped.

B.     Minimum Landscape Area. All lots shall conform to the minimum landscape area standards of the applicable zoning district, as contained in Tables 17-2.2.040.D and 17-2.2.040.E. The Planning Official, consistent with the purposes in Section 17-3.4.010, may allow credit toward the minimum landscape area for existing vegetation that is retained in the development.

C.     Plant Selection. A combination of deciduous and evergreen trees, shrubs, and ground covers shall be used for all planted areas, the selection of which shall be based on local climate, exposure, water availability, and drainage conditions, among other factors. When new vegetation is planted, soils shall be amended and irrigation shall be provided, as necessary, to allow for healthy plant growth. The selection of plants shall be based on all of the following standards and guidelines:

1.     Use plants that are appropriate to the local climate, exposure, and water availability. The presence of utilities and drainage conditions shall also be considered.

2.     Plant species that do not require irrigation once established (naturalized) are preferred over species that require irrigation.

3.     Trees shall be not less than two-inch caliper for street trees and one and one-half-inch caliper for other trees at the time of planting. Trees to be planted under or near power lines shall be selected so as to not conflict with power lines at maturity.

4.     Shrubs shall be planted from five-gallon containers, minimum, where they are for required screens or buffers, and two-gallon containers minimum elsewhere.

5.     Shrubs shall be spaced in order to provide the intended screen or canopy cover within two years of planting.

6.     All landscape areas, whether required or not, that are not planted with trees and shrubs or covered with allowable non-plant material, shall have ground cover plants that are sized and spaced to achieve plant coverage of not less than 75 percent at maturity.

7.     Bark dust, chips, aggregate, or other non-plant ground covers may be used, but shall cover not more than 35 percent of any landscape area. Non-plant ground covers cannot be a substitute for required ground cover plants.

8.     Where stormwater retention or detention, or water quality treatment facilities are proposed, they shall meet the requirements of the current version of the Public Works Design Standards.

9.     Existing mature trees that can thrive in a developed area and that do not conflict with other provisions of this Code shall be retained where specimens are in good health, have desirable aesthetic characteristics, and do not present a hazard.

10.   Landscape plans shall avoid conflicts between plants and buildings, streets, walkways, utilities, and other features of the built environment.

11.   Evergreen plants shall be used where a sight-obscuring landscape screen is required.

12.   Deciduous trees should be used where summer shade and winter sunlight is desirable.

13.   Landscape plans should provide focal points within a development, for example, by preserving large or unique trees or groves or by using flowering plants or trees with fall color.

14.   Landscape plans should use a combination of plants for seasonal variation in color and yearlong interest.

15.   Where plants are used to screen outdoor storage or mechanical equipment, the selected plants shall have growth characteristics that are compatible with such features.

16.   Landscape plans shall provide for both temporary and permanent erosion control measures, which shall include plantings where cuts or fills, including berms, swales, stormwater detention facilities, and similar grading, is proposed.

17.   When new vegetation is planted, soils shall be amended and irrigation provided, as necessary, until the plants are naturalized and able to grow on their own.

D.    Central Commercial C-1 District Streetscape Standard. Developers of projects within the Central Commercial C-1 zoning district can meet the landscape area requirement of subsection B, in part, by installing street trees in front of their projects. The Planning Official shall grant credit toward the landscape area requirement using a ratio of 1:1, where one square foot of planted area (e.g., tree well or planter surface area) receives one square foot of credit. The Planning Official may grant additional landscape area credit by the same ratio where the developer widens the sidewalk or creates a plaza or other civic space pursuant to Section 17-3.2.050.

E.     Parking Lot Landscaping. All of the following standards shall be met for parking lots. If a development contains multiple parking lots, then the standards shall be evaluated separately for each parking lot.

1.     A minimum of 10 percent of the total surface area of all parking areas, as measured around the perimeter of all parking spaces and maneuvering areas, shall be landscaped. Such landscaping shall consist of shade trees distributed throughout the parking area. A combination of deciduous and evergreen trees, shrubs, and ground cover plants is required. The trees shall be planned so that they provide a partial canopy cover over the parking lot within five years. At a minimum, one tree per 12 parking spaces on average shall be planted over and around the parking area.

2.     All parking areas with more than 20 spaces shall provide landscape islands with trees that break up the parking area into rows of not more than 10 contiguous parking spaces. Landscape islands and planters shall have dimensions of not less than 48 square feet of area and no dimension of less than six feet, to ensure adequate soil, water, and space for healthy plant growth.

3.     All required parking lot landscape areas not otherwise planted with trees must contain a combination of shrubs and groundcover plants so that, within two years of planting, not less than 50 percent of that area is covered with living plants.

4.     Wheel stops, curbs, bollards, or other physical barriers are required along the edges of all vehicle-maneuvering areas to protect landscaping from being damaged by vehicles. Trees shall be planted not less than two feet from any such barrier.

5.     Trees planted in tree wells within sidewalks or other paved areas shall be installed with root barriers, consistent with applicable nursery standards.

F.     Screening Requirements. Screening is required for outdoor storage areas, unenclosed uses, and parking lots, and may be required in other situations as determined by the Planning Official. Landscaping shall be provided pursuant to the standards of subsections F.1 through 3. (See also Figure 17-3.4-4.)

1.     Outdoor Storage and Unenclosed Uses. All areas of a site containing or proposed to contain outdoor storage of goods, materials, equipment, and vehicles (other than required parking lots and service and delivery areas, per Site Design Review), and areas containing junk, salvage materials, or similar contents, shall be screened from view from adjacent rights-of-way and residential uses by a sight-obscuring fence, wall, landscape screen, or combination of screening methods. See also Section 17-3.4.040 for related fence and wall standards.

2.     Parking Lots. The edges of parking lots shall be screened to minimize vehicle headlights shining into adjacent rights-of-way and residential yards. Parking lots abutting a sidewalk or walkway shall be screened using a low-growing hedge or low garden wall to a height of between three feet and four feet.

3.     Other Uses Requiring Screening. The Planning Official may require screening in other situations as authorized by this Code, including, but not limited to, outdoor storage areas, blank walls, Special Uses pursuant to Chapter 17-2.3, flag lots, and as mitigation where an applicant has requested an adjustment pursuant to Chapter 17-4.7.

G.    Maintenance. All landscaping shall be maintained in good condition, or otherwise replaced by the property owner.



Figure 17-3.4-4 Screening Requirements

(Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.4.040 Fences and Walls
A.    Purpose. This section provides general development standards for fences, and walls that are not part of a building, such as screening walls and retaining walls.

B.     Applicability. Section 17-3.4.040 applies to all fences, and to walls that are not part of a building, including modifications to existing fences and walls.

C.     Height.

1.     Residential Zones. Fences and freestanding walls (i.e., exclusive of building walls) for residential uses shall not exceed the following heights above grade, where grade is measured from the base of the subject fence or wall.

a.     Within Front or Street-Facing Side Yard Setback. Four feet; except the following additional height is allowed:

(1)    A fence may be constructed to a maximum height of six feet where it is located on a street-facing side yard.

(2)    A fence may be constructed to a maximum height of six feet where the fence is of open chain link or other “see-through” composition that allows 90 percent light transmission.

(3)    One incidental garden structure (e.g., arbor or gate) not exceeding eight feet in height and six feet in width is allowed within a front or street-facing yard provided it does not encroach into a required vision clearance area.

b.     Within an Interior Side or Rear Yard Setback. Six feet; except the fence or wall height, as applicable, shall not exceed the distance from the fence or wall line to the nearest primary structure on an adjacent property.

2.     Non-Residential Zones. Fences and freestanding walls (i.e., exclusive of building walls) for non-residential uses shall not exceed the following height above grade, where grade is measured from the base of the subject fence or wall.

a.     Within Front or Street-Facing Side Yard Setback. Four feet, except the following additional height is allowed for properties located within an industrial, public, or institutional zone:

(1)    Where approved by the City Planning Official, a fence constructed of open chain link or other “see-through” composition that allows 90 percent light transmission may reach a height of up to eight feet.

b.     Within an Interior Side or Rear Yard Setback. Eight feet; except the fence or wall height, as applicable, shall not exceed the distance from the fence or wall line to the nearest primary structure on an adjacent property.

3.     All Zones. Fences and walls shall comply with the vision clearance standards of Section 17-3.3.030.G. Other provisions of this Code, or the requirements of the roadway authority, may limit allowable height of a fence or wall below the height limits of this section.

D.    Materials. Prohibited fence and wall materials include straw bales, tarps, barbed or razor wire (except in the M-2 Heavy Industrial zone); scrap lumber, untreated wood (except cedar or redwood), corrugated metal, sheet metal, scrap materials; dead, diseased, or dying plants; and materials similar to those listed herein.

E.     Permitting. A Type I approval is required to install a fence of six feet or less in height, or a wall that is four feet or less in height. All other walls and fences require review and approval by the Planning Official through a Type II procedure. The Planning Official may require installation of walls or fences as a condition of approval for development, as provided by other Code sections. A building permit may be required for some fences and walls, pursuant to applicable building codes. Walls greater than four feet in height shall be designed by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Oregon.

F.     Maintenance. Fences and walls shall be maintained in good condition, or otherwise replaced by the property owner. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.4.050 Outdoor Lighting
A.    Purpose. This section contains regulations requiring adequate levels of outdoor lighting while minimizing negative impacts of light pollution.

B.     Applicability. All outdoor lighting shall comply with the standards of this section.

C.     Standards.

1.     Light poles, except as required by a roadway authority or public safety agency, shall not exceed a height of 20 feet; pedestal- or bollard-style lighting shall be used to illuminate walkways. Flag poles, utility poles, and streetlights are exempt from this requirement.

2.     Where a light standard is placed over a sidewalk or walkway, a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet shall be maintained.

3.     Outdoor lighting levels shall be subject to review and approval through Site Design Review. As a guideline, lighting levels shall be no greater than necessary to provide for pedestrian safety, property or business identification, and crime prevention.

4.     Except as provided for up-lighting of flags and permitted building-mounted signs, all outdoor light fixtures shall be directed downward, and have full cutoff and full shielding to preserve views of the night sky and to minimize excessive light spillover onto adjacent properties.

5.     Lighting shall be installed where it will not obstruct public ways, driveways, or walkways.

6.     Walkway lighting in private areas shall have a minimum average illumination of not less than 0.2 foot-candles. Lighting along public walkways shall meet the current version of the Public Works Design Standards and AASHTO lighting requirements.

7.     Active building entrances shall have a minimum average illumination of not less than two foot-candles.

8.     Surfaces of signs shall have an illumination level of not more than two foot-candles.

9.     Parking lots and outdoor services areas, including quick vehicle service areas, shall have a minimum illumination of not less than 0.2 foot-candles, average illumination of approximately 0.8 foot-candles, and a uniformity ratio (maximum-to-minimum ratio) of not more than 20:1.

10.   Where illumination grid lighting plans cannot be reviewed or if fixtures do not provide photometrics and bulbs are under 2,000 lumens, use the following guidelines:

a.     Poles should be no greater in height than four times the distance to the property line.

b.     Maximum lumen levels should be based on fixture height.

c.     Private illumination shall not be used to light adjoining public right-of-way.

11.   Where a light standard is placed within a walkway, an unobstructed pedestrian through zone not less than 48 inches wide shall be maintained.

12.   Lighting subject to this section shall consist of materials approved for outdoor use and shall be installed according to the manufacturer’s specifications.

D.    Permitting. A Type I approval is required to install or replace outdoor lighting. The Planning Official may require lighting as a condition of approval for some projects, pursuant to other Code requirements.

E.     Maintenance. For public health and safety, outdoor lighting shall be maintained in good condition, or otherwise replaced by the property owner. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

Chapter 17-3.5 PARKING AND LOADING
17-3.5.010 Purpose
Chapter 17-3.5 contains requirements for automobile and bicycle parking. This Code is intended to be flexible in requiring adequate parking, rather than a minimum number of parking spaces, for each use. It provides standards for the location, size, and design of parking areas to ensure such areas can be accessed safely and efficiently. This Code also encourages non-motorized transportation by requiring bicycle parking for some uses. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.5.020 Applicability and General Regulations
A.    Where the Regulations Apply. The regulations of this chapter apply to all parking areas in all zones, at all times, whether parking is required by this Code or put in for the convenience of property owners or users.

B.     Occupancy. All required parking areas must be developed in accordance with the requirements of this Code prior to occupancy of any structure on the subject site. Where landscaping, screening, or other improvements are required pursuant to this Code, all such improvements must be installed and approved by the Planning Official prior to occupancy.

C.     Calculations of Amounts of Required and Allowed Parking.

1.     When computing parking spaces based on floor area, parking structures and non-leasable floor spaces, such as storage closets, mechanical equipment rooms, and similar spaces, are not counted.

2.     The number of parking spaces is computed based on the primary uses on the site except as stated in subsection C.3. When there are two or more separate primary uses on a site, the minimum and maximum parking for the site is the sum of the required or allowed parking for the individual primary uses. For shared parking, see Section 17-3.5.030.D.

3.     When more than 50 percent of the floor area on a site is in an accessory use, the required or allowed parking is calculated separately for the accessory use. An example would be a 10,000 square foot building with a 7,000 square foot warehouse and a 3,000 square foot accessory retail area. The minimum and maximum parking would be computed separately for the retail and warehouse uses.

4.     Required parking spaces periodically used for the storage of equipment or goods may be counted toward meeting minimum parking standards, provided that such storage is an allowed use under Section 17-2.2.030, and is permitted as a Temporary Use under Section 17-2.3.160.

D.    Use of Required Parking Spaces. Except as otherwise provided by this section, required parking spaces must be available for residents, customers, or employees of the use. Fees may be charged for the use of required parking spaces. Required parking spaces may not be assigned in any way to a use on another site, except for shared parking pursuant to Section 17-3.5.030.D.

E.     Proximity of Parking to Use. Required parking spaces for residential uses must be located on the site of the use or on a parcel or tract owned in common by all the owners of the properties that will use the parking area. Required parking spaces for nonresidential uses must be located on the site of the use or in a parking area that has its closest pedestrian access point within 800 feet of the site.

F.     Improvement of Parking Areas. Motorized vehicle parking is allowed only on streets with an improved shoulder of sufficient width; within garages, carports, and other approved structures; and on driveways or parking lots that have been developed in conformance with this Code. For applicable design standards, see Chapter 17-3.2 Building Orientation and Design; Chapter 17-3.3 Access and Circulation; Chapter 17-3.4 Landscaping, Fences and Walls, Outdoor Lighting and Chapter 17-3.6 Public Facilities. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.5.030 Automobile Parking
A.    Minimum Number of Off-Street Automobile Parking Spaces. Except as provided by this subsection A, or as required for Americans with Disabilities Act compliance under subsection G, off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to one of the following three standards:

1.     The standards in Table 17-3.5.030.A;

2.     A standard from Table 17-3.5.030.A for a use that the Planning Official determines is similar to the proposed use; or

3.     Subsection B Exceptions, which includes a Parking Demand Analysis option.

 

Table 17-3.5.030.A Automobile Parking Spaces by Use

 

 

Use Categories

Minimum Parking per Land Use

(Chapter 17-5 contains examples of uses and definitions.)

(Fractions are rounded down to the closest whole number.)

Residential Categories

 

Household Living

 

Single-Family Dwelling, including manufactured homes on lots

1 space per dwelling

Duplex

3 spaces per duplex

Accessory Dwelling (second dwelling on a single-family lot)

1 space total for primary dwelling and accessory dwelling

Multifamily

1.5 spaces for a 1-bedroom unit

2 spaces for a 2-bedroom unit

2.5 spaces for 3 bedrooms or more

Group Living, such as nursing or convalescent homes, rest homes, assisted living, congregate care, and similar special needs housing

0.5 space per 4 bedrooms

Commercial Categories

 

Commercial Outdoor Recreation

per Conditional Use Permit review (Chapter 17-4.4)

Bed and Breakfast Inn

1 space per use, plus 1 space for each bedroom offered as lodging

Educational Services, not a school (e.g., tutoring or similar services)

1 space per 300 sq. ft. floor area

Entertainment, Major Event

per Conditional Use Permit review (Chapter 17-4.4)

Hotels, Motels, and similar uses

0.75 space per guest room. See also parking requirements for associated uses, such as restaurants, entertainment uses, drinking establishments, assembly facilities.

Mortuary or Funeral Home

1 space per 300 sq. ft. floor area

Offices

General Office: 1 space per 500 sq. ft. floor area

Medical or Dental Office: 1 space per 500 sq. ft. floor area

Outdoor Recreation, Commercial

per Conditional Use Permit review (Chapter 17-4.4)

Surface Parking Lot, when not accessory to a permitted use

per Conditional Use Permit review (Chapter 17-4.4)

Quick Vehicle Servicing or Vehicle Repair

2 spaces, excluding vehicle service or queuing area, or per Conditional Use Permit review (Chapter 17-4.4)

Retail Sales and Commercial Service

Bank: 1 space per 300 sq. ft. floor area

Retail: 1 space per 400 sq. ft. floor area, except 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. for bulk retail (e.g., auto sales, nurseries, lumber and construction materials, furniture, appliances, and similar sales)

Restaurants and Bars: 1 space per 200 sq. ft. floor area

Health Clubs, Gyms, Continuous Entertainment (e.g., bowling alleys): 1 space per 500 sq. ft.

Theaters and Cinemas: 1 space per 6 seats

Self-Service Storage

2 spaces, plus adequate space for loading and unloading

Industrial Categories

 

Industrial Service

1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area

Manufacturing and Production

1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area; or as required by Conditional Use Permit review (Chapter 17-4.4)

Warehouse and Freight Movement

0.5 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area; or as required by Conditional Use Permit review (Chapter 17-4.4)

Waste-Related

per Conditional Use Permit review (Chapter 17-4.4)

Wholesale Sales, e.g., Building Materials, Heavy Equipment, Agricultural Supplies, etc.

1 space per 1,000 sq. ft.

Institutional Categories

 

Basic Utilities

Parking based on applicant’s projected parking demand, subject to City approval

Community Service, including Government Offices and Services

Parking based on applicant’s projected parking demand, subject to City approval, except as specifically required elsewhere in this table for individual uses (See public assembly, office, retail, housing, etc.)

Daycare

Family Daycare: 1 space, plus required parking for dwelling

Daycare Center: 1 space per 400 sq. ft. of floor area

Medical Center or Hospital

1 space per 500 sq. ft. floor area

Parks and Open Space

Parking based on projected parking demand for planned uses

Public Assembly

1 space per 75 sq. ft. of public assembly area; or as required by Conditional Use Permit (Chapter 17-4.4)

Religious Institutions and Houses of Worship

1 space per 75 sq. ft. of main assembly area; or as required by Conditional Use Permit (Chapter 17-4.4)

Schools

Pre-School through Middle-School: 1 space per classroom

High Schools: Parking based on applicant’s projected parking demand, subject to City approval. A Transportation Demand Management Plan is also required.

Colleges: 1 space per 400 sq. ft. of floor area exclusive of dormitories, plus 1 space per 2 dorm rooms. A Transportation Demand Management Plan is also required.

Other Categories

 

Accessory Uses

Parking standards for accessory shall be based on applicant’s projected parking demand, subject to City approval.

Agriculture

None, except as required for accessory uses

Radio Frequency Transmission Facilities

None, except as required by Conditional Use Permit (Chapter 17-4.4)

Temporary Uses

Parking standards for temporary uses are the same as for primary uses, except that the Planning Official may reduce or waive certain development and designs standards for temporary uses

Transportation Facilities (operation, maintenance, preservation, and construction)

None, except for park-and-ride facilities; and where temporary parking is required for construction staging areas

 

B.     Carpool and Vanpool Parking Requirements.

1.     Carpool and vanpool parking spaces shall be identified for the following uses:

a.     New commercial and industrial developments with 50 or more parking spaces;

b.     New institutional or public assembly uses; and

c.     Transit park-and-ride facilities with 50 or more parking spaces.

2.     Of the total spaces available for employee, student, and commuter parking, at least five percent, but not fewer than two, shall be designated for exclusive carpool and vanpool parking.

3.     Carpool and vanpool parking spaces shall be located closer to the main employee, student or commuter entrance than all other parking spaces with the exception of ADA parking spaces.

4.     Required carpool/vanpool spaces shall be clearly marked “Reserved—Carpool/Vanpool Only.”

C.     Exceptions and Reductions to Off-Street Parking.

1.     There is no minimum number of required automobile parking spaces for uses within the Central Commercial C-1 zone.

2.     The applicant may propose a parking standard that is different than the standard under subsections A.1 and 2, for review and action by the Planning Official through a Type I or II procedure. The applicant’s proposal shall consist of a written request and a parking analysis prepared by a qualified professional. The parking analysis, at a minimum, shall assess the average parking demand and available supply for existing and proposed uses on the subject site; opportunities for shared parking with other uses in the vicinity; existing public parking in the vicinity; transportation options existing or planned near the site, such as frequent bus service, carpools, or private shuttles; and other relevant factors. This parking analysis applies to a request in the reduction or an increase in parking ratios.

3.     The Planning Official, through a Type II procedure, may reduce the off-street parking standards of Table 17-3.5.030.A for sites with one or more of the following features:

a.     Sites containing or adjacent to a bus stop with frequent transit service, whose frontage is improved with a bus stop waiting shelter consistent with the standards of the applicable transit provider, are allowed a 20 percent reduction to the standard number of automobile parking spaces.

b.     Space being dedicated for a transit facility such as a park-and-ride, bus pull-out, or other transit facility: Allow up to a 10 percent reduction in the number of automobile parking spaces.

c.     Site has dedicated parking spaces for carpool or vanpool vehicles: Allow up to a 10 percent reduction to the standard number of automobile parking spaces.

d.     Site has dedicated parking spaces for motorcycles, scooters, or electric carts: Allow reductions to the standard dimensions for parking spaces.

e.     Site has more than the minimum number of required bicycle parking spaces: Allow up to a 10 percent reduction to the number of automobile parking spaces.

f.      Site has off-street parking or other public parking in the vicinity of the site.

4.     The number of required off-street parking spaces may be reduced through the provision of shared parking, pursuant to subsection E.

5.     The Planning Official through a Type I procedure may reduce the off-street parking standards of Table 3.5.030.A by one parking space for every two on-street parking spaces located adjacent to the subject site, provided the parking spaces meet the dimensional standards of subsection F.

6.     The Planning Official, through a Type I procedure, may allow property owners of existing nonresidential development to replace up to 10 percent of existing parking spaces with bus shelters and other pedestrian and transit amenities located adjacent to streets with existing or planned transit routes.

D.    Maximum Number of Off-Street Automobile Parking Spaces. The maximum number of off-street automobile parking spaces allowed per site equals the minimum number of required spaces for the use pursuant to Table 17-3.5.030.A, times a factor of:

1.     1.2 spaces for uses fronting a street with adjacent on-street parking spaces; or

2.     1.5 spaces, for uses fronting no street with adjacent on-street parking; or

3.     A factor based on applicant’s projected parking demand, subject to City approval.

E.     Shared Parking. Required parking facilities for two or more uses, structures, or parcels of land may be satisfied by the same parking facilities used jointly, to the extent that the owners or operators show that the need for parking facilities does not materially overlap (e.g., uses primarily of a daytime versus nighttime nature; weekday uses versus weekend uses), and provided that the right of joint use is evidenced by a recorded deed, lease, contract, or similar written instrument establishing the joint use. Shared parking requests shall be subject to review and approval through a Type I Review.

F.     Parking Stall Design and Minimum Dimensions. Where a new off-street parking area is proposed, or an existing off-street parking area is proposed for expansion, the entire parking area shall be improved in conformance with this Code. At a minimum the parking spaces and drive aisles shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, or other City-approved materials, provided the Americans with Disabilities Act requirements are met, and shall conform to the minimum dimensions in Table 17-3.5.030.F and the figures below. All off-street parking areas shall contain wheel stops, perimeter curbing, bollards, or other edging as required to prevent vehicles from damaging buildings or encroaching into walkways, sidewalks, landscapes, or the public right-of-way. Parking areas shall also provide for surface water management, pursuant to Section 17-3.6.050.

 

Table 17-3.5.030.F Parking Area Minimum Dimensions*

 

PARKING ANGLE < °

CURB LENGTH

STALL DEPTH

AISLE WIDTH

BAY WIDTH

STRIPE LENGTH

SINGLE D1

DOUBLE D2

ONE WAY A1

TWO WAY A2

ONE WAY B1

TWO WAY B2

90°

8′-6″

18′

36′

23′

23′

59′

59′

18′

60°

10′

20′

40′

17′

18′

57′

58′

23′

45°

12′

18′-6″

37′

13′

18′

50′

55′

26′-6″

30°

17′

16′-6″

33′

12′

18′

45′

51′

32′-8″

0°

22′

8′-6″

17′

12′

18′

29′

35′

8′-6″

*       See Figure 17-3.5-18. See also Chapter 17-3.2 Building Orientation and Design for parking location requirements for some types of development; Chapter 17-3.3 Access and Circulation for driveway standards; and Chapter 17-3.4 for requirements related to Landscaping, Screening, Fences, Walls, and Outdoor Lighting.

 

G.    Adjustments to Parking Area Dimensions. The dimensions in subsection E are minimum standards. The Planning Official, through a Type II procedure, may adjust the dimensions based on evidence that a particular use will require more or less maneuvering area. For example, the Planning Official may approve an adjustment where an attendant will be present to move vehicles, as with valet parking. In such cases, a form of guarantee must be filed with the City ensuring that an attendant will always be present when the lot is in operation.

H.    Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Parking shall be provided consistent with ADA requirements, including, but not limited to, the minimum number of spaces for automobiles, van-accessible spaces, location of spaces relative to building entrances, accessible routes between parking areas and building entrances, identification signs, lighting, and other design and construction requirements.

I.      Electric Charging Stations. Charging stations for electric vehicles are allowed as an accessory use to parking areas developed in conformance with this Code, provided the charging station complies with applicable building codes and any applicable state or federal requirements.



Figure 17-3.5-1

(Ord. 2019-01 §1; Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.5.040 Bicycle Parking
A.    Standards. Bicycle parking spaces shall be provided with new development and, where a change of use occurs, at a minimum, shall follow the standards in Table 17-3.5.040.A. Where an application is subject to Conditional Use Permit approval or the applicant has requested a reduction to an automobile-parking standard, pursuant to Section 17-3.5.030.C, the Planning Official may require bicycle parking spaces in addition to those in Table 17-3.5.040.A.

 

Table 17-3.5.040.A Minimum Required Bicycle Parking Spaces

 

 

Use

Minimum Number of Spaces

Multifamily Residential (not required for parcels with fewer than 4 dwelling units)

2 bike spaces per 4 dwelling units

Commercial

2 bike spaces per primary use or 1 per 5 vehicle spaces, whichever is greater

Industrial

2 bike spaces per primary use or 1 per 10 vehicle spaces, whichever is greater

Community Service

2 bike spaces

Parks (active recreation areas only)

4 bike spaces

Schools (all types)

2 bike spaces per classroom

Institutional Uses and Places of Worship

2 bike spaces per primary use or 1 per 10 vehicle spaces, whichever is greater

Transit Transfer Stations and Park-and-Ride Lots

5 bike spaces per acre

Other Uses

2 bike spaces per primary use or 1 per 10 vehicle spaces, whichever is greater

 

B.     Design. Bicycle parking shall consist of staple-design steel racks or other City-approved racks, lockers, or storage lids providing a safe and secure means of storing a bicycle, consistent with the Public Works Design Standards.

C.     Exemptions. This section does not apply to single-family and duplex housing, home occupations, and agricultural uses.

D.    Hazards. Bicycle parking shall not impede or create a hazard to pedestrians or vehicles, and shall be located so as to not conflict with the vision clearance standards of Section 17-3.3.030.G.



Figure 17-3.5-19

(Ord. 2019-01 §1; Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.5.050 Loading Areas
A.    Purpose. The purpose of Section 17-3.5.050 is to provide adequate loading areas for commercial and industrial uses that do not interfere with the operation of adjacent streets.

B.     Applicability. Section 17-3.5.050 applies to uses that are expected to have service or delivery truck visits. It applies only to uses visited by trucks with a 40-foot or longer wheelbase, at a frequency of one or more vehicles per week. The Planning Official shall determine through a Type I review the number, size, and location of required loading areas, if any.

C.     Standard. Where an off-street loading space is required, it shall be large enough to accommodate the largest vehicle that is expected to serve the use without obstructing vehicles or pedestrian traffic on adjacent streets and driveways. The Planning Official may restrict the use of other public rights-of-way, so applicants are advised to provide complete and accurate information about the potential need for loading spaces.

D.    Placement, Setbacks, and Landscaping. Loading areas shall conform to the standards of Chapter 17-3.2 Building Orientation and Design; Chapter 17-3.3 Access and Circulation; and Chapter 17-3.4 Landscaping, Fences and Walls, Outdoor Lighting. Where parking areas are prohibited between a building and the street, loading areas are also prohibited.

E.     Exceptions and Adjustments. The Planning Official, through a Type I Review, may approve a loading area adjacent to or within a street right-of-way where it finds that loading and unloading operations are short in duration (i.e., less than one hour), infrequent, do not obstruct traffic during peak traffic hours, do not interfere with emergency response services, and are acceptable to the applicable roadway authority. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

Chapter 17-3.6 PUBLIC FACILITIES
17-3.6.010 Purpose and Applicability
A.    Purpose. The standards of Chapter 17-3.6 implement the public facility policies of the City of Molalla Comprehensive Plan and adopted City plans.

B.     Applicability. Chapter 17-3.6 applies to all new development, including projects subject to Land Division (Subdivision or Partition) approval and developments subject to Site Design Review where public facility improvements are required. All public facility improvements within the city shall occur in accordance with the standards and procedures of this chapter. When a question arises as to the intent or application of any standard, the City Engineer shall interpret the Code pursuant to Chapter 17-1.5.

C.     Public Works Design Standards. All public facility improvements, including, but not limited to, sanitary sewer, water, transportation, surface water and storm drainage and parks projects, whether required as a condition of development or provided voluntarily, shall conform to the City of Molalla Public Works Design Standards. Where a conflict occurs between this Code and the Public Works Design Standards, the provisions of the Public Works Design Standards shall govern.

D.    Public Improvement Requirement. No building permit may be issued until all required public facility improvements are in place and approved by the City Engineer, or otherwise bonded, in conformance with the provisions of this Code and the Public Works Design Standards. Improvements required as a condition of development approval, when not voluntarily provided by the applicant, shall be roughly proportional to the impact of the development on public facilities. Findings in the development approval shall indicate how the required improvements directly relate to and are roughly proportional to the impact of development. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.6.020 Transportation Standards
A.    General Requirements.

1.     Except as provided by subsection A.5, existing substandard streets and planned streets within or abutting a proposed development shall be improved in accordance with the standards of Chapter 17-3.6 as a condition of development approval.

2.     All street improvements, including the extension or widening of existing streets and public access ways, shall conform to Section 17-3.6.020, and shall be constructed consistent with the City of Molalla Public Works Design Standards.

3.     All new streets shall be contained within a public right-of-way. Public access ways (e.g., pedestrian ways) may be contained within a right-of-way or a public access easement, subject to review and approval of the City Engineer.

4.     The purpose of this subsection is to coordinate the review of land use applications with roadway authorities and to implement Section 660-012-0045(2)(e) of the State Transportation Planning Rule, which requires the City to adopt a process to apply conditions to development proposals in order to minimize impacts and protect transportation facilities. The following provisions also establish when a proposal must be reviewed for potential traffic impacts; when a Transit Analysis Letter (TAL) or Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) must be submitted with a development application in order to determine whether conditions are needed to minimize impacts to and protect transportation facilities; the required contents of a TAL/TIA; and who is qualified to prepare the analysis.

a.     Determining the Required Level of Transportation Analysis and Documentation. A Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA) is required for developments that are expected to have an impact on the transportation system. The analysis shall be based upon the latest edition of the ITE Trip Generation Manual or an agreed-upon alternative methodology where credible data is available to support the alternative methodology. When specific criteria generally associated with small developments are met, a Transportation Analysis Letter (TAL) may be substituted for the required TIA. At the discretion of the City Engineer, a TAL may satisfy the City’s transportation analysis requirements, in lieu of a TIA when a development meets all the following criteria:

(1)    The development generates fewer than 25 peak hour trips during either the AM or PM peak hour. (Two examples of common developments generating fewer trips than these threshold levels are: a subdivision containing 25 or fewer single-family residences or a general office building less than 15,000 square feet.)

(2)    The development is not expected to impact intersections that currently fail to meet the City’s level of service standards or intersections that are operating near the limits of the acceptable level of service thresholds during a peak operating hour.

(3)    The development is not expected to significantly impact adjacent roadways and intersections that are high accident locations, areas that contain an identified safety concern, or high concentration of pedestrians or bicyclists such as school zones.

(4)    The development generates an increase in use of adjacent streets by vehicles exceeding the 20,000-pound gross vehicle weights by less than 10 vehicles per day.

b.     Transportation Analysis Letter Contents. If the City determines, based on information provided by the applicant and in accordance with the criteria specified in Section 3.1, that a TAL is the appropriate document to submit. the following requirements shall apply.

(1)    The TAL shall be prepared by or prepared under the direct supervision of a registered professional engineer who shall sign and stamp the TAL.

(2)    The TAL shall include the following:

i.      The expected trip generation of the proposed development including the AM peak hour, the PM peak hour, daily traffic, and other germane periods as may be appropriate, together with appropriate documentation and references.

ii.     Site plan showing the location of all access driveways or private streets where they intersect with public streets plus driveways of abutting properties and driveways on the opposite side of the street from the proposed development.

iii.    Documentation that all site access driveways meet City of Molalla Private Access Driveway Width Standards.

iv.    Documentation that all site access driveways meet City of Molalla’s Minimum City Street Intersection Spacing Standards.

v.     Documentation that all new site accesses and/or public street intersections meet AASHTO intersection sight distance guidelines.

vi.    Documentation that there are no inherent safety issues associated with the design and location of the site access driveways.

vii.   Documentation that the applicant has reviewed the City’s TSP and that proposed streets and frontage improvements do or will comply with any applicable standards regarding the functional classification, typical sections, access management, traffic calming and other attributes as appropriate.

c.     Transportation Impact Analysis Contents. The following information shall be included in each TIA submitted to the City. Additional information specified by the City in the scoping summary or through the pre-application meeting or other project meetings shall also be included.

(1)    Completed TIA checklist signed by the professional engineer responsible for the preparation of the TIA.

(2)    Table of Contents—Listings of all sections, figures, and tables included in the report.

(3)    Executive Summary—A summary of key points, findings, conclusions, and recommendation including a mitigation plan.

(4)    Introduction, including:

i.      Proposed land use action including site location, zoning, building size, and project scope.

ii.     Map showing the proposed site, building footprint, access driveways, and parking facilities.

iii.    Map of the study area that shows site location and surrounding roadway facilities.

(5)    Existing Conditions.

i.      Existing site conditions and adjacent land uses.

ii.     Roadway characteristics of important transportation facilities and modal opportunities located within the study area, including roadway functional classifications, street cross-section, posted speeds, bicycle and pedestrian facilities, on-street parking, and transit facilities.

iii.    Existing lane configurations and traffic control devices at the study area intersections.

iv.    Existing traffic volumes and operational analysis of the study area roadways and intersections.

v.     Roadway and intersection crash history analysis.

vi.    Intersection and stopping sight distance related to new and impacted driveways and intersections.

(6)    Background Conditions (Without the Proposed Land Use Action).

i.      Approved in-process developments and funded transportation improvements in the study area.

ii.     Traffic growth assumptions.

iii.    Addition of traffic from other planned developments.

iv.    Background traffic volumes and operational analysis.

(7)    Full Buildout Traffic Conditions (With the Proposed Land Use Action).

i.      Description of the proposed development plans.

ii.     Trip generation characteristics of proposed project (including trip reduction documentation).

iii.    Trip distribution assumptions.

iv.    Full buildout traffic volumes and intersection operational analysis.

v.     Site circulation and parking.

vi.    Intersection and site-access driveway queuing analysis.

vii.   Recommended roadway and intersection mitigation measures (if necessary).

(8)    Conclusions and recommendations.

(9)    Appendix—With Dividers or Tabs.

i.      Traffic count summary sheets.

ii.     Crash analysis summary sheets.

iii.    Existing, background, and full buildout traffic operational analysis worksheets with detail to review capacity calculations.

iv.    Signal, left-turn, and right-turn lane warrant evaluation calculations.

v.     Signal timing sheets depicting the timing and phasing used in analysis.

vi.    Other analysis summary sheets such as queuing.

(10)  To present the information required to analyze the transportation impacts of development, the following figures shall be included in the TIS:

i.      Vicinity Map.

ii.     Existing Lane Configurations and Traffic Control Devices.

iii.    Existing Traffic Volumes and Levels of Service for each required time period.

iv.    Future Year Background Traffic Volumes and Levels of Service for each required time period.

v.     Proposed Site Plan, including access points for abutting parcels and for those across the street from the proposed development.

vi.    Future Year Assumed Lane Configurations and Traffic Control Devices.

vii.   Estimated Trip Distribution/Assignment Pattern.

viii.  Trip reductions (pass-by trips at site access(es)).

ix.    Site-Generated Traffic Volumes for each required time period.

x.     Full Buildout Traffic Volumes and Levels of Service for each required time period.

5.     The City Engineer may waive or allow deferral of standard street improvements, including sidewalk, roadway, bicycle lane, undergrounding of utilities, and landscaping, as applicable, where one or more of the following conditions in subdivisions (a) through (d) is met. Where the City Engineer agrees to defer a street improvement, it shall do so only where the property owner agrees not to remonstrate against the formation of a local improvement district in the future.

a.     The standard improvement conflicts with an adopted capital improvement plan.

b.     The standard improvement would create a safety hazard.

c.     It is unlikely due to the developed condition of adjacent property that the subject improvement would be extended in the foreseeable future, and the improvement under consideration does not by itself significantly improve transportation operations or safety.

d.     The improvement under consideration is part of an approved partition and the proposed partition does not create any new street.

B.     Street Location, Alignment, Extension, and Grades.

1.     All new streets, to the extent practicable, shall connect to the existing street network and allow for the continuation of an interconnected street network, consistent with adopted public facility plans and pursuant to subsection D Transportation Connectivity and Future Street Plans.

2.     Specific street locations and alignments shall be determined in relation to existing and planned streets, topographic conditions, public convenience and safety, and in appropriate relation to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets.

3.     Grades of streets shall conform as closely as practicable to the original (pre-development) topography to minimize grading.

4.     New streets and street extensions exceeding a grade of 10 percent over a distance more than 200 feet, to the extent practicable, shall be avoided. Where such grades are unavoidable, the City Engineer may approve an exception to the 200-foot standard and require mitigation, such as a secondary access for the subdivision, installation of fire protection sprinkler systems in dwellings, or other mitigation to protect public health and safety.

5.     Where the locations of planned streets are shown on a local street network plan, the development shall implement the street(s) shown on the plan.

 

6.     Where required local street connections are not shown on an adopted City street plan, or the adopted street plan does not designate future streets with sufficient specificity, the development shall provide for the reasonable continuation and connection of existing streets to adjacent developable properties, conforming to the standards of this Code.

7.     Existing street-ends that abut a proposed development site shall be extended with the development, unless prevented by environmental or topographical constraints, existing development patterns, or compliance with other standards in this Code. In such situations, the applicant must provide evidence that the environmental or topographic constraint precludes reasonable street connection.

8.     Proposed streets and any street extensions required pursuant to this section shall be located, designed, and constructed to allow continuity in street alignments and to facilitate future development of vacant or redevelopable lands.

C.     Rights-of-Way and Street Section Widths.

1.     Street rights-of-way and section widths shall comply with the current version of the Public Works Design Standards and Transportation System Plan. The standards are intended: to provide for streets of suitable location, width, and design to accommodate expected vehicle, pedestrian, and bicycle traffic; to afford satisfactory access to law enforcement, fire protection, sanitation, and road maintenance equipment; and to provide a convenient and accessible network of streets, avoiding undue hardships to adjoining properties.

2.     All streets shall be improved in accordance with the construction standards and specifications of the applicable roadway authority, including requirements for pavement, curbs, drainage, striping, and traffic control devices. Where a planter strip is provided it shall consist of a minimum five-foot-wide strip between the sidewalk and the curb or roadway. Where a swale is provided, it shall either be placed between the roadway and sidewalk or behind the sidewalk on private property, subject to City Engineer approval and recording of required public drainage way and drainage way maintenance easements. Streets with parking on one side only should be avoided. When used, they must be posted NO PARKING.

3.     Where a range of street width or improvement options is indicated, the City Engineer shall determine requirements based on the advice of a qualified professional and all of the following factors:

a.     Street classification and requirements of the roadway authority, if different than the City’s street classifications and requirements;

b.     Existing and projected street operations relative to applicable standards;

c.     Safety of motorists, pedestrians, bicyclists, and South Clackamas Transit District (SCTD) users, including consideration of accident history;

d.     Convenience and comfort for pedestrians, bicyclists, and SCTD users;

e.     Provision of on-street parking;

f.      Placement of utilities;

g.     Street lighting;

h.     Slope stability, erosion control, and minimizing cuts and fills;

i.      Surface water management and storm drainage requirements;

j.      Emergency vehicles or apparatus and emergency access, including evacuation needs;

k.     Transitions between varying street widths (i.e., existing streets and new streets); and

l.      Other factors related to public health, safety, and welfare.

D.    Transportation Connectivity and Future Street Plans. The following standards apply to the creation of new streets:

1.     Intersections. Streets shall be located and designed to intersect as nearly as possible to a right angle. Street intersections shall meet the current requirements of the Public Works Design Standards and Transportation System Plan.

2.     Access Ways. The Planning Commission, in approving a land use application with conditions shall require a developer to provide an access way where the creation of a cul-de-sac or dead-end street is unavoidable and the access way connects or may in the future connect, the end of the street to another street, a park, or a public access way, except where the City Engineer and City Planner determine the access way is not feasible. Where an access way is required, it shall be not less than 10 feet wide and shall contain a minimum eight-foot-wide concrete surface or other all-weather surface approved by the City Engineer. Access ways shall be contained within a public right-of-way or public access easement, as required by the City.

3.     Connectivity to Abutting Lands. The street system of a proposed subdivision shall be designed to connect to existing, proposed, and planned streets adjacent to the subdivision. Wherever a proposed development abuts unplatted land or a future development phase of an existing development, street stubs shall be provided to allow access to future abutting subdivisions and to logically extend the street system into the surrounding area. Street ends shall be designed to facilitate future extension in terms of grading, width, and temporary barricades.

4.     Street Connectivity and Formation of Blocks. In order to promote efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation throughout the City, subdivisions and site developments shall be served by an interconnected street network, pursuant to the current version of the Public Works Design Standards and Transportation System Plan. Where a street connection cannot be made due to physical site constraints, approach spacing requirements, access management requirements, or similar restrictions; a pedestrian access way connection shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17-3.3. Streets and accessways need not be required where one or more of the following conditions exist:

a.     Physical or topographic conditions make a street or accessway connection impracticable. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, freeways, railroads, steep slopes, wetlands or other bodies of water where a connection could not reasonably be provided:

b.     Buildings or other existing development on adjacent lands physically preclude a connection now or in the future considering the potential for redevelopment; or

c.     Where streets or accessways would violate provisions of leases, easements, covenants, restrictions or other agreements existing as of May 1, 1995, which preclude a required street or accessway connection.

5.     Cul-de-Sac Streets. A cul-de-sac street shall only be used where the City Engineer determines that environmental or topographical constraints, existing development patterns, or compliance with other applicable City requirements preclude a street extension. Where the City determines that a cul-de-sac is allowed, cul-de-sac length, turn-around type, and pedestrian access to adjoining properties shall meet the requirements of the current version of the Public Works Design Standards and Transportation System Plan and subsection D.2.

6.     Future Street Plan. Where a subdivision is proposed adjacent to other developable land, a future street plan shall be filed by the applicant in conjunction with an application for a subdivision in order to facilitate orderly development of the street system. The plan shall show the pattern of existing and proposed future streets from the boundaries of the proposed land division and shall include other divisible parcels within 600 feet surrounding and adjacent to the proposed subdivision. The street plan is binding when part of a multi-phased master planned development. The plan must demonstrate, pursuant to City standards, that the proposed development does not preclude future street connections to adjacent development land.

7.     Private Streets and Gated Drives. Private streets and gated drives serving more than two dwellings (i.e., where a gate limits access to a development from a public street), are prohibited.

E.     Engineering Design Standards. Street design shall conform to the standards of the applicable roadway authority; for City streets that is the current version of the Public Works Design Standards and Transportation System Plan. Where a conflict occurs between this Code and the Public Works Design Standards, the provisions of the Design Standards shall govern.

F.     Fire Code Standards. Where Fire Code standards conflict with City standards, the City shall consult with the Fire Marshal in determining appropriate requirements. The City shall have the final determination regarding applicable standards.

G.    Substandard Existing Right-of-Way. Where an existing right-of-way adjacent to a proposed development is less than the standard width, the City Engineer may require the dedication of additional rights-of-way at the time of Subdivision, Partition, or Site Plan Review, pursuant to the standards in the Public Works Design Standards and Transportation System Plan.

H.    Traffic Calming. The City may require the installation of traffic calming features such as traffic circles, curb extensions, reduced street width (parking on one side), medians with pedestrian crossing refuges, speed tables, speed humps, or special paving to slow traffic in neighborhoods or commercial areas with high pedestrian traffic.

I.      Sidewalks, Planter Strips, and Bicycle Lanes. Except where the City Engineer grants a deferral of public improvements, pursuant to Chapter 17-4.2 or Chapter 17-4.3, sidewalks, planter strips, and bicycle lanes shall be installed concurrent with development or widening of new streets, pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. Maintenance of sidewalks and planter strips in the right-of-way is the continuing obligation of the adjacent property owner.

J.      Streets Adjacent to Railroad Right-of-Way. When a transportation improvement is proposed within 300 feet of a railroad crossing, or a modification is proposed to an existing railroad crossing, the Oregon Department of Transportation and the rail service provider shall be notified and given an opportunity to comment, in conformance with the provisions of Division IV. Private crossing improvements are subject to review and licensing by the rail service provider.

K.    Street Names. No new street name shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets in the City of Molalla or vicinity. Street names shall be submitted to the City for review and approval in consultation with Clackamas County and emergency services.

L.     Survey Monuments. Upon completion of a street improvement and prior to acceptance by the City, it shall be the responsibility of the developer’s registered professional land surveyor to provide certification to the City that all boundary and interior monuments have been reestablished and protected.

M.    Street Signs. The city, county, or state with jurisdiction shall install all signs for traffic control and street names. The cost of signs required for new development shall be the responsibility of the developer. Street name signs shall be installed at all street intersections. Stop signs and other signs may be required.

N.    Streetlight Standards. Streetlights shall be relocated or new lights installed, as applicable, with street improvement projects. Streetlights shall conform to City standards, be directed downward, and full cutoff and full shielding to preserve views of the night sky and to minimize excessive light spillover onto adjacent properties.

O.    Mail Boxes. Mailboxes shall conform to the requirements of the United States Postal Service and the State of Oregon Structural Specialty Code.

P.     Street Cross-Sections. The final lift of pavement shall be placed on all new constructed public roadways prior to final City acceptance of the roadway. (Ord. 2019-01 §1; Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.6.030 Public Use Areas
A.    Dedication of Public Use Areas.

1.     Where a proposed park, playground, or other public use shown in a plan adopted by the City is located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the City may require the dedication or reservation of this area on the final plat for the subdivision, provided that the impact of the development on the City park system is roughly proportionate to the dedication or reservation being made.

2.     The City may purchase or accept voluntary dedication or reservation of areas within the subdivision that are suitable for the development of parks and other public uses; however, the City is under no obligation to accept such areas offered for dedication or sale.

B.     System Development Charge Credit. Dedication of land to the City for public use areas, voluntary or otherwise, may be eligible as a credit toward any required system development charge for parks. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.6.040 Sanitary Sewer and Water Service Improvements
A.    Sewers and Water Mains Required. All new development is required to connect to City water and sanitary sewer systems. Sanitary sewer and water system improvements shall be installed to serve each new development and to connect developments to existing mains in accordance with the adopted facility master plans and applicable Public Works Design Standards. Where streets are required to be stubbed to the edge of the subdivision, sewer and water system improvements and other utilities shall also be stubbed with the streets, except as may be waived by the City Engineer where alternate alignment(s) are provided.

B.     Sewer and Water Plan Approval. Development permits for sewer and water improvements shall not be issued until the City Engineer has approved all sanitary sewer and water plans in conformance with City standards.

C.     Over-Sizing. The City may require as a condition of development approval that sewer and water lines serving new development be sized to accommodate future development within the area as projected by the applicable facility master plans, and the City may authorize other cost-recovery or cost-sharing methods as provided under state law.

D.    Inadequate Facilities. Development permits may be restricted or rationed by the Planning Commission where a deficiency exists in the existing water or sewer system that cannot be rectified by the development and which, if not rectified, will result in a threat to public health or safety, surcharging of existing mains, or violations of state or federal standards pertaining to operation of domestic water and sewerage treatment systems. The City Engineer may require water booster pumps, sanitary sewer lift stations, and other critical facilities be installed with backup power. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.6.050 Storm Drainage and Surface Water Management Facilities
A.    General Provisions. The City shall issue a development permit only where adequate provisions for stormwater runoff have been made in conformance with the requirements of the current version of the Public Works Design Standards and Stormwater Master Plan.

B.     Accommodation of Upstream Drainage. Culverts and other drainage facilities shall be large enough to accommodate existing and potential future runoff from the entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the development. Such facilities shall be subject to review and approval by the City Engineer.

C.     Effect on Downstream Drainage. Where it is anticipated by the City Engineer that the additional runoff resulting from the development will overload an existing drainage facility, the City shall withhold approval of the development until provisions have been made for improvement of the potential condition or until provisions have been made for storage of additional runoff caused by the development in accordance with City standards.

D.    Over-Sizing. The City may require as a condition of development approval that sewer, water, or storm drainage systems serving new development be sized to accommodate future development within the area as projected by the applicable facility master plan, provided that the City may grant the developer credit toward any required system development charge for the same pursuant to the System Development Charge.

E.     Existing Watercourse. Where a proposed development is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream, the City may require a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse and such further width as will be adequate for conveyance and maintenance to protect the public health and safety. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.6.060 Utilities
The following standards apply to new development where extension of electric power, gas, or communication lines is required:

A.    General Provision. The developer of a property is responsible for coordinating the development plan with the applicable utility providers and paying for the extension and installation of utilities not otherwise available to the subject property.

B.     Underground Utilities.

1.     General Requirement. The requirements of the utility service provider shall be met. All utility lines in new subdivisions, including, but not limited to, those required for electric, communication, and lighting, and related facilities, shall be placed underground, except where the City Engineer determines that placing utilities underground would adversely impact adjacent land uses. The Planning Official may require screening and buffering of above ground facilities to protect the public health, safety, or welfare.

2.     Subdivisions. In order to facilitate underground placement of utilities, the following additional standards apply to all new subdivisions:

a.     The developer shall make all necessary arrangements with the serving utility to provide the underground services. Care shall be taken to ensure that no aboveground equipment obstructs vision clearance areas for vehicular traffic, per Chapter 17-3.3 Access and Circulation.

b.     The City Engineer reserves the right to approve the location of all surface-mounted facilities.

c.     All underground utilities installed in streets must be constructed and approved by the applicable utility provider prior to the surfacing of the streets.

d.     Stubs for service connections shall be long enough to avoid disturbing the street improvements when service connections are made.

C.     Exception to Undergrounding Requirement. The City Engineer may grant exceptions to the undergrounding standard where existing physical constraints, such as geologic conditions, streams, or existing development conditions make underground placement impractical. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.6.070 Easements
A.    Provision. The developer shall make arrangements with the City and applicable utility providers for each utility franchise for the provision and dedication of utility easements necessary to provide full services to the development.

B.     Standard. Utility easements shall conform to the requirements of the utility service provider. All other easements shall conform to the City of Molalla Public Works Design Standards.

C.     Recordation. All easements for sewers, storm drainage and water quality facilities, water mains, electric lines, or other utilities shall be recorded and referenced on a survey or final plat, as applicable. See Chapter 17-4.2 Site Design Review, and Chapter 17-4.3 Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.6.080 Construction Plan Approval
No development, including sanitary sewers, water, streets, parking areas, buildings, or other development, shall commence without plans having been approved by the City of Molalla Public Works Department and permits issued. Permit fees are required to defray the cost and expenses incurred by the City for construction and other services in connection with the improvement. Permit fees are as set by City Council resolution. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.6.090 Facility Installation
A.    Conformance Required. Improvements installed by the developer, either as a requirement of these regulations or at the developer’s option, shall conform to the requirements of this chapter, approved construction plans, and to improvement standards and specifications adopted by the City.

B.     Adopted Installation Standards. The City of Molalla has adopted Public Works Design Standards for public improvements and private utility installation within the public right-of-way.

C.     Commencement. Work in a public right-of-way shall not begin until all applicable agency permits have been approved and issued.

D.    Resumption. If work is discontinued for more than six months, it shall not be resumed until the Public Works Director is notified in writing and grants approval of an extension.

E.     City Inspection. Improvements shall be constructed under the inspection of the City Engineer. The City Engineer may approve minor changes in typical sections and details if unusual conditions arising during construction warrant such changes in the public interest, except that substantive changes to the approved design shall be subject to review under Chapter 17-4.5 Modifications to Approved Plans and Conditions of Approval. Any survey monuments that are disturbed before all improvements are completed by the developer or subdivider shall be replaced at the developer or subdivider’s expense prior to final acceptance of the improvements.

F.     Engineer’s Certification and As-Built Plans. In accordance with the current version of the Public Works Design Standards, a registered civil engineer shall provide written certification in a form required by the City that all improvements, workmanship, and materials meet current and standard engineering and construction practices, conform to approved plans and conditions of approval, and are of high grade, prior to City’s acceptance of the public improvements, or any portion thereof, for operation and maintenance. The developer’s engineer shall also provide two sets of “as-built” plans, one paper set and one electronic set for permanent filing with the City. If required by the City, the developer or subdivider shall provide a warranty bond pursuant to Section 17-3.6.100. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-3.6.100 Performance Guarantee and Warranty
A.    Performance Guarantee Required. The City at its discretion may approve a final plat or building permit when it determines that all of the public improvements required for the site development or land division, or phase thereof, are complete and the applicant has an acceptable assurance for the balance of said improvements. The applicant shall provide a performance and payment bond in accordance with the current version of the Public Works Design Standards.

B.     Determination of Sum. The assurance of performance shall be for a sum determined by the City Engineer as required to cover the cost of the improvements and repairs, including related engineering and incidental expenses, plus reasonable inflationary costs. The assurance shall not be less than 150 percent of the estimated improvement costs.

C.     Itemized Improvement Estimate. The applicant shall furnish to the City an itemized improvement estimate, certified by a registered civil engineer, to assist the City in calculating the amount of the performance assurance.

D.    Agreement. A written agreement between the City and applicant shall be signed recorded. The agreement may include a provision for the construction of the improvements in stages and for the extension of time under specific conditions. The agreement shall contain all of the following:

1.     The period within which all required improvements and repairs shall be completed;

2.     A provision that if work is not completed within the period specified, the City may complete the work and recover the full cost and expenses from the applicant;

3.     The required improvement fees and deposits.

E.     When Applicant Fails to Perform. In the event the applicant fails to carry out all provisions of the agreement and the City has un-reimbursed costs or expenses resulting from such failure, the City shall call on the bond, cash deposit, or letter of credit for reimbursement.

F.     Termination of Performance Guarantee. The applicant shall not cause termination, nor allow expiration, of the guarantee without first securing written authorization from the City.

G.    Warranty Bond. A warranty bond good for two years is required on all public improvements and landscaping when installed in the public right-of-way. The warranty bond shall equal 120 percent of the total cost of improvements and begin upon acceptance of said improvements by the City. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

Division IV. Application Review Procedures and Approval Criteria
Chapter 17-4.1 GENERAL REVIEW PROCEDURES
17-4.1.010 Purpose and Applicability
A.    Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish standard decision-making procedures that will enable the City, the applicant, and the public to reasonably review applications and participate in the local decision-making process in a timely and effective way. Table 17-4.1.010 provides a key for determining the review procedure and the decision-making body for particular approvals.

B.     Applicability of Review Procedures. All land use and development permit applications and approvals, except building permits, shall be decided by using the procedures contained in this chapter. The procedure “type” assigned to each application governs the decision-making process for that permit or approval. There are four types of permit and approval procedures as described in subsections B.1 through 4. Table 17-4.1.010 lists the City’s land use and development approvals and corresponding review procedure(s).

1.     Type I Procedure (Staff Review—Zoning Checklist). Type I decisions are made by the Planning Official, or his or her designee, without public notice and without a public hearing. A Type I procedure is used in applying City standards and criteria that do not require the use of discretion (i.e., there are clear and objective standards).

2.     Type II Procedure (Administrative or Staff Review with Notice). Type II decisions are made by the Planning Official, with public notice and an opportunity for appeal to the Planning Commission. Alternatively the Planning Official may refer a Type II application to the Planning Commission for its review and decision in a public meeting.

3.     Type III Procedure (Quasi-Judicial Review—Public Hearing). Type III decisions are made by the Planning Commission after a public hearing, with an opportunity for appeal to the City Council; or in the case of a Quasi-Judicial zone change (e.g., a change in zoning on one property to comply with the Comprehensive Plan), a Type III decision is made by the City Council on recommendation of the Planning Commission. Quasi-Judicial decisions involve discretion but implement established policy.

4.     Type IV Procedure (Legislative Review). The Type IV procedure applies to the creation, revision, or large-scale implementation of public policy (e.g., adoption of regulations, zone changes, annexation, and comprehensive plan amendments). Type IV reviews are considered by the Planning Commission, which makes a recommendation to City Council. City Council makes the final decision on a legislative proposal through the enactment of an ordinance.

 

Table 17-4.1.010 Summary of Approvals by Type of Review Procedure

 

Approvals*

Review Procedures

Applicable Regulations

Zoning Checklist Review

Type I

Applicants are required to complete a Zoning Checklist before applying for any permit or approval. See Section 17-4.1.020.

Access to a Street

Type I

Chapter17-3.3 and the standards of the applicable roadway authority (City/County/ODOT).

Adjustment

Type II

Chapter 17-4.7

Annexation

Type IV

See Oregon Revised Statute 222.

Code Interpretation

Type II or III

Chapter 17-1.5. Routine interpretations that do not involve discretion do not require a permit.

Code Text Amendment

Type IV

Chapter 17-4.6

Comprehensive Plan Amendment

Type IV

Chapter 17-4.6

Conditional Use Permit

Type III

Chapter 17-4.4

Home Occupation

No permit, except when required by Chapter 17-4.7.

Legal Lot Determination

Type I

Chapter 17-1.3

Master Planned Development

 

 

Concept Plan

Type III

Chapter 17-4.8

Detailed Plan

Type I

Chapter 17-4.8

Modification to Approval or Condition of Approval

Type I, II or III

Chapter 17-4.5

Nonconforming Use or Structure, Expansion of

Type I, II or III

Chapter 17-1.4

Partition or Re-plat of 2-3 lots

 

 

Preliminary Plat

Type II

Chapter 17-4.3

Final Plat

Type I

Chapter 17-4.3

Property Line Adjustments, including Lot Consolidations

Type I

Chapter 17-4.3

Site Design Review

Type II or III

Chapter 17-4.2

Subdivision or Replat of >3 lots

 

 

Preliminary Plat

Type III

Chapter 17-4.3

Final Plat

Type I

Chapter 17-4.3

Variance

Type III

Chapter 17-4.7

Zoning District Map Change

Type III or IV

Chapter 17-4.6

*       The applicant may be required to obtain building permits and other approvals from other agencies, such as a road authority or natural resource regulatory agency. The City’s failure to notify the applicant of any requirement or procedure of another agency shall not invalidate a permit or other decision made by the City under this Code.

(Ord. 2019-16 §2; Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.1.020 Type I Procedure (Staff Review and Zoning Checklist)
A.    Type I Procedure (Staff Review). The Planning Official, or designee, without public notice and without a public hearing, makes ministerial decisions through the Type I procedure. Ministerial decisions are those where City standards and criteria do not require the exercise of discretion (i.e., there are clear and objective standards).

B.     Zoning Checklist. The Planning Official reviews proposals requiring a Type I review using a Zoning Checklist. The Zoning Checklist is a preliminary review that is intended to ensure a project proposal meets the basic requirements of Division II Zoning Regulations before more detailed plans are prepared and before the City authorizes the Building Official to issue a building permit.

C.     Application Requirements.

1.     Application Forms. Approvals requiring Type I review, including Zoning Checklists, shall be made on forms provided by the City.

2.     Application Requirements. When a Zoning Checklist is required, it shall:

a.     Include the information requested on the application form;

b.     Address the criteria in sufficient detail for review and action; and

c.     Be filed with the required fee.

D.    Requirements. The City shall not act upon an application for land use approval, and a building permit shall not be issued, until the Planning Official has approved a Zoning Checklist for the proposed project.

E.     Criteria and Decision. The Planning Official’s review of a Zoning Checklist is intended to determine whether minimum code requirements are met and whether any other land use permit or approval is required prior to issuance of a building permit.

F.     Effective Date. A Zoning Checklist decision is final on the date it is signed by the Planning Official. It is not a land use decision as defined by ORS 197.015, and therefore is not subject to appeal to the state Land Use Board of Appeals. See also Section 17-1.2.070 Zoning Checklist and Coordination of Building Permits. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.1.030 Type II Procedure (Administrative Review With Notice)
The Planning Official, or designee, performs Administrative Staff Reviews through the Type II procedure. Type II decisions are made by the Planning Official with public notice and an opportunity for appeal to the Planning Commission. Alternatively, the Planning Official may refer a Type II application to the Planning Commission for its review and decision in a public meeting.

A.    Application Requirements.

1.     Application Forms. Applications for projects requiring Administrative Review shall be made on forms provided by the Planning Official.

2.     Submittal Information. The Planning Official shall advise the applicant on application submittal requirements. At a minimum, the application shall include all of the following information:

a.     The information requested on the application form;

b.     Plans and exhibits required for the specific approval(s) being sought (for example, requirements for property line adjustments are in Chapter 17-4.3);

c.     A written statement or letter explaining how the application satisfies each and all of the relevant criteria and standards in sufficient detail;

d.     Information demonstrating compliance with prior decision(s) and conditions of approval for the subject site, as applicable; and

e.     The required fee.

B.     Procedure.

1.     The Planning Official shall mail notice of a pending Type II decision to the following individuals and agencies no fewer than 14 days prior to making the Type II decision.

2.     The purpose of the Administrative Decision notice is to give nearby property owners and other interested people and agencies the opportunity to submit written comments on the application before the Planning Official issues the decision. The intent is to invite people to participate early in the decision-making process. Therefore all of the following individuals and agencies shall be notified:

a.     All owners of record of real property within a minimum of 300 feet of the subject site;

b.     Any person who submits a written request to receive a notice of the pending decision; and

c.     Any governmental agency that is entitled to notice under an intergovernmental agreement entered into with the City and any other affected agencies. At a minimum, the Planning Official shall notify the road authority if different than the City of Molalla. The failure of another agency to respond with written comments on a pending application shall not invalidate an action or permit approval made by the City under this Code.

3.     The notice of pending Administrative Decision, at a minimum, shall contain all of the following information:

a.     The deadline for submitting written comments, which must be at least 14 days prior to the scheduled decision date or, as applicable, the scheduled Planning Commission meeting date where an application is referred to the Commission for review;

b.     A summary of the proposal and the relevant approval criteria in sufficient detail to help the public identify and locate applicable code requirements;

c.     The address and City contact person for submitting written comments; and the date, time, and location the Planning Official or Planning Commission, as applicable, is scheduled to make a decision on the application;

d.     The street address or other easily understandable reference to the location of the proposed use or development;

e.     Disclosure statement indicating that if any person fails to address the relevant approval criteria with enough detail, he or she may not be able to appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals or Circuit Court on that issue, and that only comments on the relevant approval criteria are considered relevant evidence;

f.      Statement that all evidence relied upon by the Planning Official or Planning Commission, as applicable, to make its decision is in the public record and is available for public review. Copies of this evidence can be obtained at a reasonable cost from the City; and

g.     Statement that after the comment period closes, the City will issue its decision and the decision shall be mailed to the applicant and to anyone else who submitted written comments or who is otherwise legally entitled to notice.

4.     At the conclusion of the comment period, the Planning Official shall review the comments received and prepare a decision notice approving, approving with conditions, or denying the application based on the applicable Code criteria. Alternatively, the Planning Official may transmit all written comments received, if any, along with a copy of the application to the Planning Commission for review and decision at its next regularly scheduled meeting.

5.     Where the Planning Official refers an application subject to Administrative Review to the Planning Commission, the Planning Commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application through the Type II procedure based on the applicable Code criteria. The Planning Commission may continue its review to the next meeting to allow the applicant time to respond to questions, provided that the Commission makes a final decision within the 120-day period prescribed under state law (ORS 227.178) and as described in Section 17-4.1.060 of this Code. Alternatively, the applicant may voluntarily waive his or her right to a final decision within the 120-day timeframe and the Commission may decide to accept oral and written testimony in a public hearing review of the application, pursuant to Section 17-4.1.040; in which case, a new public notice must be mailed to those who received the original notice indicating the change to a quasi-judicial (public hearing) review procedure.

6.     Within seven days of a Type II Administrative Decision, the Planning Official shall proceed to prepare a notice of decision and mail it to the applicant, property owner (if different), the Building Official, those who provided written comments on the proposal, and those who requested a copy of the decision. The Planning Official shall cause an affidavit of mailing the notice to be prepared and made a part of the file. The affidavit shall show the date the notice was mailed and shall demonstrate that the notice was mailed to the parties above and was mailed within the time required by law.

7.     The Administrative Notice of Decision shall contain all of the following information:

a.     A description of the applicant’s proposal and the City’s decision on the proposal, which may be a summary, provided it references the specifics of the proposal and conditions of approval in the public record;

b.     The address or other geographic description of the property proposed for development, including a map of the property in relation to the surrounding area (a copy of the assessor’s map may be used);

c.     A statement of where the City’s decision can be obtained;

d.     The date the decision shall become final, unless appealed; and

e.     A statement that all persons entitled to notice may appeal the decision to City Council pursuant to subsection D.

C.     Effective Date of Decision. Unless the conditions of approval specify otherwise, an Administrative Decision becomes effective 12 days after the City mails the decision notice, unless the decision is appealed pursuant to subsection D.

D.    Appeal of Type II (Administrative) Decision. A Type II Administrative Decision made by the Planning Official may be appealed to the City of Molalla Planning Commission; and a Type II Administrative Decision made by the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council, as applicable, pursuant to the following:

1.     Who May Appeal. The following people have legal standing to appeal a Type II Administrative Decision:

a.     The applicant or owner of the subject property;

b.     Any person who was entitled to written notice of the Type II decision; and

c.     Any other person who participated in the proceeding by submitting written comments on the application to the City by the specified deadline.

2.     Appeal Filing Procedure.

a.     Notice of Appeal. Any person with standing to appeal, as provided in subsection D.1, may appeal a Type II Administrative Decision by filing a Notice of Appeal according to the following procedures.

b.     Time for Filing. A Notice of Appeal shall be filed with the Planning Official within the timeframe specified on the Notice of Decision and consistent with ORS 197.195.

c.     Content of Notice of Appeal. The Notice of Appeal shall be accompanied by the required filing fee and shall contain:

(1)    An identification of the decision being appealed, including the date of the decision;

(2)    A statement demonstrating the person filing the Notice of Appeal has standing to appeal;

(3)    A statement explaining the specific issues being raised on appeal; and

(4)    If the appellant is not the applicant, a statement demonstrating that the appeal issues were raised during the comment period.

3.     Scope of Appeal. The appeal of a Type II Administrative Decision shall be a hearing de novo, either before the Planning Commission, where the contested decision was made by the Planning Official, or before the City Council, where the Planning Commission made the contested decision. The appeal shall not be limited to the application materials, evidence and other documentation, and specific issues raised in the review leading up to the Administrative Decision, but may include other relevant evidence and arguments. The hearing appeal body shall allow additional evidence, testimony, or argument concerning any relevant standard, criterion, condition, or issue.

4.     Appeal Hearing Procedure. Hearings on appeals of Type II decisions shall follow the same procedure used for public hearings on Type III reviews under Section 17-4.1.040, which contains requirements for public hearing notices, conduct of hearings, and decision-making procedures. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.1.040 Type III Procedure (Quasi-Judicial Review—Public Hearing)
Type III decisions are made by the Planning Commission after a public hearing, with an opportunity for appeal to the City Council.

A.    Application Requirements.

1.     Application Forms. Applications requiring Quasi-Judicial Review shall be made on forms provided by the Planning Official.

2.     Submittal Information. The Planning Official shall advise the applicant on application submittal requirements. At a minimum, the application shall include all of the following information:

a.     The information requested on the application form;

b.     Plans and exhibits required for the specific approval(s) being sought;

c.     A written statement or letter explaining how the application satisfies each and all of the relevant criteria and standards in sufficient detail;

d.     Information demonstrating compliance with prior decision(s) and conditions of approval for the subject site, as applicable; and

e.     The required fee.

f.      Comments, if obtained from neighborhood contact per Section 17-4.1.070.

B.     Procedure.

1.     Mailed and Posted Notice.

a.     The City shall mail public notice of a public hearing on a Quasi-Judicial application at least 20 days before the hearing date to the individuals and organizations listed below. The Planning Official shall prepare an affidavit of notice, which shall be made a part of the file. The affidavit shall state the date that the notice was mailed. Notice shall be mailed to:

(1)    All owners of record of real property located within a minimum of 300 feet of the subject site;

(2)    Any person who submits a written request to receive a notice; and

(3)    Any governmental agency that is entitled to notice under an intergovernmental agreement entered into with the City and any other affected agencies. At a minimum, the Planning Official shall notify the road authority if different than the City of Molalla. The failure of another agency to respond with written comments on a pending application shall not invalidate an action or permit approval made by the City under this Code.

b.     At least 14 days before the first hearing, the Applicant shall post notice of the hearing on the project site in clear view from a public right-of-way using a poster format prescribed by the Planning Official. The applicant shall submit an affidavit of notice using a form provided by the City, which shall be made a part of the file. The affidavit shall state the date that the notice was posted.

c.     At least 14 days before the first hearing, the City shall publish notice of the hearing on the City website, and have said notice published in a newspaper with local circulation.

2.     Content of Notice. Notice of a Quasi-Judicial hearing to be mailed and published per subsection B.1, shall contain all of the following information:

a.     A summary of the proposal and the relevant approval criteria, in sufficient detail to help the public identify and locate applicable code requirements;

b.     The date, time, and location of the scheduled hearing;

c.     The street address or other clear reference to the location of the proposed use or development;

d.     A disclosure statement that if any person fails to address the relevant approval criteria with enough detail, he or she may not be able to appeal to the City Council, Land Use Board of Appeals, or Circuit Court, as applicable, on that issue, and that only comments on the relevant approval criteria are considered relevant evidence;

e.     A statement that a copy of the application, all documents and evidence submitted by or for the applicant, and the applicable criteria and standards shall be available for review at the office of the Planning Official, and that copies shall be provided at a reasonable cost;

f.      A statement that a copy of the City’s staff report and recommendation to the hearings body shall be available for review at no cost at least seven days before the hearing, and that a copy shall be provided on request at a reasonable cost;

g.     A general explanation of the requirements to submit testimony, and the procedure for conducting public hearings; and

h.     A statement that after the public hearing closes, the City will issue its decision, and the decision shall be mailed to the applicant and to anyone else who submitted written comments or who is otherwise legally entitled to notice.

C.     Conduct of the Public Hearing.

1.     At the commencement of the hearing, the Chairperson of the Commission or Mayor, as applicable, or his or her designee, shall state to those in attendance all of the following information and instructions:

a.     The applicable approval criteria by Code chapter that apply to the application;

b.     Testimony and evidence shall concern the approval criteria described in the staff report, or other criteria in the comprehensive plan or land use regulations that the person testifying believes to apply to the decision;

c.     Failure to raise an issue with sufficient detail to give the hearing body and the parties an opportunity to respond to the issue, may preclude appeal to the state Land Use Board of Appeals on that issue;

d.     At the conclusion of the initial evidentiary hearing, the hearing body shall deliberate and make a decision based on the facts and arguments in the public record; and

e.     Any participant may ask the hearing body for an opportunity to present additional relevant evidence or testimony that is within the scope of the hearing; if the hearing body grants the request, it will schedule a date to continue the hearing as provided in subsection C.5, or leave the record open for additional written evidence or testimony as provided in subsection C.6.

2.     The public is entitled to an impartial hearing body. Where questions related to ex parte contact are concerned, members of the hearing body shall follow the guidance for disclosure of ex parte contacts contained in ORS 227.180. Where a real conflict of interest arises, that member or members of the hearing body shall not participate in the hearing, except where state law provides otherwise. Where the appearance of a conflict of interest is likely, that member or members of the hearing body shall individually disclose their relationship to the applicant in the public hearing and state whether they are capable of rendering a fair and impartial decision. If they are unable to render a fair and impartial decision, they shall be excused from the proceedings.

3.     Presenting and Receiving Evidence.

a.     The hearing body may set reasonable time limits for oral presentations and may limit or exclude cumulative, repetitious, irrelevant, or personally derogatory testimony or evidence;

b.     No oral testimony shall be accepted after the close of the public hearing. Written testimony may be received after the close of the public hearing only as provided by this section; and

c.     Members of the hearing body may visit the property and the surrounding area, and may use information obtained during the site visit to support their decision, if the information relied upon is disclosed at the beginning of the hearing and an opportunity is provided to dispute the evidence.

4.     The hearing body, in making its decision, shall consider only facts and arguments in the public hearing record; except that it may take notice of facts not in the hearing record (e.g., local, state, or federal regulations; previous City decisions; case law; staff reports). Upon announcing its intention to take notice of such facts in its deliberations, it must allow persons who are present at the hearing and previously participated in the hearing to request the hearing record be reopened, as necessary, to present evidence concerning the newly presented facts.

5.     If the hearing body decides to continue the hearing, the hearing shall be continued to a date that is at least seven days after the date of the first evidentiary hearing (e.g., next regularly scheduled meeting). An opportunity shall be provided at the continued hearing for persons to present and respond to new written evidence and oral testimony. If new written evidence is submitted at the continued hearing, any person may request, before the conclusion of the hearing, that the record be left open for at least seven days, so that he or she can submit additional written evidence or arguments in response to the new written evidence. In the interest of time, after the close of the hearing, the hearing body may limit additional testimony to arguments and not accept additional evidence.

6.     If the hearing body leaves the record open for additional written testimony, the record shall be left open for at least seven days after the hearing. Any participant may ask the hearing body in writing for an opportunity to respond to new evidence (i.e., information not disclosed during the public hearing) submitted when the record was left open. If such a request is filed, the hearing body shall reopen the record, as follows:

a.     When the record is reopened to admit new evidence or arguments (testimony), any person may raise new issues that relate to that new evidence or testimony;

b.     An extension of the hearing or record granted pursuant to this section is subject to the limitations of Section 17-4.1.060 (ORS 227.178, 120-day rule), unless the applicant waives his or her right to a final decision being made within 120 days of filing a complete application; and

c.     If requested by the applicant, the hearing body shall grant the applicant at least seven days after the record is closed to all other persons to submit final written arguments, but not evidence, provided the applicant may expressly waive this right.

7.     The Notice of Quasi-Judicial Decision shall contain all of the following information:

a.     A description of the applicant’s proposal and the City’s decision on the proposal, which may be a summary, provided it references the specifics of the proposal and conditions of approval in the public record;

b.     The address or other geographic description of the property proposed for development, including a map of the property in relation to the surrounding area (a copy of assessor’s map may be used);

c.     A statement of where the City’s decision can be obtained;

d.     The date the decision shall become final, unless appealed; and

e.     A statement that all persons entitled to notice may appeal the Planning Commission’s decision to City Council pursuant to subsection D, or may appeal the City Council’s decision to the state Land Use Board of Appeals, as applicable.

C.     Effective Date of Decision. Unless the conditions of approval specify otherwise, a Quasi-Judicial Decision becomes effective 10 days after the City mails the decision notice, unless the decision is appealed pursuant to subsection D.

D.    Appeal of Planning Commission Decision. The Planning Commission’s decision may be appealed to the City Council as follows:

1.     Who May Appeal. The following people have legal standing to appeal:

a.     The applicant or owner of the subject property; and

b.     Any other person who testified orally or in writing during the subject public hearing before the close of the public record.

2.     Appeal Filing Procedure.

a.     Notice of Appeal. Any person with standing to appeal, as provided in subsection D.1, may appeal a Type III Quasi-Judicial Decision by filing a Notice of Appeal according to the following procedures.

b.     Time for Filing. A Notice of Appeal shall be filed with the Planning Official within the timeframe specified on the Notice of Decision and consistent with ORS 197.195.

c.     Content of Notice of Appeal. The Notice of Appeal shall be accompanied by the required filing fee and shall contain:

(1)    An identification of the decision being appealed, including the date of the decision;

(2)    A statement demonstrating the person filing the Notice of Appeal has standing to appeal;

(3)    A statement explaining the specific issues being raised on appeal; and

(4)    If the appellant is not the applicant, a statement demonstrating that the appeal issues were raised during the comment period.

3.     Scope of Appeal. The appeal of a Type III Quasi-Judicial Decision shall be a hearing de novo before the City Council. The appeal shall not be limited to the application materials, evidence and other documentation, and specific issues raised in the review leading up to the Quasi-Judicial Decision, but may include other relevant evidence and arguments. The hearing appeal body shall allow additional evidence, testimony, or argument concerning any applicable standard, criterion, condition, or issue.

E.     Record of the Public Hearing.

1.     The official public hearing record shall include all of the following information:

a.     All materials considered by the hearings body;

b.     All materials submitted by the Planning Official to the hearings body regarding the application;

c.     The minutes of the hearing;

d.     The final written decision; and

e.     Copies of all notices given as required by this chapter, and correspondence regarding the application that the City mailed or received.

2.     The meeting minutes shall be filed in hardcopy form with the Planning Official. The minutes and other evidence presented as a part of the hearing shall be part of the record.

3.     All exhibits received and displayed shall be marked to provide identification and shall be part of the record.

F.     Effective Date and Appeals to State Land Use Board of Appeals. A Quasi-Judicial Decision or Appeal Decision, as applicable, is effective the date the City mails the decision notice. Appeals of City Council decisions under this chapter shall be filed with the state Land Use Board of Appeals pursuant to ORS 197.805 to 197.860. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.1.050 Type IV (Legislative Decisions)
A.    Timing of Requests. The City Council may establish a schedule for when it will accept legislative code amendment or plan amendment requests, or the City Council may initiate its own legislative proposals at any time. Legislative requests are not subject to the 120-day review period under ORS 227.178.

B.     Application Requirements.

1.     Application Forms. Legislative applications shall be made on forms provided by the Planning Official.

2.     Submittal Information. The application shall contain all of the following information:

a.     The information requested on the application form;

b.     A map and/or plan addressing the appropriate criteria and standards in sufficient detail for review and decision (as applicable);

c.     The required fee, except when City of Molalla initiates request; and

d.     One copy of a letter or narrative statement that explains how the application satisfies each and all of the relevant approval criteria and standards.

C.     Procedure. Hearings on Legislative Land Use requests are conducted similar to City Council hearings on other legislative proposals, except the notification procedure for Legislative Land Use requests must conform to state land use laws (ORS 227.175), as follows:

1.     The Planning Official shall notify in writing the Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development (DLCD) of legislative amendments (zone change, rezoning with annexation, or comprehensive plan amendment) at least 35 days before the first public hearing at which public testimony or new evidence will be received. The notice shall include a DLCD Certificate of Mailing.

2.     At least 20 days, but not more than 40 days, before the date of the first hearing on an ordinance that proposes to amend the comprehensive plan or any element thereof, or to adopt an ordinance for any zone change, a notice shall be prepared in conformance with ORS 227.175 and mailed to:

a.     Each owner whose property would be directly affected by the proposal (e.g., rezoning or a change from one Comprehensive Plan land use designation to another), see ORS 227.186 for instructions;

b.     Any affected governmental agency;

c.     Any person who requests notice in writing; and

d.     For a zone change affecting a manufactured dwelling park, all mailing addresses within the park, in accordance with ORS 227.175.

3.     At least 10 days before the scheduled City Council public hearing date, public notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and the City’s Website.

4.     For each mailing and publication of notice, the Planning Official shall keep an affidavit of mailing/publication in the record.

D.    Final Decision and Effective Date. A Legislative Land Use decision, if approved, shall take effect and shall become final as specified in the enacting ordinance or, if not approved, upon mailing of the notice of decision to the applicant. Notice of a Legislative Land Use decision shall be mailed to the applicant, all participants of record, and the Department of Land Conservation and Development within 20 business days after the City Council decision is filed with the Planning Official. The City shall also provide notice to all persons as required by other applicable laws. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.1.060 Time Limit, Consolidated Review, and Planning Official’s Duties
A.    Time Limit—120-Day Rule. The City shall take final action on Administrative and Quasi-Judicial land use applications, pursuant to this chapter, including resolution of all appeals, within 120 days from the date the Planning Official deems the application complete for purposes of processing, unless the applicant requests an extension in writing. Any exceptions to this rule shall conform to the provisions of ORS 227.178. (Note: The 120-day rule does not apply to Legislative Land Use decisions.)

B.     Time Periods. In computing time periods prescribed or allowed by this chapter, the day of the act or event from which the designated period of time begins shall not be included. The last day of the period shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday, in which case the period runs until the end of the next day that is not on a weekend or legal holiday.

C.     Consolidated Review of Applications. When an applicant applies for more than one type of land use or development permit for the same one or more contiguous parcels of land, the proceedings shall be consolidated for review and decision. When proceedings are consolidated, required notices may be consolidated, provided the notice shall identify each application to be decided. When more than one application is reviewed in a hearing, separate findings and decisions shall be made on each application.

D.    Planning Official’s Duties. The Planning Official, or designee, shall perform all of the following duties with regard to administration of this Code:

1.     Prepare application forms based on the provisions of this Code and applicable state law;

2.     Prepare required notices and process applications for review and action;

3.     Assist the Planning Commission and City Council in administering the hearings process;

4.     Answer questions from the public regarding the City’s land use regulations;

5.     Prepare staff reports summarizing pending applications, including applicable decision criteria;

6.     Prepare findings consistent with City decisions on land use and development applications;

7.     Prepare notices of final decisions, file the notices in the City’s records, and mail a copy of the notices to all parties entitled to notice under this Code; and

8.     Maintain and preserve the file and public record for each application. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.1.070 Neighborhood Contact
A.    Purpose and Applicability. Applicants for master planned development, subdivision, or site design review on projects involving parcels or lots larger than one acre and located adjacent to any residential zone, and property owner-applicants for zone changes, are recommended to contact neighboring property owners and offer to a hold meeting with them prior to submitting an application. This is to ensure that affected property owners are given an opportunity to preview a proposal and offer input to the applicant before a plan is formally submitted to the City, thereby raising any concerns about the project and the project’s compatibility with surrounding uses early in the design process when changes can be made relatively inexpensively.

B.     Notice. Notice of the meeting should be given in writing and delivered in person, or by certified mail, to all of the property owners whose property is located within 300 feet of the site, at their addresses of record at the Clackamas County Assessor’s office, at least 14 days before the meeting and at least 21 days before submitting the application to the City. The notice should state the time, place, and purpose of the meeting, including a description of the proposed development.

C.     Meeting Place, Date, and Time. The meeting should be held within the City limits at a location obtained or provided by the applicant with sufficient room for the expected attendance. The meeting place should be accessible to persons with disabilities. It should be scheduled at a date and time reasonably calculated to allow maximum participation by interested property owners.

D.    Conduct of Meeting. At the meeting, the applicant, or the applicant’s agent, should present sufficient information about the proposed development to inform the property owners in attendance of the nature of the proposal and impacts it may have on neighboring properties, including transportation impacts. Persons attending should be allowed to ask questions and make comments. The applicant, or the applicant’s agent, should make a sound or video recording or keep written minutes of the meeting that give a true reflection of the matters discussed at the meeting and the views of the participants. The applicant should also make a list of names of persons attending the meeting.

E.     Filing Requirements. Proof of having held the meeting, even if no affected property owners attend, is required and should be submitted to the City with a land use application. Copies of the following information should accompany the land use application: a copy of the notice mailed, certified mail receipts, all addresses to which notice was mailed (e.g., copy of mailing labels), a certificate of personal service for those persons who were provided notice by personal service (including the date of service and the name of the person who provided service), a record or minutes of the meeting with a list of attendees, and copies of the meeting notice and all other written materials provided prior to or distributed at the meeting. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

Chapter 17-4.2 SITE DESIGN REVIEW
17-4.2.010 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to advance all of the following objectives in the public interest:

A.    Carry out the development pattern and plan of the City and its comprehensive plan policies through efficient and effective review of site development proposals;

B.     Promote the public health, safety, and general welfare;

C.     Provide adequate light and air, and provide for adequate transportation, water supply, sewage, fire protection, pollution control, surface water management, and protection against natural hazards; and

D.    Encourage efficient use of land resources and public services, and the provision of transportation options. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.2.020 Applicability
Site Design Review approval is required for new development. Site Design Review approval is also required to expand a nonconforming use or development. Except as specified by a condition of approval of a prior City decision, or as required for uses subject to Conditional Use Permit approval, Site Design Review is not required for the following:

A.    Change in occupancy from one type of land use to a different land use resulting in no increase in vehicular traffic or development;

B.     Single-family detached dwelling (including manufactured home) on its own lot, except as required for designated historic landmarks or properties within a designated historic district;

C.     A single duplex;

D.    Non-residential building addition of up to 500 square feet or 10 percent, whichever is greater;

E.     Home occupation, except for uses requiring a Conditional Use Permit;

F.     Development and land uses that are already approved as part of a Site Design Review or Conditional Use Permit application, provided that modifications to such plans may require Site Design Review, pursuant to Chapter 17-4.2;

G.    Public improvements required by City standards or as stipulated by a condition of land use approval (e.g., transportation facilities and improvements, parks, trails, utilities, and similar improvements), as determined by the Planning Official and City Engineer, except where a condition of approval requires Site Design Review; and

H.    Regular maintenance, repair, and replacement of materials (e.g., roof, siding, awnings, etc.), parking resurfacing, and similar maintenance and repair. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.2.030 Review Procedure
Site Design Review shall be conducted using the Type II procedure in Section 17-4.1.030, except that proposals exceeding any one of the thresholds below shall be reviewed using the Type III procedure in Section 17-4.1.040:

A.    The proposed use’s estimated vehicle trip generation exceeds 100 average daily trips, based on the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Manual;

B.     The use exceeds 5,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area; or the project involves more than one acre total site area;

C.     The proposal involves a Conditional Use (new or expanded);

D.    The proposal involves a variance under Chapter 17-4.7;

E.     The proposal involves expansion of a nonconforming use; or

F.     The Planning Official determines that, due to the nature of the proposal, a public hearing is the most effective way to solicit public input in reviewing the application. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.2.040 Application Submission Requirements
All of the following information is required for Site Design Review application submittal, except where the Planning Official and the City Engineer determines that some information is not pertinent and therefore is not required.

A.    General Submission Requirements.

1.     Information required for Type II or Type III review, as applicable (see Chapter 17-4.1).

2.     Public Facilities and Services Impact Study. The impact study shall quantify and assess the effect of the development on public facilities and services. The City shall advise as to the scope of the study. The study shall address, at a minimum, the transportation system, including required improvements for vehicles and pedestrians; the drainage system; the parks system; water system; and sewer system. For each system and type of impact, the study shall propose improvements necessary to meet City requirements. The City may require a Traffic Impact Analysis pursuant to Section 17-3.6.020.A(4).

B.     Site Design Review Information. In addition to the general submission requirements, an applicant for Site Design Review shall provide the following information, as deemed applicable by the Planning Official. The Planning Official may request any information that he or she needs to review the proposal and prepare a complete staff report and recommendation to the approval body.

1.     Site Analysis Map. The site analysis map shall contain all the following information, as the Planning Official deems applicable:

a.     The applicant’s entire property and the surrounding property to a distance sufficient to determine the location of the development in the city, and the relationship between the proposed development site and adjacent property and development. The property boundaries, dimensions, and gross area shall be identified;

b.     Topographic contour lines at two-foot intervals for slopes, except where the Public Works Director determines that larger intervals will be adequate for steeper slopes;

c.     Identification of slopes greater than 15 percent, with slope categories identified in five percent increments (e.g., 0%-5%, >5%-10%, >10%-15%, >15%-20%, and so forth);

d.     The location and width of all public and private streets, drives, sidewalks, pathways, rights-of-way, and easements on the site and adjoining the site;

e.     Potential natural hazard areas, including, as applicable, the base flood elevation identified on FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps or as otherwise determined through site specific survey, areas subject to high water table, and areas designated by the City, county, or state as having a potential for geologic hazards;

f.      Areas subject to overlay zones;

g.     Site features, including existing structures, pavement, large rock outcroppings, areas having unique views, and drainage ways, canals, and ditches;

h.     The location, size, and species of trees and other vegetation (outside proposed building envelope) having a caliper (diameter) of six inches or greater at four feet above grade;

i.      North arrow, scale, and the names and addresses of all persons listed as owners of the subject property on the most recently recorded deed; and

j.      Name and address of project designer, engineer, surveyor, and/or planner, if applicable.

2.     Proposed Site Plan. The site plan shall contain all the following information:

a.     The proposed development site, including boundaries, dimensions, and gross area;

b.     Features identified on the existing site analysis maps that are proposed to remain on the site;

c.     Features identified on the existing site map, if any, which are proposed to be removed or modified by the development;

d.     The location and dimensions of all proposed public and private streets, drives, rights-of-way, and easements;

e.     The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, utilities, pavement, and other improvements on the site. Setback dimensions for all existing and proposed buildings shall be provided on the site plan;

f.      The location and dimensions of entrances and exits to the site for vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle access;

g.     The location and dimensions of all parking and vehicle circulation areas (show striping for parking stalls and wheel stops);

h.     Pedestrian and bicycle circulation areas, including sidewalks, internal pathways, pathway connections to adjacent properties, and any bicycle lanes or trails;

i.      Loading and service areas for waste disposal, loading, and delivery;

j.      Outdoor recreation spaces, common areas, plazas, outdoor seating, street furniture, and similar improvements;

k.     Location, type, and height of outdoor lighting;

l.      Location of mail boxes, if known;

m.    Name and address of project designer, if applicable;

n.     Locations of bus stops and other public or private transportation facilities; and

o.     Locations, sizes, and types of signs.

3.     Architectural Drawings. Architectural drawings shall include, as applicable:

a.     Building elevations with dimensions;

b.     Building materials, colors, and type; and

c.     Name and contact information of the architect or designer.

4.     Preliminary Grading Plan. A preliminary grading plan prepared by a registered engineer shall be required for development sites one-half acre or larger, or where otherwise required by the City. The preliminary grading plan shall show the location and extent to which grading will take place, indicating general changes to contour lines, slope ratios, slope stabilization proposals, and location and height of retaining walls, if proposed. Surface water detention and treatment plans may also be required, in accordance with Section 17-3.6.040.

5.     Landscape Plan. Where a landscape plan is required, it shall show the following, pursuant to Chapter 17-3.4:

a.     The location and height of existing and proposed fences, buffering, or screening materials;

b.     The location of existing and proposed terraces, retaining walls, decks, patios, shelters, and play areas;

c.     The location, size, and species of the existing and proposed plant materials (at time of planting);

d.     Existing and proposed building and pavement outlines;

e.     Specifications for soil at time of planting, irrigation if plantings are not drought tolerant (may be automatic or other approved method of irrigation), and anticipated planting schedule; and

f.      Other information as deemed appropriate by the Planning Official. An arborist’s report may be required for sites with mature trees that are to be retained and protected.

6.     Deed Restrictions. Copies of all existing and proposed restrictions or covenants, including those for roadway access control.

7.     Narrative. Letter or narrative report documenting compliance with the applicable approval criteria contained in Section 17-4.2.050.

8.     Traffic Impact Analysis, when required by Section 17-3.6.020.A(4).

9.     Other information determined by the Planning Official. The City may require studies or exhibits prepared by qualified professionals to address specific site features or project impacts (e.g., traffic, noise, environmental features, natural hazards, etc.), as necessary to determine a proposal’s conformance with this Code. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.2.050 Approval Criteria
An application for Site Design Review shall be approved if the proposal meets all of the following criteria. The Planning Official, in approving the application, may impose reasonable conditions of approval, consistent with the applicable criteria.

A.    The application is complete, in accordance with Section 17-4.2.040;

B.     The application complies with all of the applicable provisions of the underlying Zoning District (Division II), including, but not limited to, building and yard setbacks, lot area and dimensions, density and floor area, lot coverage, building height, building orientation, architecture, and other applicable standards;

C.     The proposal includes required upgrades, if any, to existing development that does not comply with the applicable zoning district standards, pursuant to Chapter 17-1.4 Nonconforming Situations;

D.    The proposal complies with all of the Development and Design Standards of Division III, as applicable, including, but not limited to:

1.     Chapter 17-3.3 Access and Circulation,

2.     Chapter 17-3.4 Landscaping, Fences and Walls, Outdoor Lighting,

3.     Chapter 17-3.5 Parking and Loading,

4.     Chapter 17-3.6 Public Facilities, and

5.     Chapter 17-3.7 Signs;

E.     For non-residential uses, all adverse impacts to adjacent properties, such as light, glare, noise, odor, vibration, smoke, dust, or visual impact, are avoided; or where impacts cannot be avoided, they are minimized; and

F.     The proposal meets all existing conditions of approval for the site or use, as required by prior land use decision(s), as applicable.

Note: Compliance with other City codes and requirements, though not applicable land use criteria, may be required prior to issuance of building permits. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.2.060 Assurances
Public improvement required as part of a Site Design Review approval shall be subject to the performance guarantee and warranty bond provisions of Section 17-3.6.090, as applicable. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.2.070 Compliance With Conditions, Permit Expiration, and Modifications
Development shall not commence until the applicant has received all applicable land use and development approvals. Construction of public improvements shall not commence until the City has approved all required public improvement plans (e.g., utilities, streets, public land dedication, etc.). The City may require bonding or other assurances for improvements. Site Design Review approvals are subject to all of the following standards and limitations:

A.    Approval Period. Site Design Review approvals shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of approval. The approval shall lapse if:

1.     A public improvement plan or building permit application for the project has not been submitted within one year of approval; or

2.     Construction on the site is in violation of the approved plan.

B.     Extension. The Planning Official, upon written request by the applicant, may grant a written extension of the approval period not to exceed one year; provided that:

1.     No changes are made on the original approved plan;

2.     The applicant can show intent of initiating construction on the site within the one-year extension period;

3.     There have been no changes to the applicable Code provisions on which the approval was based. If there have been changes to the applicable Code provisions and the subject plan does not comply with those changes, then the extension shall not be granted; in this case, a new Site Design Review shall be required; and

4.     The applicant demonstrates that failure to obtain building permits and substantially begin construction within one year of site design approval was beyond the applicant’s control.

C.     Modifications to Approved Plans and Developments. Modifications to approved plans are subject to City review and approval under Chapter 17-4.5. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

Chapter 17-4.3 LAND DIVISIONS AND PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENTS
17-4.3.010 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to implement the objectives in subsections A through E:

A.    Provide rules, regulations, and standards governing the approval of subdivisions, partitions, and property line adjustments as follows:

1.     Subdivisions are the creation of four or more lots from one parent lot, parcel, or tract, within one calendar year.

2.     Partitions are the creation of three or fewer lots from one parent lot, parcel, or tract within one calendar year.

3.     Property line adjustments are modifications to lot lines or parcel boundaries that do not result in the creation of new lots (includes consolidation of lots).

B.     Carry out the City’s development pattern, as envisioned by the City’s comprehensive plan.

C.     Encourage efficient use of land resources and public services, and to provide transportation options.

D.    Promote the public health, safety, and general welfare through orderly and efficient urbanization.

E.     Provide adequate light and air, and provide for adequate transportation, water supply, sewage, fire protection, pollution control, surface water management, and protection against natural hazards. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.3.020 General Requirements
A.    Subdivision and Partition Approval Through Two-Step Process. Applications for subdivision or partition approval shall be processed by means of a preliminary plat evaluation and a final plat evaluation, according to the following two steps:

1.     The preliminary plat must be approved before the final plat can be submitted for approval consideration; and

2.     The final plat must demonstrate compliance with all conditions of approval of the preliminary plat.

Note: Property line adjustments and lot consolidation requests (i.e., no new lot is created) are subject to Section 17-4.3.120; they are not subject to Sections 17-4.3.020 through 17-4.3.110.

B.     Compliance With Oregon Revised Statutes (ORS) Chapter 92. All subdivision and partition proposals shall conform to state regulations in ORS Chapter 92 Subdivisions and Partitions.

C.     Future Re-Division Plan. When subdividing or partitioning tracts into large lots (i.e., greater than three times or 300 percent the minimum lot size allowed by the underlying land use district), the lots shall be of such size, shape, and orientation as to facilitate future re-division and extension of streets and utilities. The applicant shall submit a future re-division plan, or shadow plan, indicating how re-division of oversized lots and extension of planned public facilities to adjacent parcels can occur in the future. (See also Section 17-4.3.040 Pre-Planning for Large Sites.)

D.    Adequate Utilities. All lots created through land division shall have adequate public utilities and facilities such as streets, water, sewer, gas, and electrical systems, pursuant to Chapter 17-3.6. These systems shall be located and constructed underground where feasible.

E.     Adequate Drainage. All subdivision and partition proposals shall have adequate surface water drainage facilities that reduce exposure to flood damage and improve water quality. Water quality or quantity control improvements may be required, pursuant to Chapter 17-3.6.

F.     Adequate Access. All lots created or reconfigured shall have adequate vehicle access and parking, as may be required, pursuant to Chapter 17-3.3. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.3.030 Preliminary Plat Approval Process
A.    Review of Preliminary Plat. Preliminary plats for partitions shall be processed using the Type II procedure under Section 17-4.1.030. Subdivisions shall be processed using the Type III procedure under Section 17-4.1.040. All preliminary plats, including partitions and subdivisions, are subject to the approval criteria in Section 17-4.3.070.

B.     Preliminary Plat Approval Period. Preliminary plat approval shall be effective for a period of two years from the date of approval. The preliminary plat shall lapse if a final plat has not been submitted or other assurance provided, pursuant to Section 17-4.3.090, within the two-year period. The Planning Commission may approve phased subdivisions, pursuant to subsection D, with an overall time frame of more than two years between preliminary and final plat approvals.

C.     Modifications and Extensions. The applicant may request changes to the approved preliminary plat or conditions of approval following the procedures and criteria provided in Chapter 17-4.5. The Planning Commission may, upon written request by the applicant and payment of the required fee, grant written extensions of the approval period not to exceed one year per extension, provided that all of the following criteria are met:

1.     Any changes to the preliminary plat follow the procedures in Chapter 17-4.5;

2.     The applicant has submitted written intent to file a final plat within the one-year extension period;

3.     An extension of time will not prevent the lawful development of abutting properties;

4.     There have been no changes to the applicable Code provisions on which the approval was based. If such changes have occurred, a new preliminary plat application shall be required; and

5.     The extension request is made before expiration of the original approved plan.

D.    Phased Subdivision. The Planning Commission may approve plans for phasing a subdivision, and changes to approved phasing plans, provided the applicant’s proposal meets all of the following criteria:

1.     In no case shall the construction time period (i.e., for required public improvements, utilities, streets) for the first subdivision phase be more than one year;

2.     Public facilities shall be constructed in conjunction with or prior to each phase;

3.     The phased development shall not result in requiring the City or a third party (e.g., owners of lots) to construct public facilities that are required as part of the approved development proposal; and

4.     The proposed phasing schedule shall be reviewed with the preliminary subdivision plat application. (Ord. 2019-16 §1; Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.3.040 Pre-Planning for Large Sites
A.    Purpose. Section 17-4.3.040 requires the pre-planning of large sites in conjunction with requests for annexation, and applications for phased subdivisions and master plan developments; the purpose of which is to avoid piecemeal development with inadequate public facilities.

B.     Applicability. This section applies to land use applications and annexations affecting more than 40 acres of land under the same contiguous ownership, even where only a portion of the site is proposed for subdividing. For the purposes of this section, the same contiguous ownership means the same individual, or group of individuals, corporations, or other entities, controls a majority share of ownership.

C.     Area Plan Required. Prior to submittal of an annexation petition or land division application for an area subject to Section 17-4.3.040, a conceptual master plan shall be submitted to the Planning Official with the required pre-application materials for the project or proposal. The conceptual master plan shall illustrate the type and location of planned streets, utility corridors, parks, open spaces, and land uses for the ultimate buildout of the subject property and all lands under contiguous ownership. The plan shall demonstrate how future development, including any proposed phasing, can meet all the guidelines under subsection D, below.

D.    Criteria. The conceptual plan required under subsection C, above, is not required to be engineered but shall have a sufficient level of detail so that the City officials can determine that it meets the following design guidelines:

1.     Streets are interconnected to the extent practicable; blocks are walkable in scale (generally 200 to 600 feet in length), except where topography, existing development, or other physical features require longer blocks, in which case pedestrian access ways connect through long blocks;

2.     Water, sewer, and storm drainage facilities logically extend to serve the site at buildout, consistent with adopted public facility plans. Where a public facility plan identifies a need for new capacity-related improvements (e.g., water storage, sewage treatment, pump stations, etc.) in the future, the plan shall describe conceptually how such improvements can be accommodated;

3.     Overall, the plan achieves a housing density that is within 80 to 100 percent of planned densities, consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and Development Code; and

4.     The plan reserves land needed for public use (e.g., schools, parks, fire stations, and other facilities), in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and to the extent allowed under applicable law.

E.     Implementation. The conceptual master plan required by this section must be submitted during the pre-application meeting for the land use application or annexation petition, as applicable. The City may also refer the plan to outside agencies with jurisdiction for their input. The master plan is not binding, but the applicant is encouraged to refine the plan based on City input before submitting a land use application or annexation petition for the subject property. The applicant should also contact adjacent property owners and solicit their input prior to submitting a land use application, pursuant to Section 17-4.1.070. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.3.050 Lot Size Averaging, Flag Lots, and Infill Development
A.    Lot Size Averaging. To allow flexibility in subdivision design and to address physical constraints, such as topography, existing development, significant trees, and other natural and built features, the approval body may grant a 20 percent modification to the lot area and/or lot dimension (width/depth) standards in Chapter 17-2.2, provided that the overall density of the subdivision does not exceed the allowable density of the district and the approval body finds that all of the following are met:

1.     Granting the modification is necessary to achieve planned housing densities, as allowed by the underlying zone, or to improve development compatibility with natural features or adjacent land uses;

2.     The Planning Official may require screening, buffering, or other transitions in site design where substandard lots are proposed to abut standard- or larger-sized lots.

B.     Flag Lots. Flag lots may be created only when a through street cannot be extended to serve abutting uses or future development. A flag lot driveway (“flag pole”) shall serve not more than two dwelling units, including accessory dwellings and dwellings on individual lots. The City Engineer may approve additional units. The layout of flag lots, the placement of buildings on such lots, and the alignment of shared drives shall be designed so that future street connections can be made as adjacent properties develop, to the extent practicable, and in accordance with the standards of Section 17-3.6.020.D.

C.     Infill Development and Mid-Block Lanes. Where consecutive flag lot developments or other infill development could have the effect of precluding local street extensions through a long block, the Planning Official and City Engineer may require the improvement of a mid-block lanes through the block. Mid-block lanes are a private drives serving more than two dwelling units with reciprocal access easements; such lanes are an alternative to requiring public right-of-way street improvements where physical site constraints preclude the development of a standard street. Mid-block lanes, at a minimum, shall be paved, have adequate storm drainage (surface retention, where feasible, is preferred), meet the construction standards for alleys, and conform to the standards of subsections D and E.

D.    Emergency Vehicle Access. A drive serving more than one lot shall have a reciprocal access and maintenance easement recorded for all lots it serves. No fence, structure, or other obstacle shall be placed within the drive area. Where required, emergency vehicle apparatus lanes, including any required turn-around, shall conform to applicable building and fire code requirements. Fire sprinklers may also be required for buildings that cannot be fully served by fire hydrants (i.e., due to distance from hydrant or insufficient fire flow).

E.     Maximum Drive Lane Length. The maximum length of a drive serving more than one dwelling is subject to requirements of the Uniform Fire Code. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.3.060 Preliminary Plat Submission Requirements
Applications for Preliminary Plat approval shall contain all of the following information:

A.    General Submission Requirements.

1.     Information required for a Type III review (see Section 17-4.1.040); and

2.     Public Facilities and Services Impact Study. The impact study shall quantify and assess the effect of the development on public facilities and services. The City shall advise as to the scope of the study, which shall address, at a minimum, the transportation system, including required improvements for motorized and non-motorized vehicles and pedestrians; the drainage system; the parks system (for subdivisions and planned unit developments of 20 or more dwelling units); water system; and sewer system. For each system and type of impact, the study shall propose improvements necessary to meet City standards under adopted ordinances and facility master plans. The City may require a Traffic Impact Analysis pursuant to Section 17-3.6.020.A.4.

B.     Preliminary Plat Information. In addition to the general information described in subsection A, above, the preliminary plat application shall consist of drawings and supplementary written material (i.e., on forms and/or in a written narrative) adequate to provide all of the following information, in quantities determined by the Planning Official:

1.     General Information.

a.     Name of subdivision (partitions are named by year and file number), which shall not duplicate the name of another land division in Clackamas County (check with County Surveyor);

b.     Date, north arrow, and scale of drawing;

c.     Location of the development sufficient to define its location in the city, boundaries, and a legal description of the site;

d.     Zoning district of parcel to be divided, including any overlay zones;

e.     A title block including the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the owners of the subject property and, as applicable, the name of the engineer and surveyor, and the date of the survey; and

f.      Identification of the drawing as a “preliminary plat.”

2.     Existing Conditions. Except where the Planning Official deems certain information is not relevant, applications for Preliminary Plat approval shall contain all of the following information on existing conditions of the site:

a.     Streets. Location, name, and present width of all streets, alleys, and rights-of-way on and abutting the site;

b.     Easements. Width, location and purpose of all existing easements of record on and abutting the site;

c.     Utilities. Location and identity of all utilities on and abutting the site. If water mains and sewers are not on or abutting the site, indicate the direction and distance to the nearest one and show how utilities will be brought to standards;

d.     Ground elevations shown by contour lines at two-foot vertical intervals. Such ground elevations shall be related to some established benchmark or other datum approved by the County Surveyor; the Planning Commission may waive this standard for partitions when grades, on average, are less than six percent;

e.     The location and elevation of the closest benchmark(s) within or adjacent to the site (i.e., for surveying purposes);

f.      The Base Flood Elevation, per FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps, as applicable;

g.     North arrow and scale; and

h.     Other information, as deemed necessary by the Planning Official for review of the application. The City may require studies or exhibits prepared by qualified professionals to address specific site features and code requirements.

3.     Proposed Development. Except where the Planning Official deems certain information is not relevant, applications for Preliminary Plat approval shall contain all of the following information on the proposed development:

a.     Proposed lots, streets, tracts, open space, and park land (if any); location, names, right-of-way dimensions, approximate radius of street curves; and approximate finished street center line grades. All streets and tracts that are being held for private use and all reservations and restrictions relating to such private tracts shall be identified;

b.     Easements: location, width, and purpose of all proposed easements;

c.     Lots and private tracts (e.g., private open space, common area, or street): approximate dimensions, area calculation (e.g., in square feet), and identification numbers for all proposed lots and tracts;

d.     Proposed uses of the property, including all areas proposed to be dedicated as public right-of-way or reserved as open space for the purpose of surface water management, recreation, or other use;

e.     Proposed public street improvements, pursuant to Chapter 17-3.6;

f.      On slopes exceeding an average grade of 10 percent, as determined by the City Engineer, the preliminary location of development on lots (e.g., building envelopes), demonstrating that future development can meet minimum required setbacks and applicable engineering design standards;

g.     Preliminary design for extending City water and sewer service to each lot, per Chapter 17-3.6;

h.     Proposed method of stormwater drainage and treatment, if required, pursuant to Chapter 17-3.6;

i.      The approximate location and identity of other utilities, including the locations of street lighting fixtures, as applicable;

j.      Evidence of compliance with applicable overlay zones; and

k.     Evidence of contact with the applicable road authority for proposed new street connections. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.3.070 Preliminary Plat Approval Criteria
A.    Approval Criteria. The Planning Commission may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a preliminary plat. The Planning Commission decision shall be based on findings of compliance with all of the following approval criteria:

1.     The land division application shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 17-4.3;

2.     All proposed lots, blocks, and proposed land uses shall conform to the applicable provisions of Division II Zoning Regulations, except as modified by the provisions of Chapter 17-4.3 (e.g., lot size averaging);

3.     Access to individual lots, and public improvements necessary to serve the development, including, but not limited to, water, sewer, and streets, shall conform to Division III Community Design Standards;

4.     The proposed plat name is not already recorded for another subdivision, and satisfies the provisions of ORS Chapter 92;

5.     The proposed streets, utilities, and surface water drainage facilities conform to City of Molalla adopted master plans and applicable engineering standards, and allow for transitions to existing and potential future development on adjacent lands. The preliminary plat shall identify all proposed public improvements and dedications;

6.     All proposed private common areas and improvements, if any, are identified on the preliminary plat and maintenance of such areas is assured through appropriate legal instrument;

7.     Evidence that any required state and federal permits, as applicable, have been obtained or can reasonably be obtained prior to development;

8.     Evidence that improvements or conditions required by the City, road authority, Clackamas County, special districts, utilities, and/or other service providers, as applicable to the project, have been or can be met; and

9.     The architectural standards of Section 17-3.2.030.D are met.

B.     Conditions of Approval. The Planning Commission may attach such conditions as are necessary to carry out provisions of this Code, and other applicable ordinances and regulations. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.3.080 Land Division-Related Variances
Variances shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 17-4.7. Applications for variances shall be submitted at the same time an application for land division or lot line adjustment is submitted; when practical, the applications shall be reviewed concurrently. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.3.090 Final Plat Submission Requirements and Approval Criteria
Final plats require review and approval by the Planning Official prior to recording with Clackamas County. The final plat submission requirements, approval criteria, and procedure are as follows:

A.    Submission Requirements. The applicant shall submit the final plat within two years of the approval of the preliminary plat as provided by Section 17-4.3.070. The format of the plat shall conform to ORS Chapter 92.

B.     Approval Process and Criteria. By means of a Type I Review, the Planning Official shall review and approve or deny the final plat application based on findings of compliance or noncompliance with the all of the following criteria:

1.     The final plat is consistent in design (e.g., number, area, dimensions of lots, easements, tracts, rights-of-way) with the approved preliminary plat, and all conditions of approval have been satisfied;

2.     All public improvements required by the preliminary plat have been installed and approved by the City or applicable service provider if different than the City of Molalla (e.g., road authority), or otherwise bonded in conformance with Section 17-3.6.090;

3.     The streets and roads for public use are dedicated without reservation or restriction other than reversionary rights upon vacation of any such street or road and easements for public utilities;

4.     All required streets, access ways, roads, easements, and other dedications or reservations are shown on the plat;

5.     The plat and deed contain a dedication to the public of all public improvements, including, but not limited to, streets, public pathways and trails, access reserve strips, parks, and water and sewer facilities, as applicable;

6.     As applicable, the applicant has furnished acceptable copies of Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions (CC&Rs); easements; maintenance agreements (e.g., for access, common areas, parking, etc.); and other documents pertaining to common improvements recorded and referenced on the plat;

7.     Verification by the City that water and sanitary sewer service is available to every lot depicted on the plat; and

8.     The plat contains an affidavit by the surveyor who surveyed the land, represented on the plat to the effect the land was correctly surveyed and marked with proper monuments as provided by ORS Chapter 92, indicating the initial point of the survey, and giving the dimensions and kind of each monument and its reference to some corner approved by the Clackamas County Surveyor for purposes of identifying its location. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.3.100 Filing and Recording
A new lot is not a legal lot for purposes of ownership (title), sale, lease, or development/land use until a final plat is recorded for the subdivision or partition containing the lot is recorded. Requests to validate an existing lot created through means other than a final plat (“lot of record”) shall follow the procedures set forth in ORS 92.010 to 92.190. The final plat filing and recording requirements are as follows:

A.    Filing Plat with County. Within 60 days of City approval of the final plat, the applicant shall submit the final plat to Clackamas County for signatures of County officials, as required by ORS Chapter 92.

B.     Proof of Recording. Upon final recording with the County, the applicant shall submit to the City a mylar copy and three paper copies of all sheets of the recorded final plat. This shall occur prior to the issuance of building permits for the newly created lots.

C.     Prerequisites to Recording the Plat.

1.     No plat shall be recorded unless all ad valorem taxes and all special assessments, fees, or other charges required by law to be placed on the tax roll have been paid in the manner provided by ORS Chapter 92.

2.     No plat shall be recorded until the County Surveyor approves it in the manner provided by ORS Chapter 92. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.3.110 Re-Platting and Vacation of Plats
Any plat or portion thereof may be re-platted or vacated upon receiving an application signed by all of the owners as appearing on the deed. Except as required for street vacations, the same procedure and standards that apply to the creation of a plat (preliminary plat followed by final plat) shall be used to re-plat or vacate a plat. Street vacations are subject to ORS Chapter 271. A re-plat or vacation application may be denied if it abridges or destroys any public right in any of its public uses, improvements, streets or alleys; or if it fails to meet any applicable City standards. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.3.120 Property Line Adjustments
A property line adjustment is the modification of a lot boundary when no lot is created. The Planning Official reviews applications for property line adjustments pursuant to the Type I procedure under Section 17-4.1.020. The application submission and approval process for property line adjustments is as follows:

A.    Submission Requirements. All applications for property line adjustment shall be made on forms provided by the City and shall include information required for a Type I review, pursuant to Section 17-4.1.020. The application shall include a preliminary lot line map drawn to scale identifying all existing and proposed lot lines and dimensions, footprints and dimensions of existing structures (including accessory structures), location and dimensions of driveways and public and private streets within or abutting the subject lots, location of lands subject to the City of Molalla Water Resources Overlay, existing fences and walls, and any other information deemed necessary by the Planning Commission for ensuring compliance with City codes. The application shall be signed by all of the owners as appearing on the deeds of the subject lots.

B.     Approval Criteria. The Planning Official shall approve or deny a request for a property line adjustment in writing, based on all of the following criteria:

1.     Parcel Creation. No additional parcel or lot is created by the lot line adjustment;

2.     Lot Standards. All lots and parcels conform to the applicable lot standards of the zoning district (Division II) including lot area, dimensions, setbacks, and coverage. As applicable, all lots and parcels shall conform the City of Molalla Water Resources Overlay; and

3.     Access and Road Authority Standards. All lots and parcels conform to the standards or requirements of Chapter 17-3.3 Access and Circulation, and all applicable road authority requirements are met. If a lot is nonconforming to any City or road authority standard, it shall not be made less conforming by the property line adjustment.

C.     Recording Property Line Adjustments.

1.     Recording. Upon the City’s approval of the proposed property line adjustment, the applicant shall record the property line adjustment documents with Clackamas County within 60 days of approval (or the decision expires), and submit a copy of the recorded survey map to the City, to be filed with the approved application.

2.     Time Limit. The applicant shall submit a copy of the recorded property line adjustment survey map to the City within 15 days of recording and prior to any application being filed for a building permit on the re-configured lots. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

Chapter 17-4.4 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
17-4.4.010 Purpose
There are certain uses which, due to the nature of their impacts on surrounding land uses and public facilities, require a case-by-case review and analysis. Conditional uses are identified in Chapter 17-2.2 Zoning District Regulations. The purpose of this chapter is to provide procedures and standards for permitting conditional uses. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.4.020 Approvals Process
The Planning Commission using a Type III procedure, per Section 17-4.1.040, reviews conditional use applications. The Planning Commission may require annual, or less frequent, renewal of conditional use permits. Modifications to conditional use permits are subject to Chapter 17-4.5 Modifications to Approved Plans and Conditions. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.4.030 Application Submission Requirements
In addition to the submission requirements for a Type III review under Section 17-4.1.040, applications for conditional use permits shall include a description of existing conditions, a site plan, and information on any existing and any proposed restrictions or covenants. (For a more detailed description of each item, please refer to Section 17-4.2.040 Application Submission Requirements.) An application for a conditional use permit shall also contain a narrative report or letter responding to the applicable approval criteria in Section 17-4.4.040. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.4.040 Criteria, Standards, and Conditions of Approval
The Planning Commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a conditional use, including requests to enlarge or alter a conditional use, based on findings of fact with respect to all of the criteria and standards in subsections A and B.

A.    Use Criteria.

1.     The site size, dimensions, location, topography, and access are adequate for the needs of the proposed use, considering the proposed building mass, parking, traffic, noise, vibration, exhaust/emissions, light, glare, erosion, odor, dust, visibility, safety, and aesthetic considerations;

2.     The negative impacts of the proposed use, if any, on adjacent properties and on the public can be mitigated through application of other code standards, or other reasonable conditions of approval;

3.     All required public facilities, including water, sanitary sewer, and streets, have adequate capacity or are to be improved to serve the proposal, consistent with City standards; and

4.     A conditional use permit shall not allow a use that is prohibited or not expressly allowed under Division II; nor shall a conditional use permit grant a variance without a variance application being reviewed with the conditional use application.

B.     Conditions of Approval. The City may impose conditions that are found necessary to ensure that the use is compatible with other uses in the vicinity, and that the negative impact of the proposed use on the surrounding uses and public facilities is minimized. These conditions include, but are not limited to, one or more of the following:

1.     Limiting the hours, days, place, and/or manner of operation;

2.     Requiring site or architectural design features which minimize environmental impacts such as noise, vibration, exhaust/emissions, light, glare, erosion, odor, and/or dust;

3.     Requiring larger setback areas, lot area, and/or lot depth or width;

4.     Limiting the building or structure height, size, lot coverage, and/or location on the site;

5.     Designating the size, number, location, and/or design of vehicle access points or parking and loading areas;

6.     Requiring street right-of-way to be dedicated and street improvements made, or the installation of pathways or sidewalks, as applicable;

7.     Requiring landscaping, screening, drainage, water quality facilities, and/or improvement of parking and loading areas;

8.     Limiting the number, size, location, height, and/or lighting of signs;

9.     Limiting or setting standards for the location, type, design, and/or intensity of outdoor lighting;

10.   Requiring berms, screening, or landscaping and the establishment of standards for their installation and maintenance;

11.   Requiring and designating the size, height, location, and/or materials for fences;

12.   Requiring the protection and preservation of existing trees, soils, vegetation, watercourses, habitat areas, drainage areas, historic resources, cultural resources, and/or sensitive lands;

13.   Requiring improvements to water, sanitary sewer, or storm drainage systems, in conformance with City standards; and

14.   The Planning Commission may require review and renewal of conditional use permits annually or in accordance with another timetable. Where applicable, the timetable shall provide for periodic review and renewal, or expiration, of the conditional use permit to ensure compliance with conditions of approval; such period review may occur through a Type III review process, except where the Planning Commission delegates authority to the Planning Official to issue renewals, who shall do so through a Type I or Type II procedure (see Chapter 17-4.1 for review procedures). (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

Chapter 17-4.5 MODIFICATIONS TO APPROVED PLANS AND CONDITIONS
17-4.5.010 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an efficient process for modifying land use decisions and approved development plans, in recognition of the cost and complexity of land development and the need to conserve City resources. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.5.020 Applicability
This chapter applies when an applicant proposes to modify an approved application or condition of approval. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.5.030 Major Modifications
A.    Major Modification. The Planning Commission reviews applications for major modifications through the Quasi-Judicial procedure under Section 17-4.1.040. Any one of the following changes constitutes a major modification:

1.     A change in land use, from a less intensive use to a more intensive use, as evidenced by parking, paved area, an estimated increase in automobile or truck trips (peak and/or average daily trips), an increase in hours of operation, an increased demand for parking, additional paved area, or similar factors, where the increase is 20 percent or more, provided the standards of Divisions II and III are met;

2.     An increase in floor area in a commercial or industrial development, or an increase in the number of dwelling units in a multifamily development, by 20 percent or more, provided the standards of Divisions II and III are met;

3.     A reduction in required setbacks, or an increase in lot coverage, by 20 percent or more, provided the standards of Divisions II and III are met;

4.     A change in the type and/or location of vehicle access points or approaches, driveways, or parking areas affecting off-site traffic when the roadway authority determines the change could cause a significant adverse impact on traffic operations or safety (i.e., requiring mitigation);

5.     A reduction to screening, or a reduction to the area reserved for common open space or landscaping by 20 percent or more;

6.     Change to a condition of approval, or a change similar to subsections A.1 through 5, that could have a detrimental impact on adjoining properties. The Planning Official shall have discretion in determining detrimental impacts triggering a major modification; or

7.     Other changes similar to those in subsections A.1 through 6, in scale, magnitude, or impact to adjacent properties, as determined by the Planning Official.

B.     Major Modification Applications; Approval Criteria. Requests for major modifications shall conform to all of the following procedures and criteria:

1.     The applicant shall submit an application form, filing fee, letter describing the modification, and site plan using the same plan format as in the original approval. The City may require other relevant information, as necessary, in evaluating the request;

2.     The application shall be subject to the same approval criteria used for the initial project approval; except that a modification adding a conditional use to a project approved without a conditional use shall require findings in conformance with Chapter 17-4.4;

3.     The scope of review shall be limited to the modification request. For example, a request to modify a commercial development’s parking lot shall require Site Design Review only for the proposed parking lot and any changes to associated access, circulation, etc. Notice shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17-4.1; and

4.     The Planning Commission shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions an application for major modification based on written findings on the applicable Code criteria (e.g., subdivision, Site Design Review, conditional use, etc.). (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.5.040 Minor Modifications
A.    Minor Modification. The Planning Official through a Type I or II procedure, depending on whether the proposal involves the exercise of discretion, shall review proposals for minor modifications. Minor modifications include technical corrections to comply with codes and regulations, and changes that fall below the thresholds in Section 17-4.5.030, as determined by the Planning Official. A minor modification is a change to an approved plan or condition of approval that does not meet any of the thresholds for a major modification listed in Section 17-4.5.030.A.

B.     Minor Modification Applications; Approval Criteria. An application for minor modification shall include an application form, filing fee, letter describing the modification, and site plan using the same plan format as in the original approval. The Planning Official may require other relevant information, as necessary, in evaluating the request.

C.     Minor Modification Approval Criteria. The Planning Commission shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions an application for minor modification based on findings of compliance or noncompliance with the applicable requirements of the Development Code and the conditions of approval of the original decision. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

Chapter 17-4.6 AMENDMENTS TO ZONING MAP OR CODE
17-4.6.010 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and procedures for legislative and Quasi-Judicial amendments to this Code and Zoning Map. Amendments may be necessary from time to time to reflect changing community conditions, to correct mistakes, or to address changes in the law. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.6.020 Procedure
A.    Except for corrections, amendments to Development Code text are Legislative (Type IV).

B.     Amendments to the Zoning Map that affect more than one parcel, or more than one-half of an acre, whichever is greater, are Legislative (Type IV) actions.

C.     Amendments to the Zoning Map that require an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan are Legislative (Type IV) actions.

D.    Amendments that do not meet the criteria under subsection A, B, or C may be processed as Quasi-Judicial amendments, pursuant to the Type III procedure. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.6.030 Criteria
Planning Commission review and recommendation, and City Council approval, of an ordinance amending the Zoning Map, Development Code, or Comprehensive Plan shall be based on all of the following criteria:

A.    If the proposal involves an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan, the amendment must be consistent with the Statewide Planning Goals and relevant Oregon Administrative Rules;

B.     The proposal must be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan (the Comprehensive Plan may be amended concurrently with proposed changes in zoning);

C.     The City Council must find the proposal to be in the public interest with regard to community conditions; the proposal either responds to changes in the community, or it corrects a mistake or inconsistency in the subject plan or code; and

D.    The amendment must conform to Section 17-4.6.050 Transportation Planning Rule Compliance. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.6.040 Record of Amendments
The Planning Official shall maintain a record of amendments to the text of this Code and the Zoning Map in a format convenient for public use. In the case of a map amendment, the map shall be made part of the ordinance. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.6.050 Transportation Planning Rule Compliance
Proposals to amend the Comprehensive Plan or Zoning Map shall be reviewed to determine whether they significantly affect a transportation facility pursuant to Oregon Administrative Rule (OAR) 660-012-0060 (Transportation Planning Rule - TPR). Where the City, in consultation with the applicable roadway authority, finds that a proposed amendment would have a significant affect on a transportation facility, the City shall work with the roadway authority and applicant to modify the request or mitigate the impacts in accordance with the TPR and applicable law. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

Chapter 17-4.7 ADJUSTMENTS AND VARIANCES
17-4.7.010 Purpose
Chapter 17-4.7 provides standards and procedures for adjustments and variances, which are modifications to development standards that are not otherwise permitted elsewhere in this Code. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.7.020 Intent
Adjustments are variances that are intended to provide relief from code standards in specific situations. Both procedures are intended to ensure that the resulting development is compatible with adjacent properties and is consistent with the intent of the Code.

A.    Adjustments. Adjustments provide relief from specific code provisions when a code provision has the unintended effect of preventing reasonable development in conformance with all other code requirements. Adjustments are allowed in limited situations pursuant to Section 17-4.7.030.

B.     Variances. Variances provide greater flexibility to code standards than adjustments, where the physical characteristics of a site or its surroundings prevent reasonable development in compliance with a code standard. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.7.030 Adjustments
Adjustments are minor modifications to code standards that are intended to provide reasonable flexibility for planned land uses and development. Adjustments are subject to the following standards and procedures. Permitted uses, as provided in Division II, shall not be adjusted.

A.    Applicability. The Planning Official or Planning Commission, through a Type II procedure, may adjust the following standards:

1.     Setbacks. Up to a 20 percent reduction to a minimum setback.

2.     Lot Coverage. Up to a 20 percent increase to the maximum lot coverage.

3.     Lot Dimensions. Up to a 20 percent decrease to a minimum lot dimension.

4.     Lot Area. Up to a 20 percent decrease in minimum lot area.

5.     Other Dimensional Standards. Up to a 20 percent increase or decrease in a quantitative (numerical) standard not listed above. This option is limited to standards in Division II (Tables 17-2.2.040.D and 17-2.2.040.E, and Chapter 17-2.3 Special Use Standards) and Division III; it does not include building code requirements, engineering design standards, public safety standards, or standards implementing state or federal requirements, as determined by the Planning Official.

B.     Approval Criteria. The City may grant an Adjustment only upon finding that all of the following criteria are met. The burden is on the applicant to demonstrate compliance with the criteria.

1.     The Adjustment allows for a building plan that is more compatible with adjacent land uses, or it does not create a conflict with adjacent uses;

2.     The Adjustment is necessary to allow for normal interior building functions, such as mechanical equipment/utility closets, heating and ventilation systems, restrooms, stockrooms, shelving, and similar interior building functions;

3.     Approval of the Adjustment does not create: (a) violation(s) of any other adopted ordinance or code standard, and (b) does not create the need for a Variance;

4.     An application for an Adjustment is limited to one lot per application;

5.     Requests for more than one Adjustment on the same lot shall be consolidated on one application and reviewed concurrently by the City;

6.     Not more than three Adjustments may be approved for one lot or parcel in a continuous 12-month period; and

7.     All applicable building code requirements and engineering design standards shall be met. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.7.040 Variances
A.    Applicability. A Variance is similar to an Adjustment, but does not otherwise meet the criteria under Section 17-4.7.030.

B.     Approval Criteria. The Planning Commission through a Type III procedure may approve a Variance upon finding that it meets all of the following criteria:

1.     The Variance is necessary because the subject Code provision does not account for special or unique physical circumstances of the subject site, existing development patterns, or adjacent land uses. A legal lot determination may be sufficient evidence of a hardship for purposes of approving a variance;

2.     The Variance is the minimum necessary to address the special or unique physical circumstances related to the subject site;

3.     The need for the Variance is not self-imposed by the applicant or property owner. (For example, the Variance request does not arise as a result of a property line adjustment or land division approval previously granted to the applicant);

4.     The Variance does not conflict with other applicable City policies or other applicable regulations;

5.     The Variance will result in no foreseeable harm to adjacent property owners or the public; and

6.     All applicable building code requirements and engineering design standards shall be met. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.7.050 Expiration
Approvals granted under Chapter 17-4.7 shall expire if not acted upon by the property owner within one year of the City approving the variance. Where the owner has applied for a building permit or final plat, has made site improvements consistent with an approved development plan (e.g., Site Design Review or preliminary subdivision plan), or provides other evidence of working in good faith toward completing the project, the Planning Official may extend an approval accordingly. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

Chapter 17-4.8 MASTER PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
17-4.8.010 Purpose
The purposes of Chapter 17-4.8 are to:

A.    Implement the Comprehensive Plan by providing a means for master planning large development sites as an alternative to piecemeal subdivision development;

B.     Encourage innovative planning that results in projects that benefit the community, for example, through greater efficiency in land use, improved protection of open spaces, transportation efficiency, and housing choices;

C.     Encourage housing options for a range of household sizes, incomes, and lifestyles;

D.    Encourage mixed-use development and diversified employment opportunities;

E.     Promote an economic arrangement of land use, buildings, circulation systems, open space, and utilities;

F.     Preserve to the greatest extent possible the existing landscape features and amenities that may not otherwise be protected through conventional development;

G.    Encourage energy efficiency and improved air and water quality;

H.    Implement public facility master plans; and

I.      Provide flexibility in development standards, consistent with the above purposes. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.8.020 Applicability
The master planned development designation may be applied over any of the City’s zoning districts. It is an option available to developers of land. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.8.030 Review and Approvals Process
A.    Review Steps. There are three required steps to master planned development approval, which may be completed individually or combined for concurrent review:

1.     Application for master planned development concept plan approval;

2.     Application for detailed development plan approval, which may include a preliminary subdivision plan; and

3.     Application(s) for final development plan (e.g., final plat and/or site design review) approval.

B.     Approval Process.

1.     The master planned development concept plan shall be reviewed pursuant to the Type III procedure in Section 17-4.1.040, the submission requirements in Section 17-4.8.050, and the approval criteria in Section 17-4.8.060.

2.     The detailed development plan and preliminary subdivision plan shall be reviewed using the Type II procedure in Section 17-4.1.030 to ensure substantial compliance with the approved concept plan.

3.     Site design review applications for approved planned developments shall be reviewed using a Type II procedure in Section 17-4.1.030 to ensure substantial compliance with the approved concept plan.

4.     Steps 1 through 3, above, may be combined in any manner, so long as the decision-making sequence follows the above order. Notification and hearings may be combined. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.8.040 Modifications to Development Standards
The standards of Divisions II and III may be modified through the master plan development process without the need for variance under Chapter 17-4.7. In evaluating this criterion, the Planning Commission shall consider whether the proposal, on balance, exceeds the City’s minimum requirements and provides greater community benefits than would otherwise occur under the base Development Code requirements. In evaluating community benefits, the Planning Commission shall apply the following criteria; the City may deny an application for Master Planned Development concept plan approval that does not meet all of the following criteria:

A.    Comprehensive Plan. The modification does not conflict with the Comprehensive Plan. A Master Planned Development may exceed the maximum residential density (minimum lot size) permitted by the underlying zone, provided that the overall density of the project (average of total dwelling units per acre) is not greater than 110 percent of the density permitted by the underlying zone.

B.     Purpose and Intent of Development Code. The modification equally or better meets the purpose and intent of the Development Code section(s) to be modified, as compared to a project that strictly conforms to code standards.

C.     Public Benefit. The modification provides a net benefit to the public by one or more of the following:

1.     Greater variety of housing types or lot sizes than would be achieved under the base Development Code standards;

2.     More open space or more usable open space than would be required under the base Development Code standards;

3.     Greater protection of natural features than would be required under the base Development Code standards;

4.     Avoidance of natural hazards (e.g., geological hazards, river resources, or flood hazards); and

5.     Improved transportation connectivity, such as the provision of pathways and/or other transportation facilities, that would not otherwise be provided pursuant to base Development Code requirements.

D.    Engineering Design Standards. Modifications to the City’s Public Works Design Standards and Transportation Plan Standards require separate variance to such standards approved by the City Engineer. The City may grant such variances concurrently with the master planned development. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.8.050 Concept Plan Submission
A.    General Submission Requirements. An application for a Concept Development Plan shall follow the submission requirements for a Type III review under Section 17-4.1.040, and shall include all of the following:

1.     Statement of planning objectives to be achieved by the master planned development through the particular approach proposed by the applicant. This statement should include a description of the character of the proposed development and the rationale behind the assumptions and choices made by the applicant;

2.     Development schedule indicating the approximate dates when construction of the project and its various phases, if any, including public facilities, are expected to be initiated and completed;

3.     Statement of the applicant’s intentions with regard to the future selling or leasing of all or portions of the planned development;

4.     Narrative report or letter documenting compliance with the applicable approval criteria contained in Section 17-4.8.060;

5.     Maintenance plan for any common areas or lands not dedicated to a public agency or owned in fee simple; and

6.     Additional reports or studies prepared by qualified professionals, as required by the Planning Official and City Engineer, to determine potential project impacts and mitigation, if any, related to: transportation; public facilities; geologic or other hazards; architecture; noise, light, solar access, air quality, or similar concerns; and natural features.

B.     Additional Information. In addition to the general information described in subsection A, above, the concept plan, data, and narrative shall include all of the following exhibits and information:

1.     Existing conditions map, as defined in Section 17-4.2.040 Site Design Review Application Submission Requirements;

2.     Conceptual site plan (e.g., general land use, building envelopes, circulation, open space, utility connections, and other information necessary to convey the concept plan);

3.     Grading concept (for hillside or sloping properties, or where extensive grading is anticipated);

4.     Landscape concept (e.g., shows retention of existing vegetation and general planting areas);

5.     Architectural concept (e.g., plans illustrate architectural styles, building heights, and general materials);

6.     Sign concept plan (e.g., locations, general size, style, and materials of signs), as applicable; and

7.     Copy of all existing covenants and restrictions, and a general description of proposed restrictions or covenants (e.g., for common areas, access, parking, etc.). (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.8.060 Concept Plan Approval Criteria
The City, in approving or approving with conditions a Concept Plan, shall make findings that all of the following criteria are met. The City must deny an application where not all of the criteria are met.

A.    Comprehensive Plan. The proposal conforms to the Comprehensive Plan;

B.     Land Division Chapter. Except as may be modified under Section 17-4.8.040, all of the requirements for land divisions, under Chapter 17-4.3, are met;

C.     Division II and Division III Standards. Except as may be modified under Section 17-4.8.040, all of the requirements of Division II and Division III are met;

D.    Open Space. Master plans shall contain a minimum of 20 percent open space, which may be public, private, or a combination of public and private open space. Such open space shall be integral to the master plan and connect to a majority of the proposed residential lots. Plans shall provide space for both active and passive recreational uses, and may include, but are not limited to, neighborhood parks, pathways/trails, natural areas, plazas, and play fields. Open space areas shall be shown on the final plan and recorded with the final plat or separate instrument; the open space shall be conveyed in accordance with one of the following methods:

1.     By dedication to the City as publicly owned and maintained open space. Open space proposed for dedication to the City must be acceptable to the Planning Commission with regard to the size, shape, location, improvement, environmental condition (i.e., the applicant may be required to provide an environmental assessment), and approved by City Council based on budgetary, maintenance, and liability considerations; or

2.     By leasing or conveying title (including beneficial ownership) to a corporation, homeowners’ association, or other legal entity. The terms of such lease or other instrument of conveyance must include provisions for maintenance and property tax payment acceptable to the City. The City, through conditions of approval, may also require public access be provided, where the open space is deemed necessary, based on impacts of the development and to meet public recreational needs pursuant to the Comprehensive Plan.

E.     Modifications to Standards. Modifications to Code standards must conform to the criteria in Section 17-4.8.040. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.8.070 Concept Plan and Expiration
A.    Filing. Upon approval of a concept plan, the approved plan, including any conditions of approval, shall be binding on future uses and development of the property, except where an approval expires.

B.     Expiration. Except as provided by subsection C, below, a concept plan shall become void three years after the date of approval if the applicant, or successor, has not filed with the City an application for detailed development plan and final plat approval in conformance with Sections 17-4.8.080 and 17-4.8.090.

C.     Extension. The City may grant extensions of the concept plan approval period, not to exceed one year per extension, provided that the extension request is made before expiration of the master planned development approval, the applicant can show intent of applying for detailed development plan review within the one-year extension period, and there have been no substantive changes to the applicable Comprehensive Plan policies and ordinance provisions on which the approval was based. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.8.080 Detailed Development Plan Submission
Detailed development plan submittal requirements are determined based on the conditions of approval for the concept plan. At a minimum, the detailed development plan submittal shall meet the minimum requirements for final plat submission under Chapter 17-4.3 and shall contain information demonstrating compliance with the concept plan. The detailed development plan and preliminary subdivision plan shall be reviewed using the Type II procedure in Section 17-4.1.030 to ensure substantial conformance to the approved concept plan. Where the proposal is for a multifamily development, Site Design Review is required, pursuant to Chapter 17-4.2; Site Design Reviews on detailed development plans shall be processed through the Type II procedure. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.8.090 Detailed Development Plan Criteria
Approval of the detailed development plan shall be based upon a finding that the final plan substantially conforms to the concept plan, including any concept plan conditions of approval. Minor changes to the approved concept plan may be approved with the detailed plan where the Planning Official or City Engineer finds that the modification is necessary to correct an error or to address changes in circumstances beyond the applicant’s control that have occurred since the date of project approval. Other changes must be reviewed as major modifications under Chapter 17-4.5. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-4.8.100 Subsequent Development Reviews
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 17-4.2.030, where the City has previously approved a development project in concept as part of a master planned development approval, as determined by the Planning Official subsequent land use applications for the same project may be processed through a Type I review. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

Chapter 17-4.9 CHANGE OF USE OR OCCUPANCY
17-4.9.010 Requirements.
A.    Any change of use or occupancy that differs from the existing or previous use or occupancy is required to submit a zoning checklist pursuant to MMC Section 17-4.1.020.

B.     If the Planning Director deems the change of use or occupancy to be a change from the previous or existing use or occupancy, the use shall go through a site design review, as applicable, pursuant to Section 17-4.2.020. (Ord. 2021-01 §1; Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

17-4.9.020 Permitting process.
A.    A person proposing a change of use or occupancy shall submit a zoning checklist to the Planning Director.

B.     The Planning Director shall confer with the appropriate City departments, County departments, special districts, and State agencies.

C.     Upon conference with the appropriate entities, the Planning Director shall approve the change, deny the change, or prescribe the required processes to gain approval. (Ord. 2021-01 §1; Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

Division V. Definitions
Chapter 17-5.1 DEFINITIONS
17-5.1.010 Purpose
The purpose of Chapter 17-5.1 is to define terms that are used in the City of Molalla Development Code and other terms that may arise in interpreting the Code, particularly those that may be uncommon or have more than one meaning. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-5.1.020 Applicability
A.    Definitions. The definitions in Chapter 17-5.1 apply to all actions and interpretations under the City of Molalla Development Code. The meanings of some terms in this chapter may, in certain contexts in which they are used, be clearly inapplicable. In such cases the context in which a term is used will indicate its intended meaning, and that intent shall control.

B.     When a Term is Not Defined. Terms not defined in this Code shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context in which they are used. Webster’s Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, shall be used as the standard reference.

C.     Land Use Categories. Chapter 17-5.1 defines the land use categories used in Division II.

D.    Conflicting Definitions. Where a term listed in Chapter 17-5.1 is defined by another section of this Code or by other regulations or statutes referenced by this Code, the term is not redefined herein for purposes of that other code. (Ord. 2017-08 §1)

 

17-5.1.020 Definitions
The following definitions are organized alphabetically.

 

A

Abutting. Contiguous or adjoining.

Access. A way or means of approach to provide pedestrian, bicycle, and/or motor vehicular entrances or exits to a property.

Access Control. Where the right of access between a property abutting the highway and the highway has been acquired by a roadway authority, or eliminated by law, pursuant to access or approach spacing standards.

Access Easement. An easement conveyed for the purposed of providing vehicle, bicycle, and/or pedestrian access from a public street to a lot or parcel across intervening property under separate ownership from the parcel being provided access. Cross access easement is an easement providing vehicular access between two or more separate sites, so that the driver need not enter the public street system between sites.

Access Management. The systematic control of the location, spacing, design, and operation of driveways, median openings interchanges, and street connections to a roadway to minimize conflicts between turning and through vehicles, bicyclists, and pedestrians. The purpose of access management is to provide vehicular access to land development in a manner that preserves the safety and efficiency of the transportation system. Public facility measures to support access management include roadway design applications, such as median treatments and auxiliary lanes, and the appropriate spacing of traffic signals. Measures that may be included as conditions of approval for development decisions include, but are not limited to: (1) standards such as minimum spacing of driveways and onsite vehicle storage requirements; (2) mitigations related to site conditions such as right-in-right-out only approaches, medians, dedicated turn lanes, and shared driveways; and (3) provision for future opportunities for mitigation by land dedication or easement.

Access Management Plan. A plan adopted by the City, or jointly by the Oregon Transportation Commission (OTC) in coordination with the City, for managing access on a designated section of an arterial street or highway, or within the influence area of a highway interchange.

Accessible. Two meanings are possible depending on the specific code provision. In general, accessible means approachable by pedestrians, vehicles, or other transportation modes, as applicable. Accessible may also mean approachable and useable by people with disabilities, in conformance with the federal Americans with Disabilities Act. Either or both definitions may apply in a particular situation.

Accessory Structure. A structure of secondary importance or function on a site. In general, the primary use of the site is not carried on in an accessory structure. Accessory structures are detached from the primary structure. Examples of accessory structures include, but are not limited to, garages, decks, fences, arbors, gazebos, heat pumps, workshops, and other structures. See also Primary Structure.

Accessory Use. A use or activity that is a subordinate part of a primary use and that is clearly incidental to a primary use on a site. See also Primary Use.

Access Point. A connection providing for the movement of vehicles between a lot or parcel and a public roadway.

Access, Reasonable. Access that does not require excessive out-of-direction travel or pose a safety hazard.

Access Spacing/Intersection Spacing. The minimum required distance from an intersection of a public or private street to the nearest driveway or other access connection, measured from the closest edge of the pavement of the intersecting street to the closest edge of the pavement of the connection along the traveled way.

Access Way. A walkway or multi-use path connecting two rights-of-way to one another where no vehicle connection is made.

Access Way. A walkway providing a through connection for pedestrians between two streets, between two lots, or between a development and a public right-of-way. It may be an access way for pedestrians and bicyclists (with no vehicle access), or a walkway on public or private property (i.e., with a public access easement); it may also be designed to accommodate emergency vehicles. See also Walkway.

Adjacent. Abutting or located directly across a street right-of-way or easement.

Alter/Alteration. A change in use or occupancy or physical change to a structure or site. Alteration does not include normal maintenance and repair. Alterations may or may not require land use approval, but property owners should check with the City of Molalla before preparing project plans or commencing development. Alterations include, but are not limited to, the following:

-       Changes in use or occupancy;

-       Changes to the exterior of a building;

-       Changes to the interior of a building;

-       Increases or decreases in floor area of a building;

-       Changes to other structures on the site, or the development of new structures;

-       Changes to exterior improvements;

-       Changes to landscaping; and

-       Changes in the topography of the site.

Alternate Access. The right to access a property by means other than the proposed approach or access connection. It may include an existing public right-of-way, another location on the subject street or highway, an easement across adjoining property, a different street, a service road, a local road, or an alley, and may be in the form of a single or joint approach.

Applicant. A person who applies for a permit or approval under this Code. An applicant can be the owner of the property, a contract purchaser, or someone who is legally authorized to represent the owner, such as a builder, developer, or contract purchaser.

 

B

Bed and Breakfast Inn. Any establishment located in a structure designed for a single-family residence and structures appurtenant thereto, providing limited overnight lodging and meals for guests pursuant to the special use requirements for bed and breakfast inns.

Block. All of the property bounded by streets, rights-of-way (pedestrian or vehicle ways), water features, or any combination thereof, but is not divided or separated in any way by streets or water features.

Block Face/Street Frontage. All of the property fronting on one side of a street that is between intersecting or intercepting streets, or that is between a street and a water feature, or end of a dead-end street. An intercepting street determines the boundary of the block frontage only on the side of the street that it intercepts. See figure, below.

Block Frontage



Building. See applicable building code.

Building Footprint. The outline of a building, as measured around its foundation.

Building Official. The person who enforces the building ordinances and regulations for the City, and other ordinances and regulations as assigned.

Building/Structure Height. The height of a building or structure as measured pursuant to the State of Oregon Structural Specialty Code.

Build-To Line. A maximum front or street yard setback which is typically required along commercial street frontages to promote a storefront character and pedestrian-oriented design.

Build-To Line



C

Capacity. Maximum holding or service ability, as used for transportation, utilities, parks, and other public facilities. See also definition of “Occupancy” in applicable building codes.

Carport. A stationary structure consisting of a roof, its supports, and not more than one wall or storage cabinets substituting for a wall, used to shelter motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, or boats; does not include temporary shelters or canopies not affixed to a permanent foundation per applicable building codes.

Change of Use. Change in the primary type of use on a site.

Child Care Facility. Facilities that provide care and supervision of minor children for periods of less than 24 hours that do not otherwise meet the definition of Family Daycare.

City. The City of Molalla, Oregon.

Clear and Objective. Decision criteria and standards that do not involve substantial discretion or individual judgment in their application.

Clearing (as in clearing and grading). Any activity that removes existing vegetation or strips surface material from any portion of the site and exceeding typical yard maintenance for a single-family dwelling.

Club. Any organization, group, or association supported by the members thereof, the purpose of which is to render a service customarily rendered for members and their guests, but shall not include any organization, group, or association, the chief activity of which is to render a service customarily carried on as a business.

Commercial. Land use involving buying/selling of goods or services as the primary activity. See also Retail Sales and Services.

Commercial Outdoor Recreation (Land Use). Includes firing ranges, golf courses, and driving ranges, etc.

Common Area. Land jointly owned to include open space, landscaping, or recreation facilities (e.g., may be managed by a homeowners’ association).

Community Services (Land Use). Community services are uses of a public, nonprofit, or charitable nature generally providing a local service to people of the community, except for schools, which are categorized separately. Generally, they provide the service on the site or have employees at the site on a regular basis. The service is ongoing, not just for special events. Private lodges, clubs, and non-profit organizations that have membership provisions may be considered a community service. Uses providing mass shelter or short-term housing where tenancy may be arranged for periods of less than one month when operated by a public or non-profit agency may also be considered a community service. The use may also provide special counseling, education, or training of a public, nonprofit, or charitable nature. See also Religious Institutions, and Parks and Open Spaces.

Comprehensive Plan. The current adopted Comprehensive Plan of the City of Molalla.

Conditional Use. A use that requires a Conditional Use Permit. See Chapter 17-4.4.

Condominium. Ownership of a single unit in a multi-unit structure that may contain common areas and facilities; includes both residential and commercial condominiums. See ORS Chapter 100 for applicable requirements.

Corner Lot. See Lot, Corner lot.

Corner Radius. The radius of a street corner, as measured around the curb or edge of pavement, except as otherwise specified by applicable engineering design standards.

Council/City Council. The City Council of Molalla, Oregon.

County. Clackamas County.

 

D

Days. Calendar days, unless specifically stated as working days. Working days include Monday through Friday, excluding federal holidays.

Dedication. The designation of land by its owner for any public use as shown on a subdivision plat or deed. The term may also be used for dedications to a private homeowners’ association.

Density(ies). A measurement of the number of dwelling units in relationship to a specified amount of land based on the minimum lot size per dwelling unit required by the applicable zone.

Develop. To construct or alter a structure or to make a physical change to the land, including excavations, clearing, and fills. See also Alteration.

Development. All improvements on a site, including alterations to land and new or remodeled structures, parking and loading areas, landscaping, paved or graveled areas, and areas devoted to exterior display, storage, or activities.

Discontinued Use. A use that physically left the land it was on, a permitted use that ceased, or a use terminated at the end of a lease or contract. See Chapter 17-1.4 Nonconforming Situations.

Discretionary. A permit action or decision that involves substantial judgment or discretion.

Drive-Through/Drive-Up Facility. A facility or structure that is designed to allow drivers to remain in their vehicles before and during an activity on the site. Drive-through facilities may serve the primary use of the site or may serve accessory uses. Examples are drive-up windows; automatic teller machines; coffee kiosks and similar vendors; menu boards; order boards or boxes; gas pump islands; car wash facilities; auto service facilities, such as air compressor, water, and windshield washing stations; quick-lube or quick-oil change facilities; and drive-in theaters. All driveways queuing and waiting areas associated with a drive-through/drive-up facility are similarly regulated as part of such facility.

Driveway. The area that provides vehicular access to a site from a street, or the area that provides vehicular circulation on a site.

Driveway Approach. A driveway connection to a public street or highway where it meets a public right-of-way. Note: The design standards of the applicable roadway authority apply. See also Oregon Administrative Rules 734, Division 51, for definitions specific to state highways.

Driveway Apron. The edge of a driveway where it meets a public right-of-way. Note: The design standards of the applicable roadway authority apply.

Driveway, Shared. When land uses on two or more lots or parcels share one driveway. An easement or tract (owned in common) must be created and recorded for this purpose.

Dwelling. A structure conforming to the definition of a dwelling under applicable building codes and providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. If the individual units are self-contained, assisted living facilities for the elderly or disabled as defined by the State of Oregon, having common food preparation, dining, social, recreational, and/or housekeeping facilities are included in this definition. Typical accessory uses include: accessory storage buildings; private garage and parking areas; storage of not more than one commercial vehicle per dwelling unit; common area buildings for residents, guest houses, and guest quarters not in the main building, provided such houses and quarters are and remain dependent upon the main building for either kitchen or bathroom facilities, or both, and the guest facilities are used for temporary lodging only and not as a place of residence; and the taking of boarders or leasing of rooms by a resident family, providing the total number of boarders and roomers does not exceed two in any dwelling unit. For the purposes of this Code, the following types of dwelling units are defined:

-       Accessory Dwelling. A secondary dwelling unit on a lot where the primary use is a single-family dwelling.

-       Attached, Single-Family (Townhome). A dwelling unit located on its own lot that shares one or more common or abutting walls with one or more dwelling units on adjacent lot(s).

-       Cottage Cluster. A grouping of small, single-family dwellings clustered around a common area and developed with a coherent plan for the entire site.

-       Duplex Dwelling. A structure that contains two primary dwelling units on one lot. The units must share a common wall or common floor/ceiling.

-       Dwelling Unit. A building, or a portion of a building, that has independent living facilities including provisions for sleeping, cooking, and sanitation, and that is designed for residential occupancy by a group of people. Buildings with more than one set of cooking facilities are considered to contain multiple dwelling units or accessory dwelling units, as applicable, unless the additional cooking facilities are clearly accessory to the primary use, such as an outdoor grill or wet bar.

-       Manufactured Home. A structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking, and plumbing facilities; that is intended for human occupancy; that is being used for residential purposes; and that was constructed in accordance with federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards and regulations in effect at the time of construction.

-       Mobile Home. A structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking, and plumbing facilities; that is intended for human occupancy; that is being used for residential purposes; and that was constructed between January 1, 1962, and June 15, 1976, and met the construction requirements of Oregon mobile home law in effect at the time of construction.

-       Multifamily Development. A structure or grouping of structures containing three or more dwellings on the same lot.

-       Multifamily Structure. A structure containing three or more dwelling units. The land underneath the structure is not divided into separate lots.

-       Recreational Vehicle (RV). A vehicle, with or without motive power, that is designed for human occupancy and to be used temporarily for recreational, seasonal, or emergency purposes and is further defined by state law and administrative rules.

-       Residential Care Facility is defined under ORS 430.010 (for alcohol and drug abuse programs), ORS 443.400 (for persons with disabilities), and ORS 443.880; residential facilities provide housing and care for six to 15 individuals who need not be related. Staff persons required to meet state licensing requirements are not counted in the number of facility residents and need not be related to each other or the residents.

-       Residential Care Home. A residential treatment or training or adult foster home licensed by or under the authority of the Department of Human Services, under ORS 443.400 to 443.825, a residential facility registered under ORS 443.480 to 443.500, or an adult foster home licensed under ORS 443.705 to 443.825 that provides residential care alone or in conjunction with treatment or training or a combination thereof for five or fewer individuals who need not be related. (See also ORS 197.660.)

-       Residential Trailer. A structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking, and plumbing facilities; that is intended for human occupancy; that is being used for residential purposes; and that was constructed before January 1, 1962.

-       Single-Family, Detached Dwelling. A detached dwelling unit located on its own lot.

 

E

Easement. A grant of rights by a property owner that allows others to use the owner’s land for a specific purpose, such as access, or to locate utilities. Recorded and on record at Clackamas County.

Emergency Apparatus Lane or Fire Lane. Unobstructed area or driveway meeting Uniform Fire Code requirements, typically not be used for parking or loading area.

 

F

Family Daycare. Care for not more than 16 children in a home. See ORS 657A.440(4) for applicable licensing and other requirements.

Final Plat. The diagrams, drawings, and other writing containing all the descriptions, locations, dedications, provisions, and information concerning a land division, pursuant to ORS Chapter 92 and Chapter 17-4.3 of this Code.

Floodplain/Hazard Area. Area as so indicated by the Federal Flood Insurance Rate Map, as amended.

Floor Area. Area of building, which may be described in terms of gross (overall) square feet, or net marketable/leasable space.

 

G

Garage. A covered permanent structure designed to provide shelter for vehicles, and which is accessory to a dwelling or other primary use. Carports are considered garages.

Grade. The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving, or sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line or, when the property line is more than five feet from the building, between the building and a line five feet from the building. This is the definition used in the Oregon Structural Specialty Code (the International Building Code as amended by the State of Oregon).

Grading. All cuts, fills, embankments, stockpile areas, and equipment maneuvering areas associated with development.

Ground Cover. Living or processed plant material (e. g., mulch, bark chips), river rock, and cinders used for aesthetic purposes and to prevent erosion (i.e., cover bare ground) in designated landscape areas. See Chapter 17-3.4 Landscaping, Fences and Walls, Outdoor Lighting.

Ground Floor. Building floor closest to street level and within four feet of finished grade.

 

H

Hazardous Substances. Any substance, material, or waste listed below:

-       Nuclear or radioactive materials or waste

-       Chemicals subject to reporting under Title III of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA) of 1986, published July 1987, U. S. Environmental Protection Agency

-       Hazardous Materials Table, in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Title 49, Part 172.101

-       Other substances as determined by applicable state or federal agency

Home Occupation, Home Occupation Site. A business activity that is carried out on the same site as a dwelling unit, and which is accessory to the residential use on the site, subject to the special use provisions of Chapter 17-2.3.

Hotel/Motel. A building or portion thereof designed and used for occupancy of transient individuals lodged with or without meals for a continuous period not to exceed 29 days. (See ORS 446.310.)

 

I

Incidental and Subordinate to. Secondary to, and less apparent than, the primary use or other portion of the development.

Industrial Service Uses. Industrial service firms are engaged in the repair or servicing of industrial, business, or consumer machinery, equipment, products, or by-products. Examples include welding shops; machine shops; tool repair; electric motor repair; sales, repair, salvage, or wrecking of heavy machinery, metal, building materials, autos, or trucks (does not include junk yards); towing and temporary vehicle storage; heavy truck servicing and repair; tire re-treading or recapping; truck stops; building, heating, plumbing, or electrical contractors; printing, publishing, and lithography; exterminators; recycling operations; janitorial and building maintenance services; fuel oil distributors; solid fuel yards; research and development laboratories; industrial laundry, dry-cleaning, and carpet cleaning plants; photofinishing laboratories; and similar uses.

Intersection. An at-grade connection of a public or private approach road to the highway.

 

J

Junk Yard. (1) Any property or establishment on which one or more persons are engaged in breaking up, dismantling, sorting, storing, distributing, buying, or selling scrap or waste materials. (2) Any establishment or place of business on which two or more inoperable motor vehicles or an equivalent volume of waste or refuse are maintained, stored, bought, or sold. Includes wrecking yards, automobile graveyards, garbage dumps, and scrap metal processing facilities.

 

K

Kennel. Any lot or premises where three or more dogs or cats aged six months or older are boarded or bred for compensation. Establishments where animals are offered for sale as the primary use, such as pet stores, are not classified as kennels.

 

L

Land Division. The process of dividing land to create parcels or lots. See Chapter 17-4.3.

Landscaping. Any combination of living plants such as trees, shrubs, plants, vegetative ground cover, or turf grasses, and may include structural features such as walkways, fences, benches, plazas, works of art, reflective pools, fountains, or the like. Also includes irrigation systems, mulches, topsoil, and re-vegetation or the preservation, protection, and replacement of trees.

Land Use. The activity or activities that occur on a piece of land. Activities may be individually identified as primary or accessory uses.

Land Use Decision. A final decision or determination made by the City of Molalla (or other agency with jurisdiction) that concerns the adoption, amendment, or application of the Statewide Planning Goals, the Comprehensive Plan, or any land use regulation (i.e., this Code) where the decision requires the interpretation or exercise of policy or legal judgment (ORS 197.015). Note: All decisions requiring Quasi-Judicial review by the City of Molalla are Land Use Decisions. Decisions subject to Administrative review are considered Limited Land Use Decisions, pursuant to ORS 197.015.

Legislative. A legislative action or decision is the making of law, as opposed to the application of existing law to a particular use (e. g., adoption of, or amendment to, a comprehensive plan or development regulation). See also Section 4.1.050.

Level of Service (“LOS”). A quantitative standard for transportation facilities describing operational conditions. See City of Molalla Transportation System Plan.

Loading Area. The area available for the maneuvering and standing of vehicles engaged in delivering and loading goods, freight, or other articles. See also Chapter 17-3.5 Parking and Loading.

Lot. A lot is a legally defined piece of land other than a tract that is the result of a land division. The following definitions for “lot” apply to the state definition of both lot (result of subdividing) and parcel (result of partitioning). See figures under the definition for “Lot Lines/Property Lines.”

-       Corner Lot. A lot that has frontage on more than one intersecting street. A street that curves with angles of 120 degrees or less, measured from the center line of the street, is considered two intersecting streets for the purpose of evaluating whether a lot is a corner lot. See figures, below.

-       Flag Lot. A lot with two distinct parts, the flag, which is the only building site and is located behind another lot; and the pole, which connects the flag to the street, provides the only street frontage for the lot, and at any point is less than the minimum lot width for the zone.

-       Through/Reverse Frontage Lot. A lot that has frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets.

Corner Lots

 







 

Flag Lot



Lot Area. The total surface area (measured horizontally) within the boundary lines of a lot.

Lot Consolidation. The reduction in the number of lots, i.e., the creation of one lot from two or more existing lots.

Lot Coverage. The total area of a lot covered by building(s) or impervious surfaces, as provided by the applicable land use district development standards.

Lot, Double-Frontage. See Lot, Through/Reverse Frontage Lot.

Lot Line Adjustment. See Property Line Adjustment.

Lot Lines/Property Lines. The property lines along the edge of a lot or site. See figures, below.

-       Front Lot Line. A lot line, or segment of a lot line, that abuts a street. On a corner lot, the front lot line is the shortest of the lot lines that abut a street. If two or more street lot lines are of equal length, then the applicant or property owner can choose which lot line is to be the front lot line for the purpose of determining required setbacks. However, a through lot has two front lot lines regardless of whether the street lot lines are of equal or unequal length. See figures, below.

-       Rear Lot Line. A lot line that is opposite a front lot line. A triangular lot has two side lot lines but no rear lot line. For other irregularly shaped lots, the rear lot line is all lot lines that are most nearly opposite the front lot line. See figures, below.

-       Side Lot Line. A lot line that connects front and rear lot lines. On a corner lot, the longer lot line that abuts a street is a side lot line. See figures, below.

-       Side Street Lot Line. A lot line that is both a side lot line and a street lot line. See figures, below.

-       Street Lot Line. A lot line, or segment of a lot line, that abuts a street. Street lot line does not include lot lines that abut a dedicated alley. On a corner lot, there are two (or more) street lot lines. Street lot line can include front lot lines and side lot lines, however, both are considered front yards for the purpose of measuring required setbacks. See figures, below.

Front and Side Lot Lines



 

Street Lot Lines



 

Lot Lines on Irregular Lots



 

Lot of Record. A legally created lot or parcel meeting all applicable regulations in effect at the time of creation and held in separate ownership, or any other lot deemed a legal lot under Chapter 17-1.3.

 

M

Main/Primary Building Entrance. A main entrance is the entrance to a building that most pedestrians are expected to use. Generally, each building has one main entrance; however, some buildings may have more than one primary entrance or may have entrances that open directly into the building’s lobby or principal interior ground level circulation space.

Maneuvering Area/Aisle. The driving area in a parking lot where motor vehicles are able to turn around and access parking or loading spaces.

Manufactured and Mobile Homes. See definitions under Dwelling.

Manufactured Dwelling Park (Land Use). Any place where four or more manufactured dwellings, as defined in ORS 446.003, are located within 500 feet of one another on a lot, tract, or parcel of land under the same ownership, the primary purpose of which is to rent or lease space, or keep space for rent or lease, to any person for a charge or fee paid, or to be paid, for the rental or lease or use of facilities, or to offer space free in connection with securing the trade or patronage of such person. Manufactured dwelling park does not include a lot or lots located within an approved subdivision being rented or leased for occupancy by one manufactured dwelling per lot. See also ORS Chapter 446.

Manufacturing and Production (Land Use). Manufacturing and production firms are involved in the manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods. Examples include processing of food and related products; breweries and distilleries when not accessory to a commercial use; slaughter houses or meat packing; taxidermist; lumber mills, pulp and paper mills, and other wood products manufacturing; woodworking, including cabinet makers; production of chemical, rubber, leather, clay, bone, plastic, stone, or glass materials or products; concrete batching and asphalt mixing; production or fabrication of metals or metal products, including enameling and galvanizing; manufacture or assembly of machinery, equipment, vehicles, appliances; sign making; production of prefabricated structures, including mobile homes; and the production of energy.

Marijuana Items. Marijuana, cannabinoid products, cannabinoid concentrates and cannabinoid extracts as those terms are defined in Oregon law.

Marijuana Processors. Any facility or operation registered with the Oregon Liquor Control Commission that lawfully processes marijuana items.

Marijuana Producers. Any facility or operation registered with the Oregon Liquor Control Commission that lawfully produces marijuana. Also known as a recreational marijuana “grow site.”

Marijuana Wholesaler. Any facility or operation registered with the Oregon Liquor Control Commission that lawfully purchases marijuana items in this state for resale to a person other than a consumer.

Medical Marijuana Dispensary or Retailer. Any facility or operation registered with the Oregon Health Authority and used or intended to be used for purposes of delivering, dispensing, or transferring marijuana items to Oregon medical marijuana registry identification card holders pursuant to ORS 475.300-475.346.

Medical Marijuana Producers. Any facility or operation registered with the Oregon Health Authority and used or intended to be used for the purpose of cultivating marijuana at a specific location registered by the Authority and used by the grower to produce marijuana for medical use by a specific patient. Also known as a medical marijuana “grow site.”

Mixed-Use. The combination of residential uses with commercial (e.g., office, retail, or services), civic, or light industrial uses on a site.

Mobile Food Unit. Any vehicle that is self-propelled or that can be pulled or pushed down a sidewalk, street, highway or waterway, on which food is prepared, processed or converted or which is used in selling and dispensing food to the ultimate consumer.

Mobile Food Unit, Temporary. Any mobile food unit that operates, in any part, on a site that has not been approved as a permanent mobile food unit site.

Mobile Food Unit, Permanent. Any mobile food unit that operates, in any part, on a site that has been approved as a permanent mobile food unit site.

Multifamily Development and Structure. See definitions under Dwelling.

 

N

Net Buildable Area. The area of a site for residential or non-residential development, excluding street rights-of-way and other publicly dedicated improvements such as parks, open space, and stormwater detention and retention facilities. “Net buildable area” is expressed either in acres or square feet.

Nonconforming Development. An element of a development, such as lot area, setback, height, lot coverage, landscaping, sidewalk, or parking area, or lack thereof, that was created in conformance with development regulations but which subsequently, due to a change in the zone or applicable Code standards, is no longer in conformance with the current applicable development regulations. See Chapter 17-1.4.

 

Nonconforming Situation. A Nonconforming Development or Nonconforming Use. A situation may be nonconforming in more than one aspect. For example, a site may contain a nonconforming use and also have some nonconforming development. See also Nonconforming Development and Nonconforming Use. See Chapter 17-1.4.

Nonconforming Use. A use that was allowed by right when established or a use that obtained a required land use approval when established, but that subsequently, due to a change in the zone or zoning regulations, the use or the amount of floor area of the use is now prohibited in the zone. See Chapter 17-1.4.

 

O

Office (Land Use). Office uses are characterized by activities conducted in an office setting and generally focusing on business, government, professional, medical, or financial services.

Off-Street Parking. All off-street areas designed, constructed, used, or required, or intended to be used, for the parking of motor vehicles. See Chapter 17-3.5 for parking standards.

On-Street Parking. Parking in the street right-of-way, typically in parking lanes or bays, when allowed by the applicable roadway authority. See Chapter 17-3.5 for parking standards.

Orientation. To face toward a particular point of reference (e.g., “A building oriented to the street”).

Owner. The owner of the title to real property or the contract purchaser of real property of record, as shown on the latest assessment records in the Office of the County Assessor. Owner also includes a deed holder or contract purchaser whose name does not appear in the latest assessment records, but who presents to the City a copy of a deed or contract of sale signed by the owner of record.

 

P

Parcel. A legally defined area of land created through a partition.

Parking Area. A parking area is all the area devoted to the standing, maneuvering, and circulation of motor vehicles. Parking areas do not include driveways or areas devoted exclusively to non-passenger loading or fire apparatus lanes.

Parking Lot Perimeter. The boundary of a parking lot area that usually contains a landscaped buffer area.

Parking Space. An improved space designed to provide standing area for a motor vehicle. See Chapter 17-3.5 for parking space standards.

Parking Versus Storage. Parking is to leave a motor vehicle for a temporary time. Storage is to place or leave in a location for storage, maintenance, repair, future sale, or rental, or future use for an indefinite period of time.

Parks and Open Space (Land Use). Parks and open space areas are public parks or private common areas consisting mostly of recreational facilities, community gardens, or natural areas.

Partition. To divide an area or tract of land into two or three parcels within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under single ownership at the beginning of such year. See ORS 92.010(8).

Pathway. A walkway, bikeway, or access way conforming to City standards and separated from the street right-of-way, that may or may not be within a public right-of-way.

Planned Road or Street. A highway, road, street, or alley identified in an adopted corridor plan, comprehensive plan or transportation system plan in accordance with administrative procedures of OAR 660-012 and ORS Chapter 197, but that has not been constructed.

Planter Strip. A landscape area for street trees and other plantings within the public right-of-way, usually a continuous planter area between the street and a sidewalk.

Plat. Diagrams, drawings, and other writing containing all the descriptions, locations, dedications, provisions, and information concerning a land division. This term includes the state law definitions of “partition plat” and “subdivision plat.” See also Chapter 17-4.3, Land Divisions.

Posted Speed. The statutory speed established by ORS 811.105 or ORS 811.180, or the designated speed established by ORS 810.180.

Practicable. Capable of being done after taking into consideration reasonable cost, existing technology, and logistics in light of overall project purposes.

Primary Structure. A structure or combination of structures of chief importance or function on a site. In general, the primary use of the site is carried out in a primary structure. The difference between a primary and accessory structure is determined by comparing the size, placement, design, appearance, and the orientation of the structures on a site.

Primary Use. An activity or combination of activities of chief importance on the site. One of the main purposes for which the land or structures are intended, designed, or ordinarily used. A site may have more than one primary use.

Project. An existing or proposed use or development subject to one or more land use approvals.

Property Line Adjustment. The relocation of a single common property line between two abutting properties not resulting in an increase in the number of lots, pursuant to Chapter 17-4.3. See figure, below.

Property Line Adjustment


 

Public Access Easement. A public access easement is an easement granted to the public for vehicular and pedestrian access, or for non-motorized access.

Public Improvements. Development of public infrastructure, as required by the City, a special district, or road authority, as applicable. See Chapter 17-3.6.

 

Q

Quasi-Judicial. An action or decision that requires substantial discretion or judgment in applying the standards or criteria of this Code to the facts of a development or land use proposal, and requires a public hearing. See Section 17-4.1.040.

 

R

Radio Frequency Transmission Facilities (Land Use). Radio frequency transmission facilities includes all devices, equipment, machinery, structures, or supporting elements necessary to produce non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation within the range of frequencies from 100 KHz to 300 GHz and operating as a discrete unit to produce a signal or message. Towers may be self supporting, guyed, or mounted on poles or buildings.

Recreational Marijuana Dispensary or Retailer. Any facility or operation registered with the Oregon Liquor Control Commission that lawfully sells marijuana items to a consumer in Oregon.

Recreational Vehicle Park (Land Use). A commercial use providing space and facilities for motor homes or other recreational vehicles for recreational use or transient lodging. There is no minimum required stay in a recreational vehicle park, however, the City may establish the maximum length of stay. Uses where unoccupied recreational vehicles are offered for sale or lease, or are stored, are not included as Recreational Vehicle Parks.

 

Recycling Center. A facility for the collection, storage, and processing of recyclable materials including crushing, breaking, sorting, packaging and related operations. This shall not include retail bottle/can return centers in C-1 or C-2 commercial districts, junkyards or wrecking yards.

Religious Institutions and Places of Worship (Land Use). Uses primarily providing meeting areas for religious activities; may include schools as an accessory use.

Residential Use (Land Use). Long-term (i.e., more than 28 days) occupancy of a dwelling unit, which may be owner-occupied or rented. Occupancy of a dwelling unit for shorter periods of time is considered an overnight accommodation.

Retail Sales and Service Uses (Land Use). Retail sales and service uses sell, lease, or rent new or used products, goods, or services. They include services such as barber/salon, accountant, restaurant, bar, repair service, and similar uses. See also Vehicle Servicing.

Right-of-Way. Real property or an interest in real property owned by a roadway authority for the purpose of constructing, operating, and maintaining public facilities.

Road/Roadway Authority. The City or other agency (e. g., Oregon Department of Transportation, City of Molalla, or Clackamas County) with jurisdiction over a road or street.

Roadway. The portion of a right-of-way that is improved for motor vehicle and bicycle travel, subject to applicable state motor vehicle licensing requirements. Roadway includes vehicle travel lanes and on-street parking areas. Roadway does not include area devoted to curbs, parking strips, or sidewalks.

 

S

Schools (Land Use). Public and private schools, secular or parochial, at the primary, elementary, middle, junior high, or high school level.

Self-Service Storage. Mini-storage or other storage areas for individual or business uses. The storage areas are designed to allow private access by the tenant for storing personal property.

Setback/Setback Yard. The minimum distance required between a specified object, such as a building, and another point, measured from lot lines to a specified object. Typically, a setback refers to the minimum distance (yard dimension) from a building to a specified property line.

Shared Driveway. A driveway used to access two or more parcels.

Shared Parking. Required parking facilities for two or more uses, structures, or lots or parcels, which are satisfied jointly with the same facilities. See Chapter 17-3.5.

Sidewalk. A paved walkway within a public street right-of-way that is generally located adjacent to and separated from the roadway by a curb, drainage facility (e.g., ditch or swale), or planter strip.

Sight Distance. The unobstructed viewing distance measured from one object or location to another object or location, usually required for the purpose of traffic safety (e.g., a length of street or highway that a driver can see with an acceptable level of clarity, pursuant to the standards of the applicable roadway authority).

Sign. Any outdoor device, or device visible from outdoors, providing identification, advertising, or directional information for a specific business, group of businesses, service, product, brand, person, organization, place or building. included in this definition of signs are: graphic devices such as logos and trademarks; attention-attracting objects such as wind-driven spinners, portable sign devices, logo sculptures, banners, balloons, streamers, strobe lights, flags, inflatable structures, projected picture signs, holographic projection signs, and laser projected designs/images/copy; and other attention attracting media and devices. (Note: Cross reference with existing sign ordinance.)

Site. For land divisions, property line adjustments, and lot consolidations, the site is the lots, lots of record, parcels, or tracts proposed to be divided or reconfigured. For all other purposes, the site is an ownership except as follows:

-       If a proposed development includes multiple ownerships, then the site is the combined area of all contiguous ownerships.

-       If a proposed development includes only a portion of an ownership, and the balance of the ownership is vacant, then the applicant may choose to define the site as the portion of the ownership that is proposed for development.

-       If a proposed development includes only a portion of an ownership, and there is other development on the ownership, then the applicant may choose to define the site as the portion of the ownership that is currently developed plus the portion proposed for development.

Site Frontage. The part of a site that abuts a street. See also Block/Street Frontage.

Spacing Standards. The minimum distance required between a proposed street or driveway connection, as applicable, and the center of the nearest existing street or driveway connection on the same side of the highway in both directions, as set forth by the standards of the applicable roadway authority. Spacing standards for state highways are contained in OAR 734-051-4020.

Street. A right-of-way that is intended for motor vehicle, pedestrian, or bicycle travel; or for motor vehicle, bicycle, or pedestrian access to abutting property. For the purposes of this Code, street does not include alleys and rail rights-of-way that do not also allow for motor vehicle access, or freeways and their ramps.

Street Connectivity. Expressed as the number of street and/or access way connections within a specific geographic area. Higher levels of connectivity provide for more direct transportation routes and better dispersion of traffic, resulting in less traffic on individual streets and potentially slower speeds through neighborhoods.

Street-Facing/Oriented to Street. A wall plane of a structure that faces or is oriented within 45 degrees or less from a street lot line.

Street Stub. A temporary street ending where the street will be extended through adjacent property in the future, as those properties develop. Not a permanent street-end or dead-end street.

Structure. Except as provided by applicable building codes, any object constructed in or on the ground. Structure includes buildings, decks, fences, towers, flag poles, signs, utility vaults, and other similar objects. Structure does not include paved areas or vegetative landscaping materials.

Subdivision. To divide land into four or more lots within a single calendar year. See also Chapter 17-4.3 Land Divisions, and ORS 92.010.

 

T

Through Street. A street that connects to other streets at both ends or is planned to do so in the future, pursuant to a comprehensive plan, transportation system plan, access management plan, or land use approval.

Topographical Constraint. Where existing slopes, landforms (e.g., streams, canals, rock outcropping, etc.) or existing man-made feature (e.g., embankment or berm) make conformance with a Code standard impracticable.

Tract. A piece of land within a platted subdivision reserved for open space, utility corridor, recreation facilities, sensitive lands, or other purpose; may be dedicated to a homeowner’s association or other entity for maintenance.

Traffic Impact Analysis. A report prepared by a professional engineer that analyzes existing and future roadway conditions, and which may recommend transportation improvements and mitigation measures.

Travel Trailer. A vacation structure or self-propelled vehicle equipped with wheels for street or highway use; intended for human occupancy; equipped with plumbing, sink, or toilets; used for vacation and recreational purposes; and not used as a residence. See ORS 446.003(5), (24), and Recreational Vehicle.

Turnaround. A vehicle maneuvering area at the end of a dead-end street (e.g., hammerhead, cul-de-sac, or other configuration) that allows for vehicles to turn around.

 

U

Use (Land Use). The purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged, intended, occupied, or maintained.

Utilities. For the purposes of this Code, there are two types of utilities: (1) private: telephone, electric, telecommunication, and similar franchise facilities; and (2) public: water and wastewater conveyance and treatment facilities.

Utilities (Land Use). Utilities are infrastructure services, which need to be located in or near the area where the service is provided. Basic utility uses may or may not have regular employees at the site. Services may be public or privately provided. Examples include water and sewer pump stations; sewage disposal and conveyance systems; electrical substations; water towers and reservoirs; water quality and flow control facilities; water conveyance systems; stormwater facilities and conveyance systems; telephone exchanges; suspended cable transportation systems; public safety facilities; district heating and cooling systems; solar, wind, or geothermal power generation facilities that are not accessory to a primary use; and emergency communication broadcast facilities. Larger-scale utility facilities, and those that do not conform to the above definition (e.g., biomass power generation), may be classified as Industrial uses or “Other” uses (e.g., Utility Corridor) as applicable.

 

V

Variance. A Planning Commission or Planning Official decision to lessen or otherwise modify the requirements of this Code. See Chapter 17-4.7.

Vehicle Areas. All of the areas on a site where vehicles may circulate or park, including parking areas, driveways, drive-through lanes, and loading areas. See also Driveway and Parking Area.

Vehicle Repair. Repair of passenger vehicles, trucks or other motor vehicles such as motorcycles, boats and recreational vehicles.

Vehicle Servicing. Gas stations, unattended card key stations, car washes, commercial vehicle maintenance and/or oil and lubrication services, and similar uses.

Vision Clearance Area. Areas near intersections of roadways and motor vehicle access points where a clear field of vision is required for traffic safety and to maintain adequate sight distance. See Chapter 17-3.3.

 

W

Walkway. A sidewalk or path, including any access way, improved to City standards, or to other roadway authority standards, as applicable. See also Access Way, Pathway, and Sidewalk.

Warehouse, Freight Movement and Distribution. The storage or movement of goods, except as accessory to a primary permitted use on the subject site.

Waste-Related Use. Waste-related uses are characterized by uses that receive solid or liquid wastes from others for disposal on the site or for transfer to another location, uses that collect sanitary wastes, or uses that manufacture or produce goods or energy from the biological decomposition of organic material. Waste-related uses also include uses that receive, store, sort, and distribute post-consumer recyclable materials; and those that receive hazardous wastes from others and are subject to the regulations of OAR 340-100-110, Hazardous Waste Management.

Waste/Trash Collection Areas. Waste collection areas include areas set aside or designed to be used for garbage collection and collection of materials for recycling. Waste collection areas include areas occupied by dumpsters and other solid waste receptacles.

Wireless Communication Equipment. Cellular towers, antennae, monopoles, and related facilities used for radio signal transmission and receiving.

 

X [reserved]

 

Y

Yard. The area defined by setbacks (i.e., between the setback line and nearest property line).

 

Z [reserved]

(Ord. 2020-10 §2; Ord. 2018-13 §2; Ord. 2017-08 §1)

Title 18 SIGNS
Chapter 18.02 SIGNS

Chapter 18.02 SIGNS
18.02.010 Purpose.
A.    The purpose of the sign regulations is to:

1.     Protect the health, safety, property and welfare of the public;

2.     Provide a neat, clean, orderly and attractive appearance in the community;

3.     Provide for safe construction, location, erection and maintenance of signs;

4.     Encourage signs to be well designed and wisely located;

5.     Prevent sign clutter, minimize adverse visual safety factors to travelers in the public right-of-way;

6.     Provide a simple and efficient regulatory process; and

7.     Achieve these purposes consistent with state and federal constitutional limits on the regulation of speech.

B.     To achieve this purpose, it is necessary to regulate the design, quality of materials, construction, location, electrification, illumination, and maintenance of signs that are visible to the public.

C.     Nothing in these regulations is intended to control the construction or location of directional or informational signs installed by the city, county or state for the purpose of controlling traffic, indicating street names, providing legal or public notice, or other public purposes. (Ord. 2018-12 §2)

 

18.02.020 Rules for reading and applying sign code language.
A.    Reading and Applying the Code. Literal readings of the code language will be used. Regulations are no more or less strict than as stated. Application of the regulations that are consistent with the rules of this sign code are non-discretionary actions of the Planning Director to implement the code.

B.     Situations Where the Code is Silent. Proposals for signs where the code is silent, or where the rules of this chapter do not provide a basis for concluding that the sign is allowed, are prohibited. (Ord. 2018-12 §2)

 

18.02.030 Area of signs.
Sign area includes the area within a perimeter enclosing the limits of lettering, writing, representation, emblem, figure, essential sign structure, foundations or supports. For a multiple-face (more than 2-sided) sign, the sign area shall be the total of all faces. If the sign consists of more than 1 section or module, all areas will be totaled. For a double-faced sign in a single cabinet, the allowed area shall be the dimension of the cabinet, not the total of the area of the message. (Ord. 2018-12 §2)

 

18.02.040 Permit requirements.
A.    Permit Required. All signs erected after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, other than signs exempt from permit requirements of this chapter shall require a sign permit.

B.     Permit Application.

1.     Application for a sign permit shall be made on forms provided by the Planning Director.

2.     An application shall include all plans and information necessary to establish that the proposed sign complies with the applicable requirements of this chapter and applicable building, structural and life safety codes.

3.     Sign permit applications shall be submitted on a form provided by the City. The sign permit application fee shall be set from time to time by resolution of the City Council. Such application and required fee shall be filed in the office of the City Recorder. Applications shall be reviewed administratively by the City within approximately five to seven business days set forth in Section 18.02.040, and such issuance or denial shall constitute the City’s decision on the application. A denial shall be in writing and explain the reason for such denial.

An applicant whose sign application has been conditioned, denied, suspended or revoked may file a written request with the City Manager. The request must be filed within 10 business days after the notice of conditioned, denied, suspended or revoked application is mailed or delivered, whichever is earlier. The written request shall include:

a.     The name and address of the applicant and the business owner if different than the applicant;

b.     The nature of the determination from which the request is taken and a copy of the determination;

c.     The reason or reasons why the determination is alleged to be incorrect; and

d.     What the correct determination should be.

This will be the final decision on the application.

4.     An approved sign review does not replace, supersede, or waive structural or electrical standards and permits required. These other permits must also be obtained prior to work on the installation of the sign.

5.     Signs requested to be placed in any public right-of-way must first obtain permission from the jurisdiction having control of said right-of-way.

6.     A sign review permit issued under this chapter is void if substantial physical action is not taken in accordance with the conditions of the permit and the applicable provisions of this chapter, and the finding that the applicant did not misrepresent or falsify any information supplied in the application.

7.     Site plan and/or building elevation plans drawn to scale and dimension showing:

a.     Existing structures;

b.     Driveways;

c.     Street and right-of-way;

d.     Existing signs;

e.     Proposed sign;

f.      Vision clearance;

g.     All incidental signs.

8.     A proposed sign plan drawn to scale and dimension showing:

a.     Height;

b.     Width;

c.     Square footage;

d.     Thickness;

e.     Size and style of letters;

f.      Color;

g.     Type of illumination;

h.     Materials.

C.     Fees. A fee as established by resolution of the City Council shall be paid upon the filing of an application. Such fees shall not be refundable.

D.    Permit Conditions. The Planning Department shall attach conditions in conjunction with the approval of a sign permit in order to ensure the intent of this Code is met. The Planning Department may also require guarantees and evidence to ensure that such conditions will be complied with.

E.     Permit Suspension or Revocation. The Planning Director or duly authorized representative may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under provisions of this chapter whenever the permit is issued on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of applicable ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-02 §§1, 2; Ord. 2018-12 §2)

 

18.02.050 Construction and maintenance.
A.    Signs shall be constructed, erected and maintained to meet the requirements of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code, National Electric Code and Oregon Mechanical Code. In addition, all illuminated signs shall be subject to the provisions of the Underwriters’ Standards, as defined in Underwriters’ Laboratories, “Standards for Safety, Electric Signs.” For purposes of this section, “illuminated sign” means any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as part of the sign property.

B.     All signs and component parts shall be kept in good repair and maintained in a safe, neat, clean and attractive condition.

C.     All signs shall be located entirely within the boundaries of the subject property unless specifically authorized by this code.

D.    No sign shall be erected or maintained in such a manner that any portion will interfere in any way with the free use of, or any access to, any fire escape, or be erected or maintained so as to obstruct any window of light or ventilation required by any applicable law or building code.

E.     It is unlawful to erect or maintain a sign which, by reason of its size or location, pose immediate danger to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, either pedestrian or motorists, at public and/or private roadways, intersections, and driveways.

F.     All signs shall be able to withstand a wind pressure at a minimum of 20 pounds per square foot of exposed surface.

G.    All signs shall be constructed securely and shall not constitute a fire hazard.

H.    When wood is used which comes into contact with the ground, the wood must be pressure treated. (Ord. 2018-12 §2)

 

18.02.060 Sign removal.
The Planning Department may order removal of any sign erected, replaced, reconstructed or maintained in violation of these regulations.

A.    The Planning Department shall deliver written notice by certified mail (return receipt requested) to the owner of the sign, or, if the owner of the sign cannot be located, to the owner of the lot(s) as shown on the tax rolls of Clackamas County, on which such sign is located, directing that the sign shall be removed or brought into compliance with these standards.

B.     If the owner of such sign or the owner of the lot(s) on which the sign is located fails to remove the sign or remedy the violation within 30 days after receipt of written notice from the city, the Planning Director shall cause such sign to be removed at the expense of the property owner. Such costs shall be entered by the City Recorder on the docket of city liens against the property owner and shall be collectible in the same manner as liens for public improvements.

C.     If the condition of the sign presents an immediate threat to the safety of the public, the Planning Director may cause removal of the sign immediately, without prior notice, and the expenses for such removal shall be paid by the owner of the sign or the permit applicant. If such persons cannot be found, the expense shall be paid by the owner of the building, structure or property. (Ord. 2018-12 §2)

 

18.02.070 Nonconforming signs.
A.    A nonconforming sign lawfully existed prior to the adoption of applicable zoning requirements with which it does not comply. Except, however, signs shall be considered to be nonconforming where the sign, by reason of its size, location, construction, or lack of maintenance creates a public hazard or nuisance. In the case of such public hazard or nuisance, the city may begin immediate abatement procedures, as provided in this chapter and other city ordinances.

B.     Relocation, replacement, structural alteration or expansion of a nonconforming sign is subject to the same limitations, application procedures and requirements set forth in this chapter for other nonconforming structures. Except, approval of a nonconforming structure application is not required for the following:

1.     Normal repair and maintenance, where the cost to repair the sign does not exceed 50% of the replacement cost of the sign using new materials, as determined by the Building Official.

2.     Change of sign copy.

3.     Structural alteration when the alteration is necessary for structural safety, as determined by the Building Official.

4.     A nonconforming sign may be reconstructed if it is required to be temporarily removed to accommodate construction or repair of public utilities or public works and the sign reconstruction is completed within 90 days after the completion of the public utilities or public works construction activity.

C.     Signs installed in violation of any prior sign code or applicable laws or regulations, and which are in violation of this chapter, shall be removed, replaced or altered in order to conform to the requirements of this chapter.

D.    Signs recognized as historical element of a historical landmark are exempt from this chapter.

E.     All nonconforming signs shall be altered to conform to the requirements of this chapter by January 1, 2025.

F.     A sign for which a variance is granted under the provisions of this chapter is not considered nonconforming.

G.    If a nonconforming sign is damaged by wind, fire, neglect or by any other cause, and such damage exceeds 60% of its replacement value, the nonconforming sign shall be removed.

H.    An unlawful sign shall be removed or made to conform within 60 days after written notice from the Planning Department. Said 60-day period may be extended if the owner of an unlawful sign submits to the Planning Department a declaration signed under penalty of perjury, on forms provided by the Department, stating that he or she intends to terminate the business identified by said sign within 12 months of the date of the notice and agrees to remove the sign upon the expiration of the 12-month period or the date he or she terminates his or her business, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 2018-12 §2)

 

18.02.080 Exempt signs.
All signs which are placed inside a structure or building, which are not visible through windows or building openings and are not intended to be visible to the public are exempt from the provisions of the sign code. (Ord. 2018-12 §2)

 

18.02.090 Prohibited signs.
A.    No sign, unless exempt or allowed pursuant to this chapter shall be permitted.

B.     In a commercial or industrial zone no sign shall be placed inside or outside a structure so as to obscure more than 25% of any individual window surface. In a residential zone no sign shall be placed so as to obscure more than 10% of any individual window surface. Glass doors shall be considered an individual window surface.

Holiday paintings and temporary specials painted on windows shall be exempt from this percentage of limitation.

C.     No permanent sign, other than a public sign, may be placed within or over any portion of the public right-of-way, except those signs which are consistent with the provisions of this chapter.

D.    No sign shall be allowed within 2 feet of any area subject to vehicular travel.

E.     No temporary sign, except for banner signs for which a permit has been issued and those necessary for temporary traffic control shall be placed within or over any portion of the public right-of-way of a major collector or arterial street.

F.     No sign shall be located in a manner which could impede travel on any pedestrian or vehicular travel surface.

G.    No temporary signs, bench signs. Banners, pennants, wind signs, balloon signs, flags, or any other temporary sign structure shall be allowed as except specifically authorized by this chapter.

H.    Except as otherwise provided herein, no sign shall be equipped or displayed with moving, flashing or intermittent illumination except athletic scoreboards.

I.      No sign shall be or consist of any moving, rotating, or otherwise animated part.

J.      No signs on buildings shall be placed on the roof or extend above the roof line or parapet of the structure.

K.    No sign shall be attached to a tree or vegetation.

L.     No non-public sign which purports to be, is an imitation of, or resembles an official traffic sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic on the street, or which hides from view any official traffic sign or signal shall be permitted.

M.    No public address system or sound devices shall be used in conjunction with any sign or advertising device.

N.    No signs that are internally illuminated shall be permitted in any residential zone.

O.    No sign that obstructs free and clear vision of the traveling public at the intersection of any street or driveway shall be permitted.

P.     A sign with lighting of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare on adjoining properties or roadways or impair the vision of a driver of a motor vehicle or otherwise to interfere with the operations thereof or allows light to be directed upward.

Q.    A sign erected or maintained on public property or within the public right-of-way without permission of the public body having jurisdiction.

R.     Any sign larger than 32 square feet (counting both sides) on an undeveloped lot or parcel of property.

S.     Signs larger than 3 square feet on fences or fencing.

T.     Signs placed on, affixed to, or painted on any motor vehicle, trailer or other mobile structure not registered, licensed and insured for use on public highways, city and/or parked with the primary purpose of providing a sign not otherwise allowed by this chapter.

U.    Video signs.

V.    Any signs advertising a business or other use which has discontinued operation within the building, on the lot or in the development shall be deemed abandoned and shall be removed within 90 days of the time the business or use is discontinued, unless a new occupancy permit is issued for a new sign. Removal of the sign is the business owner’s responsibility however if not removed within the 90 days becomes the property owner’s responsibility.

W.    Signs in violation of the other chapters of the Molalla Municipal Code. (Ord. 2019-02 §§3, 4; Ord. 2018-12 §2)

 

18.02.100 Design standards.
A.    All illuminated signs must be installed by a licensed sign contractor, subject to provisions of the State Electrical Code. All electrically illuminated signs shall bear the Underwriters’ Laboratory label or equivalent.

B.     Building and electrical permits shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Prior to obtaining permits the applicant bears the burden of providing an approved sign permit or demonstrating exemption from the permit requirements of this chapter.

C.     Signs shall be designed to be compatible with nearby signs, other elements of street and site furniture and with adjacent structures. Compatibility shall be determined by the relationship of the elements of form, proportion, scale, color, materials, surface treatment, overall sign size and the size and style of lettering.

D.    Content on signs visible from streets shall be designed to minimize distractions to motorists. Signs may be reviewed for clarity and readability.

E.     Setbacks. Signs are required to meet the setback requirements of the applicable zoning district, except however the street yard setback for signs may be reduced to 50% of that required for other structures in the zone. Signs shall not obstruct a vision clearance area.

F.     Size of Sign. The maximum size of all signs per building shall not exceed the totals listed in the table below:

 

 

Street Frontage (ft)

Maximum Display Surface Area (sq ft)

Maximum Area of Any One Sign Face (sq ft)

Maximum Height Freestanding Signs (ft)

1 – 50

50

25

30

50 – 200

100

50

30

201+

300

150

30

 

On a building containing multiple tenants signage requirements shall meet the maximum below as an entire building not as individual business.

G.    Illumination.

1.     External illumination is allowed. The external illumination may be either “direct” or “indirect,” provided that the source of light (e.g., bulb) is shielded such that it is not directly seen by the public. External light sources shall be carefully located, directed and shielded in order to avoid direct illumination of any off-site object or property.

2.     Internal illumination is allowed.

3.     Sign illumination shall not result in glare onto neighboring properties or onto public right-of-way, such that due to level of brightness, lack of shielding, or high contrast with surrounding light levels, the sign illumination results in “light intrusion” onto adjacent properties.

a.     Direct lighting means exposed lighting or neon tubes on the sign face.

b.     Indirect lighting means the light source is separate from the sign face or cabinet and is directed so as to shine on the sign.

c.     Internal lighting means the light source is concealed within the sign.

4.     Signs shall not flash, undulate, pulse, or portray explosions, fireworks, flashes of light, or blinking or chasing lights.

5.     Exposed incandescent bulbs may be used on the exterior surface of a sign if each of such bulbs do not exceed 25 watts or unless each of such bulbs is screened by a diffusing lens, sun screen or similar shading device.

H.    Monument Signs.

1.     Monument signs shall have a distinct base, middle, and top. These elements of the sign shall vary from one another in terms of their thickness, materials, or color.

2.     Monument signs shall incorporate the following materials, unless otherwise approved pursuant to subsection (H)(4) of this section.

a.     The base and top shall be constructed of stone, brick, or wood;

b.     The middle shall be constructed of stone, brick, wood, metal with a matte/non-reflective finish, vinyl, or other materials as noted in subsection (H)(2)(c);

c.     Other materials may be used for bulletin board or electronic message board components in the middle portion of a monument sign, as needed to allow the bulletin board or electronic message board to function.

3.     Monument signs shall provide street addresses when street addresses are not visible from the street.

4.     A monument sign which does not meet 1 or more of the standards detailed above in subsections (H)(1) through (3), may be approved by the Planning Director. A discretionary monument sign application may be approved if the applicant demonstrates compliance with all of the following criteria:

a.     The overall design of the sign exhibits a sense of structure; and

b.     Materials, similar to stone, brick, or wood are used; and

c.     The proposed sign is in conformance with all other applicable city ordinances concerning its location, construction, and design.

I.      Blade/Overhang Signs.

1.     Blade/overhang sign shall not extend more than 8 feet from the building face.

2.     The outer edge of a blade/overhang sign shall be set back a minimum of 2 feet from the curb.

3.     A minimum 9-foot clearance shall be provided between grade and the bottom of a blade/overhang sign.

J.      Wall Signs.

1.     A wall sign shall not project more than 18 inches from the wall to which it is attached (or 12 inches from a wall directly abutting an alley). An encroachment permit is required prior to encroachment into any public right-of-way.

2.     The surface area of a wall sign shall not be more than 2 square feet per lineal foot of the wall on which it is erected.

For shopping centers, the footage will be counted on the entire surface of the wall on which the sign is being erected and include all signs erected on that wall in the total footage.

K.    Reader Boards and Electronic Message Boards.

1.     The rate of change for sign copy on a bulletin or electronic message board from 1 message to another message shall be no more frequent than every 8 seconds. Once changed, content shall remain static until the next change.

2.     Displays may travel horizontally or scroll vertically onto electronic message boards but must hold a static position after completing the travel or scroll.

3.     Sign content shall not appear to flash, undulate, pulse, or portray explosions, fireworks, flashes of light, or blinking or chasing lights. Content shall not appear to move toward or away from the viewer, expand or contract, bounce, rotate, spin, twist, or otherwise portray graphics or animation as it moves onto, is displayed on or leaves the electronic message board.

4.     No electronic message board may be illuminated to a degree of brightness that is greater than necessary for adequate visibility.

5.     Electronic reader boards may be placed in commercial, industrial and public zones only.

6.     No electronic message board may be located closer than 500 feet from another electronic message board.

7.     These signs are only allowed as part of a blade/overhang sign, marquee sign, monument sign, pole sign, or wall sign.

L.     A-Frame Signs.

1.     Dimensions. The A-frame sign area shall not exceed 3 feet high by 2 feet wide. The top of the sign shall be no more than 42 inches from the ground (including feet and hinge mechanisms).

2.     Construction. Shall be constructed of wood, plastic, or metal with a matte/non-reflective finish.

3.     Location. Shall not be located further than 100 feet from the primary business. Signs must not obstruct vehicle sight clearances or be placed so as to obscure permanent signs.

4.     Quantity. No more than 1 A-frame sign per business.

5.     No A-frame sign shall include any parts or attachments that extend beyond the edge of the sign dimensions.

6.     No reflective materials shall be incorporated into the A-frame sign.

7.     Neon colors shall not be incorporated into the A-frame sign.

8.     No A-frame sign shall be placed along any designated sidewalk, or walkway in such a manner as to impede pedestrian passage.

9.     A-frames shall not be placed in landscaped areas.

10.   All A-frames shall comply with the requirements of this code within 1 year of adoption of this code.

11.   Time Period. A-frame signs may be displayed only during public business hours and shall be promptly removed from public display when the business is closed, or at dusk, whichever comes first. For enforcement purposes, dusk is when nearby street lights turn on.

12.   An A-frame sign which does not meet one or more of the standards detailed in this section above, may be approved by the Planning Director. A discretionary A-frame sign application may be approved if the applicant demonstrates compliance with all of the following criteria:

The proposed materials, colors, and dimensions of the A-frame sign do not pose a hazard concerning its location, construction, and design.

M.    Signs in Residential Zones. In addition to the temporary and permanent signage allowed without a permit in the residential zones the following signage is allowed subject to permit and fee:

1.     Monument Signs.

a.     Subdivision Identification Sign and Multifamily (16 or More Units) Monument Signs. A permanent sign may be located at the principle entrance to a subdivision identifying the name of the development. Any sign permitted pursuant to this provision shall meet all the following requirements:

i.      Size. Maximum area on 1 sign face is 32 square feet;

ii.     Maximum height 6 feet.

iii.    Lighting. Indirect lighting shall be used when lighting is requested.

iv.    Types of materials to be used shall be similar to that of the surrounding area. These types include:

(A)   Wood;

(B)   Stone;

(C)   Brick.

v.     No bright colors of any kind shall be allowed on these signs. All signage shall follow the base color code.

vi.    Signs shall be placed in a landscaped area.

vii.   Signs may include the name of the subdivision or apartment complex as well as a phone number and the owner of the complex.

b.     Church, School, Public/Semi-Public Facility or Privately-Owned Community Center.

i.      Size. Maximum of 40 square feet per sign face.

ii.     Maximum height 7 feet.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign per parcel.

 

2.     Blade/Overhang Signs.

a.     Home Occupation or Permitted Commercial Use.

i.      Size. Maximum 2 square feet per sign face.

ii.     Maximum Height. Shall not project above the roofline or top of the parapet wall, whichever is higher.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign per building frontage.

b.     All other uses not allowed.

3.     Wall Signs.

a.     Church, School, Public/Semi-Public Facility.

i.      Size. Maximum 9% of building elevation area, with a maximum sign face of 60 square feet on a primary frontage or 30 square feet on a secondary frontage.

ii.     Maximum Height. Shall not project above the roofline or top of the parapet wall, whichever is higher.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign per building frontage.

b.     Home occupation or permitted commercial use other than those listed above in subsection (M)(3)(a):

 

i.      Size. Maximum 2 square feet.

ii.     Maximum Height. Shall not project above the roofline or top of the parapet wall, whichever is higher.

iii.    Location/Number. Maximum 1 sign; no specific location requirement.

c.     All other uses not allowed.

4.     Reader Boards and Electronic Message Boards.

a.     Reader Boards for Church, School, Public/Semi-Public Facility.

i.      Size. Bulletin board may encompass up to 75% of sign face area.

ii.     Maximum height determined by height of sign.

iii.    Location/Number. Only allowed as a permitted sign.

b.     Electronic Message Board for Church, School, Public/Semi-Public Facility.

i.      Size. Electronic message board may be no larger than 8-foot horizontal by 3-foot vertical from the ground.

ii.     Maximum height determined by height of sign.

iii.    Location/Number. Only allowed as part of permitted sign.

c.     Bulletin board and electronic message board all other areas—Not allowed.

5.     Pole Signs.

a.     Church, School, Public/Semi-Public Facility.

i.      Size. Maximum 40 square feet per sign face.

ii.     Maximum height 8 feet.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign may be located adjacent each street frontage.

b.     All other uses not allowed.

6.     Awning Sign or Canopy Sign. Not permitted on any use.

7.     Marquee Sign. Not permitted on any use.

8.     Window Sign.

a.     Size. Maximum 15% of total window area.

b.     Maximum height determined by height of window.

c.     Location/Number. Only allowed in ground floor or 2nd floor windows.

N.    Signs in the Central Business District. In addition to the temporary and permanent signage allowed without permit in the following Central Business District zones the following signage is allowed subject to permit and fee:

1.     Monument Signs.

a.     Church, School, or Public Facility.

i.      Size. Maximum 40 square feet per sign face up to 2 sign faces.

ii.     Maximum height 9 feet.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign may be located adjacent on each street frontage.

b.     Minor Business Complex.

i.      Size. Maximum 50 square feet per sign face up to 2 sign faces.

ii.     Maximum height 12 feet.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign, except on site abutting a collector or arterial street, 1 sign may be located adjacent to each collector/arterial street frontage.

c.     Major Business Complex.

i.      Size. Maximum 65 square feet per sign face up to 2 sign faces.

ii.     Maximum height 12 feet.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign, except on site abutting a collector or arterial street, 1 sign may be located adjacent to each collector/arterial street frontage.

d.     All Other Uses.

i.      Size. Maximum 40 square feet per sign face up to 2 sign faces.

ii.     Maximum height 9 feet.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign, except on site abutting a collector or arterial street, 1 sign may be located adjacent to each collector/arterial street frontage.

2.     Blade/Overhang Sign.

a.     All Other Uses.

i.      Size. Each sign shall have a maximum sign face area of 20 square feet. The total combined area of wall and blade/overhang signs on a primary frontage shall not exceed 12% of the building elevation area.

ii.     Maximum Height The height of the sign shall not project above the roofline or top of the parapet wall, whichever is higher.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign per building frontage for each business license on file with the city at that location.

3.     Wall Signs.

a.     Church, School, Public/Semi-Public Facility.

i.      Size. Maximum 9% of building elevation area, with a maximum sign face of 60 square feet on a primary frontage or 30 square feet on a secondary frontage.

ii.     Maximum Height. Shall not project above the roofline or top of the parapet wall, whichever is higher.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign per building frontage.

b.     Home Occupation.

i.      Size. Maximum 2 square feet.

ii.     Maximum Height. Shall not project above the roofline or top of the parapet wall, whichever is higher.

iii.    Location/Number. Maximum 1 sign; no specific location requirement.

c.     Commercial Uses.

i.      Size. Maximum sign area of all signage allowed on a primary building frontage is 8% of the building elevation area of the primary building frontage, up to a maximum of 120 square feet.

(A)   The total combined area of marquee signs, awning or canopy signs, and wall signs on a primary frontage shall not exceed the maximum percentage of building elevation area allowed.

(B)   The maximum sign face area of all signage allowed on a secondary building frontage is 6% of the building elevation area of the secondary building frontage, up to a maximum of 60 square feet.

(C)   If the building elevation area of a primary or secondary building frontage exceeds 5,000 square feet, the total sign face area allowed on that frontage is 130 square feet.

ii.     Maximum Height. Shall not project above the roofline or top of the parapet wall, whichever is higher.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign per building frontage for each business license on file with the city at that location.

d.     All other uses not allowed.

4.     Reader Boards and Electronic Message Board Signs.

a.     Size. May be no larger than 8-foot horizontal by 3-foot vertical from the ground.

b.     Maximum height determined by height of sign.

c.     Location/Number. Only allowed as a permitted sign.

5.     Bulletin Board—All Other Uses.

a.     Size. May encompass up to 50% of sign face area.

b.     Maximum height determined by height of sign.

c.     Location/Number. Only allowed as of a permitted sign.

6.     Pole Signs.

a.     Church, School, Public/Semi-Public Facility.

i.      Size. Maximum 40 square feet per sign face (up to 2 faces).

ii.     Maximum height 12 feet.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign may be located adjacent to each street frontage.

b.     Minor Business Complex.

i.      Size. Maximum 50 square feet per sign face (up to 2 faces).

ii.     Maximum height 18 feet.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign may be located adjacent to each street frontage.

c.     Major Business Complex.

i.      Size. Maximum sign face area of all signage allowed on a primary building frontage is 8% of the building elevation area of the primary building frontage, up to a maximum of 60 square feet.

(A)   The total combined area of the marquee signs, awning or canopy signs, and wall signs on a primary frontage shall not exceed the maximum percentage of building elevation area allowed.

(B)   The total combined area of wall and blade/overhang signs on a primary frontage shall not exceed 12% of the building elevation area.

(C)   The maximum sign face area of all signage allowed on a secondary building frontage is 6% of the building elevation area of the secondary building frontage, up to a maximum of 30 square feet.

ii.     Maximum Height. Shall not project above the roof line or top of the parapet wall, whichever is higher.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign per building frontage for each business license on file with the city at the location.

7.     Awning Sign or Canopy Sign.

a.     Use on Site—All Uses.

i.      Size. Maximum sign face area of all signage allowed on a primary building frontage is 12% of the building elevation area of the primary building frontage, up to a maximum of 60 square feet.

(A)   The total combined area of marquee signs, awning or canopy signs, and wall signs on a primary frontage shall not exceed the maximum percentage of building elevation area allowed.

(B)   The maximum sign face area of all signage allowed on a secondary building frontage is 8% of the building elevation area of the secondary frontage, up to a maximum of 30 square feet.

ii.     Maximum Height. Shall not project above the roofline or parapet wall whichever is higher.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign per building frontage for each business license on file with the city at that location. Sign shall not extend more than 8 inches from the building face. Outer edge of sign shall be set back a minimum of 2 feet from the curb. A minimum 8½ foot clearance shall be provided between grade and bottom of the sign.

8.     Marquee Sign.

a.     Use on Site—All Uses.

i.      Size. Maximum sign face area of all signage allowed on a primary building frontage is 12% of the building elevation area of the primary building frontage, up to a maximum of 120 square feet.

The total combined area of marquee signs, awning or canopy signs, and wall signs on a primary frontage shall not exceed the maximum percentage of the building elevation area allowed.

ii.     Maximum Height. Shall not project more than 8 feet above the roofline or parapet wall, whichever is higher the blade/overhang portion of the sign may extend above the roof line or parapet wall.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign per primary building frontage for each business license on file with the city at that location. Outer edge of sign shall be setback a minimum of 2 feet from a curb.

9.     Window Sign.

a.     Use on Site—All Other Uses.

i.      Size. See Section 18.02.090(B).

ii.     Maximum height determined by height of window.

iii.    Location/Number. Only allowed in ground floor or 2nd floor windows.

O.    Signs in the Commercial District. In addition to the temporary and permanent signage allowed without permit in the following commercial zones the following signage is allowed subject to permit and fee:

1.     Monument Signs.

a.     Church, School, or Public Facility.

i.      Size. Maximum 48 square feet per sign face up to 2 sign faces.

ii.     Maximum height 9 feet.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign may be located adjacent on each street frontage.

b.     Minor Business Complex.

i.      Size. Maximum 100 square feet per sign face up to 2 sign faces.

ii.     Maximum height 12 feet.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign, except on site abutting a collector or arterial street, 1 sign may be located adjacent to each collector/arterial street frontage.

c.     Major Business Complex.

i.      Size. Maximum 150 square feet per sign face up to 2 sign faces.

ii.     Maximum height 12 feet.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign, except on site abutting a collector or arterial street, 1 sign may be located adjacent to each collector/arterial street frontage.

d.     All Other Uses.

i.      Size. Maximum 48 square feet per sign face up to 2 sign faces.

ii.     Maximum height 12 feet.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign, except on site abutting a collector or arterial street, 1 sign may be located adjacent to each collector/arterial street frontage.

2.     Blade/Overhang Signs.

a.     All Other Uses.

i.      Size. Each sign shall have a maximum sign face area of 48 square feet. The total combined area of wall and blade/overhang signs on a primary frontage shall not exceed 12% of the building elevation area.

ii.     Maximum Height. The height of the sign shall not project above the roofline or top of the parapet wall, whichever is higher.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign per building frontage for each business license on file with the city at that location.

3.     Wall Signs.

a.     All Uses.

i.      Size. Maximum sign area of all signage allowed on a primary building frontage is 8% of the building elevation area of the primary building frontage, up to a maximum of 120 square feet.

(A)   The total combined area of marquee signs, awning or canopy signs, and wall signs on a primary frontage shall not exceed the maximum percentage of building elevation area allowed.

(B)   The maximum sign face area of all signage allowed on a secondary building frontage is 6% of the building elevation area of the secondary building frontage, up to a maximum of 60 square feet.

(C)   If the building elevation area of a primary or secondary building frontage exceeds 5,000 square feet, the total sign face area allowed on that frontage is 130 square feet.

ii.     Maximum Height. Shall not project above the roofline or top of the parapet wall, whichever is higher.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign per building frontage for each business license on file with the city at that location.

4.     Reader Boards and Electronic Message Board Signs.

a.     Bulletin Board for Church, School, Public/Semi-Public Facility.

i.      Size. May encompass up to 75% of the sign face area.

ii.     Maximum height determined by height of sign.

iii.    Location/Number. Only allowed as a permitted sign.

b.     Bulletin Board—All Other Uses.

i.      Size. May encompass up to 50% of sign face area.

ii.     Maximum height determined by height of sign.

iii.    Location/Number. Only allowed as part of a permitted sign.

c.     Electronic Message Board—All Uses.

i.      Size. May be no larger than 8-foot horizontal by 3-foot vertical from the ground.

ii.     Maximum height determined by height of sign.

iii.    Location/Number. Only allowed as part of permitted sign.

5.     Pole Signs.

a.     Church, School, Public/Semi-Public Facility.

i.      Size. Maximum 48 square feet per sign face (up to 2 faces).

ii.     Maximum height 18 feet.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign may be located adjacent each street frontage.

b.     Minor Business Complex.

i.      Size. Maximum 100 square feet per sign face (up to 2 faces).

ii.     Maximum height 20 feet.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign; except on a site with more than 1 street frontage, 1 sign may be located adjacent each collector or arterial street frontage that is at least 500 feet in length. Where more than 1 sign is permitted on a site, the signs must be separated by at least 300 feet.

c.     Major Business Complex.

i.      Size. Maximum 130 square feet per sign face (up to 2 faces).

ii.     Maximum height 26 feet.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign; except on a site with more than 1 street frontage, 1 sign may be located adjacent each collector or arterial street frontage that is at least 500 feet in length. Where more than 1 sign is permitted on a site, the signs must be separated by at least 300 feet.

d.     All Other Uses.

i.      Size. Maximum 48 square feet per sign face (up to 2 faces).

ii.     Maximum height 18 feet.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign; except 1 sign may be located adjacent each collector or arterial street frontage.

6.     Awning Sign and Canopy Sign.

a.     Use on Site—All Uses.

i.      Size. Maximum sign face area of all signage allowed on a primary building frontage is 12% of the building elevation area of the primary building frontage, up to a maximum of 120 square feet.

(A)   The total combined area of marquee signs, awning or canopy signs, and wall signs on a primary frontage shall not exceed the maximum percentage of building elevation area allowed.

(B)   The maximum sign face area of all signage allowed on a secondary building frontage is 8% of the building elevation area of the secondary frontage, up to a maximum of 30 square feet.

ii.     Maximum Height. Shall not project above the roof line or parapet wall whichever is higher.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign per building frontage for each business license on file with the city at that location. Sign shall not project above the roof line. Sign shall not extend more than 8 feet from the building face. Outer edge of sign shall be set back a minimum of 2 feet from a curb. A minimum 8½ foot clearance shall be provided between grade and bottom of sign.

7.     Marquee Sign.

a.     Use on Site—All Uses.

i.      Size. Maximum sign face area of all signage allowed on a primary building frontage is 12% of the building elevation area of the primary building frontage, up to a maximum of 120 square feet.

The total combined area of marquee signs, awning or canopy signs, and wall signs on a primary frontage shall not exceed the maximum percentage of the building elevation area allowed.

ii.     Maximum Height. Shall not project more than 8 feet above the roofline or parapet wall, whichever is higher the blade/overhang portion of the sign may extend above the roof line or parapet wall.

iii.    Location/Number. Outer edge of sign shall be setback a minimum of 2 feet from a curb. A minimum 8½ foot clearance shall be provided between grade and bottom of sign.

8.     Window Signs.

a.     Use on Site—All Other Uses.

i.      Size. See Section 18.02.090(B).

ii.     Maximum height determined by height of window.

iii.    Location/Number. Only allowed in ground floor or 2nd floor windows.

P.     Signs in the Community Planning Area. In addition to the temporary and permanent signage allowed without permit in the Community Planning Area the following signage is allowed subject to a permit and fee.

1.     Monument Signs.

a.     Church, School, or Public Facility.

i.      Size. Maximum 32 square feet per sign face up to 2 sign faces.

ii.     Maximum height 7 feet.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign may be located adjacent on each street frontage.

b.     Residential—None.

c.     All Other Uses.

i.      Size. Maximum 32 square feet per sign face up to 2 sign faces.

ii.     Maximum height 7 feet.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign, except on site abutting a collector or arterial street, 1 sign may be located adjacent to each collector/arterial street frontage.

2.     Blade/Overhang Signs.

a.     All Other Uses.

i.      Size. Each sign shall have a maximum sign face area of 6 square feet.

ii.     Maximum Height. The height of the sign shall not project above the roofline or top of the parapet wall whichever is higher.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign per building frontage for each business license on file with the city at that location.

3.     Wall Signs.

a.     Church, School, Public/Semi-Public Facility.

i.      Size. Maximum sign face area for each sign is 60 square feet on a primary building frontage.

The maximum sign face area of all signage allowed on a secondary building frontage is 6% of the building elevation area of the secondary building frontage, up to a maximum of 30 square feet.

ii.     Maximum Height. Shall not project above the roofline or top of the parapet wall, whichever is higher.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign per building frontage.

b.     All Uses.

i.      Size. The maximum sign face area of all signage allowed on a secondary building frontage is 6% of the building elevation area of the primary building.

The maximum sign face area of all signage allowed on a secondary building frontage is 4% of the building elevation of the secondary building frontage, up to a maximum of 8 square feet.

ii.     Maximum Height. Shall not project above the roofline or top of the parapet wall, whichever is greater.

iii.    Location/Number. No more than 1 wall sign per building frontage for each business license on file with the city at that location. A wall sign shall not project more than 18 inches from the wall to which it is attached (or 12 inches from the wall on a building frontage abutting an alley).

4.     Bulletin Board Sign and Electronic Message Board Signs.

a.     Bulletin Board for Church, School, Public/Semi-Public Facility.

i.      Size. May encompass up to 75% of the sign face area.

ii.     Maximum height determined by height of sign.

iii.    Location/Number. Only allowed as a permitted sign.

b.     Bulletin Board—All Other Uses.

i.      Size. May encompass up to 50% of sign face area.

ii.     Maximum height determined by height of sign.

iii.    Location/Number. Only allowed as part of a permitted sign.

c.     Electronic Message Board—All Uses.

i.      Size. May be no larger than 8-foot horizontal by 3-foot vertical from the ground.

ii.     Determined by height of sign.

iii.    Location/Number. Only allowed as part of permitted sign.

5.     Pole Signs.

a.     Church, School, Public/Semi-Public Facility.

i.      Size. Maximum 32 square feet per sign face (up to 2 faces).

ii.     Maximum height 8 feet.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign may be located adjacent to each street frontage.

b.     All Other Uses.

i.      Size. Maximum 32 square feet per sign face (up to 2 faces).

ii.     Maximum height 8 feet.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign; except on a site with more than 1 street frontage, 1 sign may be located adjacent to each collector or arterial street frontage.

6.     Awning Sign or Canopy Sign.

a.     Use on Site—Church, School, or Public/Semi-Public Facility.

i.      Size. Maximum sign face area of all signage allowed on a primary building frontage is 12% of the building elevation area of the primary building frontage, up to a maximum of 50 square feet.

The maximum sign face area of all signage allowed on a secondary building frontage is 8% of the building elevation area of the secondary frontage, up to a maximum of 25 square feet.

ii.     Maximum Height. Shall not project above the roof line or parapet wall whichever is higher.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign per building frontage for each business license on file with the city at that location. Sign shall not project above the roof line. Sign shall not extend more than 8 feet from the building face. Outer edge of sign shall be set back a minimum of 2 feet from a curb. A minimum 8½ foot clearance shall be provided between grade and bottom of sign.

b.     Use on Site. All other uses not allowed.

7.     Marquee sign not allowed.

8.     Window Sign.

a.     Use on Site—All Other Uses.

i.      Size. See Section 18.02.030(B).

ii.     Maximum height determined by height of window.

iii.    Location/Number. Only allowed in ground floor or 2nd floor windows.

Q.    Signs in Industrial Districts. In addition to the temporary and permanent signage allowed without permit in the following industrial zones the following signage is allowed subject to permit and fee:

1.     Monument Signs.

a.     All uses in the M1 or M2 zones.

i.      Size. Maximum 32 square feet per sign face up to 2 sign faces.

ii.     Maximum height 6 feet.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign.

b.     All Uses in Support Commercial.

i.      Size. Maximum 32 square feet per sign face up to 2 sign faces.

ii.     Maximum height 8 feet.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign.

2.     Blade/Overhang Signs.

a.     All Other Uses.

i.      Size. Each sign shall have a maximum sign face area of 48 square feet.

The total sign face area of all signs placed on a primary building frontage shall not exceed 12% of the building elevation area of the primary building frontage.

ii.     Maximum Height. The height of the sign shall not project above the roofline or top of the parapet wall whichever is higher.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign per building frontage for each business license on file with the city at that location.

3.     Wall Signs.

a.     All Uses.

i.      Size. Maximum sign face area of all signage allowed on a primary building frontage is 8% of the building elevation area of the primary building frontage, up to a maximum of 300 square feet.

The maximum sign face area of all signage allowed on a secondary building frontage is 6% of the building elevation area of the secondary building frontage, up to a maximum of 190 square feet.

ii.     Maximum Height. Shall not project above the roofline or top of the parapet wall, whichever is higher.

iii.    Location/Number. Painted wall signs are prohibited. Internally illuminated box style signs, also called can signs, are prohibited. For other types of wall signs, 1 sign is permitted per building frontage for each business license on file with the city at that location.

4.     Reader Boards and Electronic Message Boards.

a.     Bulletin Board—All Other Uses.

i.      Size. May encompass up to 50% of sign face area.

ii.     Maximum height determined by height of sign.

iii.    Location/Number. Only allowed as part of a permitted sign.

b.     Electronic Message Board—All Uses.

i.      Size. May be no larger than 8-foot horizontal by 3-foot vertical from the ground.

ii.     Determined by height of sign.

iii.    Location/Number. Only allowed as part of permitted sign.

5.     Pole signs not allowed.

6.     Awning Sign or Canopy Sign.

a.     Use on Site—All Uses.

i.      Size. Maximum sign face area of all signage allowed on a primary building frontage is 12% of the building elevation area of the primary building frontage, up to a maximum of 120 square feet.

The maximum sign face area of all signage allowed on a secondary building frontage is 8% of the building elevation area of the secondary frontage, up to a maximum of 60 square feet.

ii.     Maximum Height. Shall not project above the roof line or parapet wall whichever is higher.

iii.    Location/Number. One sign per building frontage for each business license on file with the city at that location. Sign shall not project above the roof line. Sign shall not extend more than 8 feet from the building face. Outer edge of sign shall be set back a minimum of 2 feet from a curb. A minimum 8½ foot clearance shall be provided between grade and bottom of sign.

7.     Marquee sign not allowed.

8.     Window Signs.

a.     Use on Site—All Uses.

i.      Size. See Section 18.02.090(B).

ii.     Maximum height determined by height of window.

iii.    Location/Number. Only allowed in ground floor or 2nd floor windows. (Ord. 2019-02 §4; Ord. 2018-12 §2)

 

18.02.110 Permanent signs exempt from permit and fee.
The following signs shall comply with all provisions and regulations of this chapter; however, no fee, permit or application is required:

A.    One sign not exceeding 1 square foot in area hung from a building.

B.     One sign not exceeding 2 square feet in area placed on any occupied residential lot.

C.     Incidental Signs. Not exceeding 6 square feet in area shall be allowed on any parcel that a multiple dwelling is constructed.

D.    Public Signs. For hospitals or emergency services, legal notices, railroad signs, and danger signs.

Signs or tablets (including names of buildings, and the date of erection) when cut into any masonry surface, or constructed of bronze or other noncombustible surface not to exceed 8 square feet in area.

E.     Athletic Field Signs. Rigid signs located on the outfield fence of athletic fields may be installed. Each individual sign shall be no more than 32 square feet in area. There shall be no more than 32 square feet of area for any 8 linear feet of fence. The maximum height shall not exceed 8 feet above grade. The signs shall be placed so as to be visible from the interior of the field and/or viewing stands. One sign located at 1 end of the field visible to spectators shall have a maximum height of 15 feet above grade and shall be a maximum of 64 square feet.

F.     Accessory signs within a commercial or industrial zone which are permanent and an internal part of permitted outdoor accessory or display structures such as soft drink machines, fuel pumps, and newspaper dispensers.

G.    No “solicitation” sign pursuant to size.

H.    Signs attached to or carried by a person limited to 6 square feet in total size.

I.      Flags as outlined in Chapter 21.30. (Ord. 2018-12 §2)

 

18.02.120 Regulation of temporary signs.
The following signs shall comply with all provisions and regulations of this chapter; however, no fee, permit or application is required. Temporary signs are prohibited signs except as provided by this section.

A.    Generally.

1.     Illumination. No temporary sign shall be internally or externally illuminated.

2.     Location.

a.     No temporary sign shall extend into or over the public right-of-way of any street.

b.     Signs allowed in the right-of-way for temporary traffic control shall provide a minimum of 5 feet of clear passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk where a sidewalk exists and shall come no closer than 2 feet from areas subject to vehicular travel.

c.     No temporary sign shall extend into the vision clearance area.

3.     Maintenance. Temporary signs shall be kept neat, clean and in good repair. Signs which are faded, torn, damaged or otherwise unsightly or in a state of disrepair shall be immediately repaired or removed.

4.     Placement. Except as provided by this section, temporary signs shall not be attached to trees, shrubbery, utility poles, or traffic control signs or devices. They shall not obstruct or obscure primary signs on adjacent premises.

5.     Sign Collection and Retrieval.

a.     The city may collect temporary signs placed in the public right-of-way without a permit.

b.     Each sign collected will be stored for a minimum of 30 days.

c.     Notice will be mailed within 3 business days of the date of collection to the owner of each sign if the ownership is reasonably discernible from the sign or as previously filed by the owner of the sign with the Planning Department.

d.     The owner of a sign may retrieve a sign collected by the city within 30 days of the collection date. The owner must present proof of ownership of the sign and pay a sign retrieval fee in the amount established by City Council resolution.

e.     The owner of the sign may request a meeting before the City Manager to contest the sign removal. To request a meeting, the owner of a sign must request in writing for a meeting within 15 days of the date of mailing of the notice as provided in subsection (A)(5)(c) above.

B.     Allowed Signage.

1.     To any residential zone temporary signage shall be allowed for each and every lot. This signage shall not be restricted by content, but is usually and customarily used to advertise real estate sales, political or ideological positions, garage sales, home construction or remodeling, etc. Signage shall be allowed for each lot as follows:

a.     Temporary signs not exceeding 6 square feet, provided the signs are erected not more than 90 days prior to an election and removed within 5 days following the election.

b.     One temporary sign not exceeding 6 square feet provided the sign is removed within 15 days from the sale, lease or rental of the property or within 7 days of completion of any construction or remodeling. An additional sign of the same size may be erected if the property borders a second street and the signs are not visible simultaneously. On tracts of land of more than 2 acres in residential zones the sign area may be increased to 32 square feet. In no case shall the sign or signs be erected for more than 12 months.

c.     One temporary sign not exceeding 4 square feet in area which is erected for a maximum of 8 days in any calendar month and is removed by sunset on any day it is erected.

d.     Temporary signs erected within a building which do not obstruct more than 10% of any individual window surface.

2.     In any commercial or industrial zone temporary signage shall be allowed for each and every lot. This signage shall not be restricted by content, but is usually and customarily used to advertise real estate signs, political or ideological positions, construction or remodeling, etc. The signage shall be allowed for each lot as follows:

a.     Temporary signs not exceeding 6 square feet, provided the signs are erected not more than 90 days prior to an election and removed within 5 days following the election.

b.     Temporary sign not exceeding 32 square feet provided said signs are removed within 15 days from the sale, lease or rental of the property or within 7 days of completion of any construction or remodeling. An additional sign of the same size may be erected if the property borders a second street and the signs are not visible simultaneously.

c.     Temporary non-illuminated signs not exceeding 16 square feet for charitable fundraising events placed by nonprofit and charitable organizations. Such signs shall not be placed more than 7 days prior to the event and must be removed within 2 days following the event. No more than 3 such events shall be advertised in this manner per lot per year.

d.     Temporary signs not exceeding 16 square feet in area erected in association with the temporary uses allowed by code including Christmas tree sales, pushcart vendors, Saturday market and sidewalk sales. This signage shall be allowed for the same duration as the temporary use. (Ord. 2019-02 §4; Ord. 2018-12 §2)

 

18.02.130 Temporary signs requiring a permit.
A.    The City Manager may allow temporary signs larger than those allowed by this code to be erected. This signage shall not be restricted by content, but is usually and customarily used to advertise special events and store openings on banners. The City Manager shall allow the erection of such signs only if the City Manager finds that the proposed sign will not materially impair the purposes of the Sign Code. Seasonal decorations erected within the public right-of-way shall be considered to be such signs. These signs shall meet all applicable City Code provisions. Lighting of such signs will be reviewed as part of the application and may be allowed depending on impact to surrounding development.

B.     The following requirements shall be met, as applicable:

1.     Written consent from the property owner where the sign will be located shall be provided. The consent shall identify any restrictions that the property owner requires of the permit holder. Banners hung from utility poles shall require written approval from Portland General Electric. Banners hung over a state highway will require written approval from the Oregon Department of Transportation.

2.     Plans or a description showing the location of the sign; banner height above the right-of-way; support devices for the banner; and proposed dates shall be provided.

3.     The display period shall not exceed 25 consecutive days in duration and no more than once in any 12-month period. All such signs shall be removed no later than 1 day following the event being advertised.

4.     A copy of any liability and/or property damage insurance required by the property owner where the sign or banner will be located.

5.     A signed rebate and indemnity agreement shall be provided if placing a banner over the public right-of-way.

6.     The extent of signage allowed and the location of the signage is at the discretion of the City Manager.

C.     The extent of signage allowed and the location of the signage is at the discretion of the City Manager.

D.    Any temporary sign that exceeds 6 square feet in size. (Ord. 2018-12 §2)

 

18.02.140 Signs requiring a permit.
A.    It is unlawful and a civil infraction for any person to erect, construct, alter or relocate any sign without first obtaining a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter unless a provision of this chapter specifically exempts a sign from the permit requirement.

B.     It is unlawful and a civil infraction for any person to construct a sign that is not specifically allowed by this chapter or to erect, construct, maintain or allow to exist a sign in violation of the terms of the permit issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2018-12 §2)

 

18.02.150 Automobile service station sign standards.
Sign denoting gasoline prices, as provided for in Oregon Revised Statutes 649.030, are permitted subject to the following provisions:

A.    Maximum area on 1 sign face is 20 square feet.

B.     Maximum height is 25 feet or that required under freestanding signs whichever is less.

C.     Only 1 gasoline sign shall be allowed per business location street frontage. (Ord. 2018-12 §2)

 

18.02.160 Signage on cars.
Signs on cars not otherwise discussed in the MDC shall meet the following requirements:

A.    Shall not project beyond the original frame of the vehicle more than 1/4 inch; exceptions: pizza delivery, taxi, and the like;

B.     Shall not be larger than 6 square feet; car wraps are exempt from the size requirements; and

C.     Shall not be parked in a right-of-way for periods of time to be used as a portable sign. (Ord. 2018-12 §2)

 

18.02.170 Garage/household sales.
Signs advertising household goods, such as a garage sale, are permitted, subject to the following provisions:

A.    Maximum area on 1 sign face is 6 square feet.

B.     Height of 3 square feet.

C.     On premises sign—One sign.

D.    Three off-premises A-frame signs.

E.     Placement no earlier than 8:00 a.m. on the first day and removal no later than 7:00 p.m. on the last day.

F.     Sign cannot create a traffic hazard, impede pedestrian passage or create a public nuisance.

G.    All garage sale signs shall include the address of the location of the garage sale.

H.    The city shall have available a reasonable supply of professional sale signs that can be rented by individuals. In addition, the city may secure a deposit to recover the cost of replacing the sign in the event of damage or loss. (Ord. 2018-12 §2)

 

18.02.180 Nameplates.
Nameplates identifying the occupant of a residence are permitted outright when not exceeding 1 square foot in size. (Ord. 2018-12 §2)

 

18.02.190 Open house signs/for sale signs.
A.    Additional temporary single or double-faced open house signs shall be permitted on private property during daylight hours provided such additional temporary signs are removed prior to sunset the day of placement. Such signs are permitted only on private property with the consent of the occupant. Units displaying an open house sign must remain unlocked during the time the sign is posted. An open house is to be attended by the seller or representative at all times during the open house. This section does not apply to model homes within subdivisions or model apartment units. An open house sign may not be displayed for the same address for more than 2 consecutive weekends.

B.     One temporary sign per frontage, not exceeding 6 square feet in area, during the time of sale, lease or rental of the lot/structure provided that the sign is removed within 30 days of the sale, lease or rental of the lot/structure. (Ord. 2018-12 §2)

Titles 19 and 20 (RESERVED)

Title 21 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS
Chapter 21.10 SPRINKLING OF CERTAIN BUILDINGS AND FIRE HYDRANT REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 21.16 BONDING OF LANDSCAPING
Chapter 21.18 DISPOSAL OF DEBRIS FROM CONSTRUCTION SITES
Chapter 21.20 ADDRESS DISPLAY REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 21.30 FLAGS
Chapter 21.40 SWIMMING POOLS
Chapter 21.50 ABATEMENT OF BUILDING NUISANCES
Chapter 21.60 HAZARDS
Chapter 21.70 EXCAVATION, FILLS, GRADING AND EROSION CONTROL
Chapter 21.80 DARK SKIES
Chapter 21.90 TREES

Chapter 21.10 SPRINKLING OF CERTAIN BUILDINGS AND FIRE HYDRANT REQUIREMENTS
21.10.010 Purpose.
Fire support and enforcement is critical to ensure the health and safety of citizens. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.10.020 Fire sprinklers in residential zones.
Any residential building taller than 30 feet, from the lowest ground point along the building to the tallest peak of the building, is required to install an interior sprinkler system as required by the Molalla Fire Department and Building Official. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.10.030 Fire sprinklers on flag lots.
Habitable structures shall include a sprinkling system when located on a flag lot having a flag length greater than 75 feet or where the Fire Department believes it necessary for public health and safety. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.10.040 Fire sprinklers on all other development.
Sprinkling shall occur on all other developments if they exceed 30 feet in height or if the Building Official or Fire Marshal deems such fire sprinkling necessary for public health and safety. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.10.050 Fire hydrants general.
A.    Fire hydrants shall remain unobstructed and clear of debris at all times.

B.     Fire hydrants shall be required at the time a street is improved in new development or redevelopment. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.10.060 Public fire hydrants.
A.    Public fire hydrants shall only be painted red or yellow.

B.     All public fire hydrants shall require a 4-inch Stortz connection as required by the Molalla Fire Department. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.10.070 Private fire hydrants.
Private fire hydrants shall be painted orange. Private fire hydrants shall be required to provide a 4-inch Stortz connection if required by the Molalla Fire Department. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.10.080 Ornamental fire hydrants.
Ornamental fire hydrants shall not be placed in such a manner as to be mistaken for a workable fire hydrant. Ornamental fire hydrants shall also not be red, yellow, or orange in color or resemble these colors. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.10.090 Oregon and Metro Fire Code.
The City of Molalla hereby adopts the State of Oregon Fire Code along with Metro’s Fire Interpretation Manual. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.10.100 Reflective hydrant markers.
A.    Fire hydrant locations shall be identified by the installation of reflective markers. The markers shall be blue. They shall be located adjacent and to the side of the center line of the access road way that the fire hydrant is located on. In case there is no center line then assume a center line, and place the reflectors accordingly.

B.     This shall be required on all new development where the road way is added or improved upon. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

Chapter 21.16 BONDING OF LANDSCAPING
21.16.010 Purpose.
Landscaping is a necessary element of development. All landscaping shall be completed or bonded prior to final inspection of the development. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.16.020 Inspection and occupancy.
A.    No home or business shall take occupancy of a building until a certificate of occupancy is completed. Failure to obtain a certificate of occupancy prior to occupying the home shall result in fines, disconnection of water and sewer, revocation of building permit(s), and/or a revocation of business license(s).

B.     Landscaping shall be complete at the time of a final inspection. The Building Official shall ensure that all landscaping is in place at the time of final inspection. Failure to have landscaping complete or bonding in place at the time of final inspection will result in a denial of the final inspection and the house will be deemed incomplete. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.16.030 Bonding.
A.    A builder may file a bond in lieu of landscaping under the following conditions:

1.     When a final inspection would occur between the months of November and February.

2.     If abnormal weather patterns are anticipated to cause problems with the landscaping.

3.     When other good cause exists as determined by the Planning Director in the Director’s sole discretion.

B.     The Planning Director may require bonding if the Director finds the quality of the landscaping or conditions poor enough to threaten the viability of the landscaping. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.16.040 Bonding procedures.
A.    Landscaping Bids. Any application for a bond shall be accompanied by a minimum of 3 bids from qualified landscape professionals.

B.     The Planning Director may require additional bids if the Director believes the bids submitted are not within a reasonable range of likely costs. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.16.050 Bonding costs.
The bond shall be in the amount of 110% of the cost selected. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.16.060 Enforcing the bond.
The Planning Director may request the landscaping to be completed by a date certain as weather permits. Failure to complete the landscaping within 15 days of the specified date shall allow the Planning Director to use the bond to complete the project. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

Chapter 21.18 DISPOSAL OF DEBRIS FROM CONSTRUCTION SITES
21.18.010 Required.
All debris generated from construction sites within the City shall be removed from the site before a certificate of final action and/or a certificate of occupancy are issued for the structure or structures located on the construction site. The term “debris” shall include but not be limited to stumps, tree limbs, brush, discarded building materials, and other waste materials generated by the construction process. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

Chapter 21.20 ADDRESS DISPLAY REQUIREMENTS
21.20.010 Address display requirements.
A.    The owner of each structure assigned an address shall place and maintain the address number on the door, the door frame, the main entrance to the building, or in any other readily visible area on the building from the street most parallel to the entrance. The Building Official, the City Engineer or the Fire Marshal may require lettering in a specific or different location if the official believes that relocation is necessary to make the numbers readily visible from the street. Failure to place or maintain address numbers as required by this section is a violation.

B.     The numbers may be made or painted with any material, as approved by the Planning Department, so long as numbers are readily visible from the street

C.     Numbers on structures shall be at least 6 inches tall. The Building Official, the City Engineer or the Fire Marshal may require larger lettering in a specific circumstance where necessary to make the numbers readily visible from the street. The City shall encourage the owners of existing structures to replace such numbers with numbers at least 6 inches tall for the purpose of promoting public safety and encouraging timely emergency response.

D.    The owner of a flag lot shall place a sign a minimum of 24 inches off the ground, stating the address of the flag lot. This address sign shall be at the entrance of the flag lot adjacent and visible from the public right of way. The sign shall be made of a material that is not glaring or intrusive but allows emergency services to easily locate and identify those properties from the public right of way. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

Chapter 21.30 FLAGS
21.30.010 Flags—General.
A.    Official national, state and local government flags or banners when installed in a manner that meets City ordinances and when flown and maintained with the respect due to these symbols of honor and authority, as specified by the U.S. Flag Code, are allowed as outright uses in all zones.

B.     The flag structure should not exceed 20 feet in height or 110% of the maximum height of the primary structure on the property whichever is greater. All structures over 10 feet in height require a building permit and an inspection of the footing and structure, as per the Oregon State Structural Specialty Code, prior to installation of the structure.

C.     The City shall not allow the banning of the American flag in the Contract, Covenants and Restrictions (CC&Rs) of any development. The City will work with all developments to ensure the flag is an integral part of every development. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

Chapter 21.40 SWIMMING POOLS
21.40.010 Application.
The provisions of this chapter control the design of barriers for residential swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs. These design controls are intended to provide protection against potential drowning and near drowning by restricting access to swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.40.020 Outdoor swimming pool.
An outdoor swimming pool, including in-ground, above-ground or on-ground pools, hot tubs or spas shall include a barrier that complies with the following:

A.    The top of the barrier shall be at least 48 inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be 2 inches measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, such as an above-ground pool, the barrier may be on top of the pool structure. Where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the bottom of the barrier shall be 4 inches.

B.     Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a 4-inch diameter sphere.

C.     Solid barriers that do not have openings, such as a masonry or stone wall, shall not contain indentations or protrusions except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.

D.    Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches, the horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 1.75 inches in width. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1.75 inches in width.

E.     Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is 45 inches or more, spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 4 inches. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1.75 inches in width.

F.     Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be 1.25 inch square unless the fence is provided with slats fastened at the top or the bottom which reduce the openings to not more than 1.75 inches.

G.    Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, such as a lattice fence, the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall not be more than 1.75 inches.

H.    Access gates shall comply with the requirements set above and shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian access gates shall open outward, away from the pool, and shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Gates other than pedestrian access gates shall have a self latching device. Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than 54 inches from the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism and openings shall comply with the following:

1.     The release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate at least 3 inches below the top of the gate, and

2.     The gate and barrier shall have no opening greater than 1/2 inch within 18 inches of the release mechanism.

I.      A pool shall not be located within the front yard area. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

Chapter 21.50 ABATEMENT OF BUILDING NUISANCES
21.50.010 Dangerous building defined.
For the purpose of this chapter the term “dangerous building” means any building or structure that has any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described, provided that such conditions or defects endanger the life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the buildings or structures:

A.    When a door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size, or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic;

B.     When the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than 1½ times the working stress or stresses allowed in State Building Code, for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location;

C.     When any portion the building has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind and flood, or be any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability of the building is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the State Building Code, for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location;

D.    When any portion of member or appurtenance of the building is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property;

E.     When any portion of the building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of 1/2 of that specified in the State Building Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the State Building Code for such buildings;

F.     When any portion of the building has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction:

G.    When the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of (1) dilapidation, deterioration or decay; (2) faulty construction; (3) the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; (4) the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or (5) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse;

H.    When, for any reason, the building or structure or any portion thereof is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used;

I.      When an exterior wall or other vertical structural member lists, leans or buckles to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base;

J.      When the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become (1) an attractive nuisance to children; (2) a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons; or as to (3) enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts;

K.    When a building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to the building or structure provided by the building regulations of the City, as specified in the State Building Code, Volume I, or State Building Code, Volume III, Housing, or of any law or ordinance of this State or City relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings;

L.     When a building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any non-supporting part, member or portion, less than 50%, or in any supporting part, member of portion less than 66% of the (1) strength; (2) fire resisting qualities or characteristics; or (3) weather resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location;

M.    When a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the County Health Department to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease;

N.    When a building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire resistant construction, faulty electrical wiring, gas connection or hearting apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the Fire Marshal to be a fire hazard;

O.    When a building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance;

P.     When a portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure, or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of 6 months so as to constitute an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.50.020 Maintenance of dangerous buildings.
Any person who is the owner of, or is in possession of any dangerous building within the City and knowingly permits the building to be or remain dangerous for a period of 10 days after receipt of notice as provided in Section 21.50.040 of this chapter is guilty of a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.50.030 Hearing—Notice.
Whenever the Building Official finds or is of the opinion that there is a dangerous building in the City, it shall be the Building Official’s duty to report the same to the City Council. Thereupon the City Council shall, within a reasonable time, fix a time and place for public hearing on the report. The City Recorder shall provide notice of the hearing to the owner of record of the property on which the building is located, the tenant or occupant of the building, and any person or corporation having a lien of record against the property. The notice shall state, in general terms, that a hearing will be held concerning the property and the time and place thereof. At the hearing, the City Council shall determine by resolution whether or not the building is dangerous. The City Council may, as a part of the hearing, inspect the building and the facts observed by the City Council at such inspection may be considered by it in determining whether or not the building is dangerous. At the hearing the owner or other person interested in the property or building shall have the right to be heard, if the owner or person requests the same.

A.    Notice required in this section shall be provided by personal service or registered or certified first class mail upon the owner of record of the premises whereupon the building is located, the tenant or occupant of the building, and any person or corporation having a lien of record against the property, if any or all shall be found in the City.

B.     Said notice shall be given to such persons or corporation not less than 10 days prior to the date of the hearing before City Council. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.50.040 Determination of City Council—Compliance.
At the hearing the City Council shall have the power to order any building declared to be dangerous, removed and abated, if in its judgment such removal and abatement is necessary in order to remove the dangerous condition. The City Council may order the building made safe and to prescribe what acts or things must be done to make the building safe. Notice of the findings and of any orders made by the City Council shall be given to the owner of the building, the owner’s agent and to the tenant or occupant of the building. If the City Council orders are not obeyed and the building rendered safe within the time specified in the order, the City Council may arrange to have the building removed or made safe and the costs thereof assessed as a lien against the property. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.50.050 City may abate lien.
In the event the City Council orders the building removed or made safe, the Council must specify with convenient certainty the work to be done and shall file a statement to that effect with the recorder. The City shall advertise for bids for the completion of the work. All costs incurred by the City to remove the building or make it safe shall be assessed the property on which the building is located. The assessment shall be declared by an ordinance, entered in the docket of the City liens and thereupon become a lien against the property. The creation of a lien and the collection and enforcement of the costs shall be done and performed in substantially the same manner as in the case of the cost of street improvements, but irregularities or informalities in the procedure shall be disregarded. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.50.060 Dangerous buildings declared nuisance.
Every building or part thereof that is found by the City Council to be a dangerous building is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated according to the procedure described in this chapter or by a suit for abatement brought by the City in the Clackamas County Circuit Court. In addition, the Chief of Police or the Building Official may proceed summarily, without prior action by the City Council, to temporarily abate a condition in or on a dangerous building which such official finds to be an unmistakable danger to public health or safety, and from which there is imminent danger to human life or property. Emergency abatement action shall be the minimum necessary to remove the imminent danger to human life or property and such actions shall be promptly reported to the City Council. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.50.070 Buildings used for illegal manufacture.
Any building or any portion thereof that has been used for the illegal manufacture or distribution of hazardous chemicals or materials is declared a dangerous building. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.50.080 Violation—Penalty.
Any person or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction thereof be punished by imprisonment in jail for a period not exceeding 30 days, or by a fine not exceeding $500.00, or by both. Each day the violation exists constitutes a separate offense.

A.    The owner of any dangerous building within the City shall not knowingly allow a building to be or remain dangerous after 10 days from the date that a notice to abate has been mailed and no written protest has been filed.

B.     A person shall not fail to abate a nuisance within the time provided in the Notice and Order of the Building Official.

C.     Violation of this chapter is a Class 1 Civil Infraction and shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in Building Code (BC) Sections 2.10.010 through 2.10.050.

D.    The requirement to abate a public nuisance is not a penalty for violating this chapter but is an additional remedy. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

Chapter 21.60 HAZARDS
21.60.010 Destruction of restricted uses.
Structures occupied by such uses may be rebuilt if destroyed, provided replacement construction complies with the development and design standards of Chapter 19.08, application for development approval is filed within 6 months and construction commences not more than 1 year after destruction of the original structure. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.60.020 Uses involving hazardous materials.
A.    Any use, project or establishment that includes or proposed to include or allow any of the following:

1.     “Type H Occupancy” as defined and regulated by the State Structural Specialty Code with Oregon Amendments.

2.     Outside storage of flammable, combustible, explosive or regulated materials as governed by the Uniform Fire Code or the Fire Code Ordinance of the Molalla Fire Department.

3.     Use ore release of biological agents requiring bio-safety containment precautions as determined by the National Institutes of Health or the U.S. Center for Disease Control.

4.     Use or release of an “extremely hazardous substance,” or a “hazardous chemical,” or a “toxic chemical” in quantities requiring reporting under, and as such terms are defined in, the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986 (Title III of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, 42 U.S.C.A. Sec 55.11001 to 55.11050) and its associated Federal and Oregon State regulations.

5.     Use or release of any materials classified as regulated materials under administrative rules adopted under this subsection.

B.     Any use, project or establishment is exempt and shall not require a Hazardous Materials Permit if the applicant’s use of regulated materials:

C.     If a use, project or establishment is not exempt under the provisions of subsection (A)(2) above, a Hazardous Materials Permit shall be issued only upon demonstration that all of the following criteria are met:

1.     The use, project or establishment proposes to use regulated materials in such quantities, combinations, and under such manner of use, conditions and precautions that a leak, explosion, fire or accident at the building or site containing or proposed to contain the regulated material(s) is unlikely to:

a.     Release such regulated materials at levels greater than ½ the recognized level deemed to be “Immediately Dangerous to Life and Health” (IDLH) as defined and determined by the Structural Specialty Code and/or the Uniform Fire Code for the material, substance or agent in question.

b.     Release such regulated materials at levels the National Institutes of Health and/or the U.S. Center for Disease Control have determined to be hazardous to the life or health of those coming into contact with the material, substance or agent.

D.    An application for any Building or Engineering Permit shall not be deemed complete unless the application submittal includes one of the completed documents listed below. Any application for a land use action or permit shall either include one of the completed documents or the applicant shall simultaneously apply for an exemption or Hazardous Materials Permit along with, but separate from, the land use application.

1.     A signed and binding affidavit by the applicant stating the proposed use, project or establishment is exempt from the Hazardous Materials Permit process by virtue of the fact that the proposed use, project or establishment shall not contain any regulated materials.

2.     An Exemption Certificate.

3.     A Hazardous Materials Permit.

E.     Requirements for Establishing the Hazardous Materials Permit Process. The application for Hazardous Materials Screening shall provide the following information:

1.     An inventory of regulated materials to be used on the applicant’s premises.

2.     An estimate of the maximum quantity of such regulated materials to be used on the premises at any given time.

3.     A statement of how and in what manner the regulated materials are to be used.

4.     A statement describing the specific methods and technology to be employed to ensure the safe use and containment of the regulated materials.

F.     Upon receipt of the application for Hazardous Materials Screening, together with the required fee, the Planning Director, or designee, shall review the application for completeness and compliance and shall advise the applicant regarding submittal of any additional materials necessary to comply. If the Planning Director determines that additional material must be submitted, the applicant may submit such material within 180 days of receipt of the original application. If the Planning Director, or designee, determines the submittal to be complete, the Planning Director, or designee, shall review the Hazardous Materials Screening submittal and issue a determination within 10 business days.

G.    If a Hazardous Materials Containment and Mitigation Review are required, the applicant shall file an application for a review and pay a deposit sufficient to offset the actual cost including any consultant’s report(s) ordered by the Review Body. The amount of the deposit shall be based on a schedule that takes into account the size, scope and nature of the project, as well as the number, type and amount(s) of regulated materials in question. The City shall keep an accurate record of the direct, indirect and overhead costs of the Hazardous Materials Containment and Mitigation Review. Any unexpended portion of the deposit shall be refunded to the applicant. Any additional cost in excess of the deposit shall be due to the City upon completion of the Committee’s final report and paid before its release. Upon receipt of the application for Hazardous Materials Containment and Mitigation Review, together with the required fee, the Review Body shall review the application for completeness and compliance and shall advise the applicant regarding submittal of any additional materials necessary to comply with this section. If the Committee determines that additional material must be submitted, the applicant may submit such material within 180 days of receipt of the original application.

H.    Except as otherwise herein provided, the application for a Hazardous Materials Permit shall be reviewed and a decision rendered by the Review Body. The Review Committee shall be comprised of the following individuals or their designees:

1.     The Fire Marshal;

2.     The Public Works Director;

3.     The Planning Director;

4.     The Building Code Official.

I.      The Hazardous Material Containment and Mitigation Review shall determine if the proposed use, project or establishment, meets or can be modified or mitigated to meet, the criteria set forth.

J.      At the direction of the committee, the applicant shall supplement the information required for the Hazardous Materials Screening process by providing:

1.     Any applicable statement, standards or specifications describing the industry standards for the safe use and containment of the regulated material in question. Industry standards as used here include applicable governmental regulations as well as standards developed by industry trade, technical and scientific societies, associations, groups and institutes;

2.     A statement from the applicant demonstrating how the applicant’s specific methods and technology to be employed for the safe use and containment of the regulated materials fits with or deviates from the industry standards;

3.     Additional technical, engineering and/or scientific information necessary to the Committee’s decision;

4.     If the proposed project has already entered the design phase or if it is a replication of an existing development using the same or substantially similar technology, the Committee may request detailed drawings and specifications that show proposed plans and measures designed to ensure that the proposed use, project or establishment will achieve the criteria and meet all pertinent aspects of the Structural Specialty Code, the Uniform Fire Code, and any other pertinent City Ordinance related to the permitting, siting and/or regulation of such uses, projects or establishments. An application may be denied if the committee finds that the information, data, plans or drawings required in the decision-making process are inadequate, incomplete or have not been provided in a timely fashion.

K.    The Hazardous Materials Containment and Mitigation Review process shall include a specific notice to potentially affected property owners within an appropriate distance of the applicant’s site to achieve the intent of the Community Right-to-Know Act and any applicable State law or administrative rule. Alternatively, if allowed by state law or administrative rule, the notice may be published in the Newspaper of general circulation in the area at least 14 days prior to the hearing.

1.     Notification shall be as follows:

a.     At a minimum 500 feet from the subject property(ies);

b.     At the Planning Director’s discretion a larger notice area may be required;

c.     In the most severe cases, all residents of the City as well as county agencies (to determine if further county notice is required) shall receive notice.

L.     A public hearing on the Hazardous Materials Containment and Mitigation application shall be held within 30 days after the information is required as set forth in this Code. A public hearing notice shall be sent no less than 14 days prior to the public hearing. The hearing shall be open to the public and shall be conducted on the record of material and testimony submitted by the applicant, any consultant’s report requested by the Review Committee, and any other testimony received at the hearing. At the discretion of the Review Committee, the hearing may be continued, but in no case may the hearing be continued beyond 50 days after the initial filing has been deemed complete unless the applicant voluntarily waives state statutory rights to a final decision within a particular period of time. A decision shall be rendered by the Review Committee not more than 10 business days after the last evidentiary session.

M.    Pursuant to the Hazardous Materials Containment and Mitigation Review, the Review Committee may find that the use, project or establishment includes or proposes to include use of regulated materials, that:

1.     Are in fact, below the established minimum thresholds of concern and require no other regulatory action;

2.     Are deemed too dangerous, either alone or in combination with other materials either proposed for use by the applicant or preexisting in the proximate area, to allow the proposed use in a densely populated area, such as the TTCPA, thereby requiring denial of a Hazardous Materials Permit;

3.     Are above the established minimum threshold or in combination so as to be of concern, and are proposed for use in such manner that the best available technology and/or mitigation measures for that particular application have not been clearly demonstrated to be capable of meeting the criteria for approval, thereby requiring denial of a Hazardous Materials Permit;

4.     Are above the established minimum threshold or contained in combination so as to be of concern, but may be granted a Hazardous Materials Permit subject to certain conditions. Such conditions of approval may include, but are not limited to:

a.     Restrictions on the quantity of regulated materials allowed to be on site,

b.     Prohibitions against certain combinations of regulated materials being on site or within certain proximity of each other,

c.     Special conditions for storage; the application of best technology,

d.     Additional buffering or containment controls; provisions for regular and/or spot compliance inspections, reporting and inventory requirements, and/or periodic updating of emergency response plans,

e.     Notice to the Fire Department when materials are brought on site,

f.      Other mitigation measures as determined by the Committee to be appropriate to the specific application and circumstances such that upon implementing and maintaining the conditions of approval the risk that a proposed use, project or establishment will be a danger to public health or safety is significantly reduced.

N.    If the Committee finds that the applicant fails to meet the criteria and denies the issuance of a Hazardous Materials Permit, the denial shall not have bearing on other aspects of the use, project or establishment or on the use of other regulated materials for which a permit has or may be issued. Nor shall denial of the Hazardous Materials Permit preclude approval of any land use action, Building or Engineering Permit.

O.    If the Committee denies the application for a Hazardous Materials Permit, the applicant may, upon proper application and payment of the appropriate fee, appeal to the Molalla City Council. Any such appeal shall be filed within 7 days from the date the Notice of Decision was mailed. If no appeal is filed within 7 days, the City’s decision on the permit shall become final on the 8th day after the Notice of Decision was mailed. A hearing before the Council shall be based on the record compiled during the Hazardous Materials Containment and Mitigation Review. Notice of Appeal shall be provided to all participants in the Hazardous Materials Containment and Mitigation Review process. The criteria for decisions by the Council shall be those listed in this Code. Unless waived by the applicant, any decision of the Review Committee shall be rendered within 120 days of the date when the original application was deemed complete. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the decision of the Council is final.

P.     Because of the above procedure it is not necessarily a full engineering and structural or Fire Code review of the construction plans and specifications, participation in this process does not preclude further investigation, analysis and requirements at the Building Permit stage of development. However, an applicant may submit the materials and information developed for the Hazardous Materials Screening or Containment and Mitigation Review towards satisfaction of those requirements.

Q.    If the Committee finds the applicant fails to meet the criteria in this section and denies issuance of a Hazardous Materials Permit, but the applicant changes the process, procedures or use of the regulated material in question and prepares detailed plans and specifications clearly demonstrating that the approval can be met, the applicant may, upon proper application and payment of appropriate fees, file for reconsideration by the Committee.

R.     Except as provided herein, any affidavit, exemption certificate or Hazardous Materials Permit presented to the City pursuant to the requirements of this chapter, shall apply only to the specific use, project or establishment in question; shall remain valid throughout the permit period and shall be transferable to subsequent owners of the facility. However, if any variable important to the decision making process is altered or if there is a change of occupancy type, a change in process, a change in the type, quantity or combination of regulated materials used at the site, or any other consequential change that would materially affect the determination as to whether the use, project or establishment is permitted, the affidavit, exemption certificate or Hazardous Materials Permit shall be deemed null and void and a new application required. If not deemed exempt or granted a new Hazardous Materials Permit within 60 days of such change, such operations at the establishment shall be prohibited and shall cease. A continuing violation of prohibited operations shall be a violation for each such day of operation, shall be subject to the maximum fine as provided in the Molalla Municipal Code for each violation, and may be subject to other legal action. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.60.030 Requirements for establishing the hazardous materials permit standards.
A.    The Review Body shall hold public hearings and accept testimony in order to develop administrative rules to accomplish the purpose and requirements of this subsection. In establishing the rules, the Review Committee may also incorporate by reference, in whole or in part any rules, regulations, standards, guidelines and model regulations adopted or developed by federal, state, or local governments, public agencies, public interest groups or industry trade associations which the Committee deems germane and of value to the City.

B.     In developing and implementing the Hazardous Materials Permit process, the administrative rules may be approved and become effective in more than one phase. The first phase shall, at a minimum, establish:

1.     An “Exemption List” of regulated materials that are required to be periodically reported to the City, but that is exempt from the need for a Hazardous Materials Permit.

2.     A “Regulated Materials List” of hazardous materials, substances and agents that may require a Hazardous Materials Permit.

a.     A “Prohibited Materials List” of regulated materials that, by their nature and action, are deemed to be too potentially dangerous to the public health and safety, regardless of concentration or amount, to be allowed within densely populated areas.

b.     A procedure for updating the lists.

3.     The Review Committee shall then develop and recommend to the City Council consideration and adoption objectives standards for each listed regulated material which may require a Hazardous Materials Permit.

a.     The minimum threshold level of concern (concentration, volume, weight, etc.) that will trigger a Hazardous Materials Permit process.

b.     Impermissible combinations of selected regulated materials that may, due to chemical or synergistic reaction, trigger hazardous conditions beyond those caused absent the possibility of such combination or reaction.

c.     A standard set of conditions of approval (control technology, mitigating measures, etc.) to be applied where a given regulated material is beyond the minimum threshold of concern but where, if such conditions of approval are implemented and maintained, the regulated materials may be permitted.

d.     Minimum periodic reporting standards and procedures.

e.     Other objective standards deemed necessary to help preserve the health and safety of those within the area of concern.

4.     Whether or not a Hazardous Materials Permit is required under this subsection, if a use, project or establishment contains regulated materials, it shall also comply with the requirements of the Department of Environmental Quality concerning these matters. Unless specifically preempted by state or federal law in these matters, if there is a conflict between state or federal regulations and this subsection, the provisions of the state and federal government shall supersede and prevail. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 
Chapter 21.70 EXCAVATION, FILLS, GRADING AND EROSION CONTROL
21.70.010 Intent.
A.    It is the intent of this chapter to insure that any excavation or fill adjacent to public right-of-way or within a public easement, designated waterway, or floodplain overlay zone:

1.     Creates an imminent danger to public safety or public facilities.

2.     Does not create a public nuisance known to common law or in equity jurisprudence.

B.     The following definitions will be added to the definition section if they do not already exist: Adjacent, Approved, Approved Discharge Point, Backfill, Drainage Course, Excavation, Fill, Floodplain, Qualified Engineer, Waterway. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.70.020 Scope.
The scope of this chapter shall include the following items as they relate to excavations, and fills regulated by this chapter:

A.    Under what circumstances permits are required and specific exclusions;

B.     Limitations imposed on excavations and fills;

C.     Surface and subsurface water drainage;

D.    Inspection of excavation and fill work before, during, and after completions; and

E.     Alternatives to the limitations set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.70.030 Excavations—Permit required.
No person shall do any grading without first having obtained a grading permit from the Planning Department. In appropriate instances, the Planning Director may, upon showing by the applicant that 1 of the following categories applies, allow an exception to this chapter:

A.    An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a building, retaining wall or other structure authorized by a valid building permit. This shall not exempt any fill made with the material from such excavation nor exempt any excavation having an unsupported height greater than 5 feet after the completion of such structure.

B.     Cemetery graves.

C.     Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.

D.    Excavations for wells or utilities.

E.     Mining, quarrying, excavating processing, stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay where established and provided for by law, provided such operations do not affect the lateral support or increase the stresses in or pressure upon any adjacent or contiguous property.

F.     Exploratory excavations under the direction of soil engineers or engineering geologists.

G.    An excavation that:

1.     Is less than 2 feet in depth, and

2.     Does not create a cut in slope greater than 5 feet in height and steeper than 1½ horizontal to the vertical.

H.    A fill less than 1 foot in depth and placed on natural terrain with a slope flatter than 5 horizontal to 1 vertical, or less than 3 feet in depth, not intended to support structures, which does note exceed 50 cubic yards on any 1 lot and does not obstruct a drainage course.

I.      In all cases a permit shall be obtained when more than 50 cubic yards of soil is removed or added.

J.      All residential properties shall obtain a permit and submit a simple grading plan. Single-family lots shall provide a grading and erosion control plan at time of subdivision grading and at time of permit issuance for each lot.

K.    A permit is required for the placement of any fill material adjoining a public right-of-way or easement (or future public right-of-way or easement or within or adjacent to a designated waterway or within a floodplain overly zone) or for moving more than 50 cubic yards. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.70.040 Permit issuance.
An applicant shall complete a grading, excavation, fill and erosion control permit application provided by the Planning Director. The form shall disclose or be accompanied by the following information:

A.    Identification of the work as excavation or fill.

B.     Legal description of property involved.

C.     Identification of soil type if soil is to be removed from 1 location and placed in fills at another location.

D.    Each application for a permit under this section shall be accompanied by two sets of drawings. The minimum required shall be a plan view of the property drawn to suitable scale with the following:

1.     Lot lines shown and their dimensions given.

2.     North arrow.

3.     Street and curb line locations and elevations (if applicable).

4.     Both existing and final grades depicted by contour lines at 2-foot intervals. Contours shall not be interpolated from U.S.G.S. contour maps.

5.     Intended method of proper stormwater drainage (if applicable).

6.     Recorded easement and right-of-way locations.

7.     The director may require additional information on the plan view or require cross-section views. In addition, the Planning Director may require additional data or studies necessary to evaluate the impact of the proposed work; and, in geologically hazardous areas, floodplain overlay zone or other unstable areas, may require information such as the name and address of the permittee, property owner, owner’s engineer, contractor, and other persons associated with the work.

8.     The application shall be accompanied by the written concurrence, in recordable form, of the holders of any private easements and rights-of-way affected by the proposed excavation or fill.

9.     The Planning Director shall either issue or deny the permit, or notify the applicant that additional information is required pursuant to this section. In the event that additional information is required, the Planning Director shall either issue or deny the permit, or notify the applicant of what additional time will be necessary to review and evaluate the additional information submitted.

10.   In the event a permit is denied, the Planning Director shall furnish the applicant with a written statement of the reasons therefor.

E.     Applications for development over 5 acres in size shall include an engineers report.

F.     The Building Official may request an engineers report for any application he or she deems necessary.

G.    All fill shall be compacted to a minimum 90% of maximum density as determined by the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) Test D1557-78 Method A. Field density shall be determined in accordance with Test (ASTM) D1556-82 or equivalent as approved by the Building Official. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.70.050 Scope of work authorized by permit.
A.    The issuance of a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall be held to authorize work only in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the approved plans, and work necessarily implied therefrom.

B.     The issuance of such a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for or approval of any violation of the provisions of this chapter, or any other applicable law or ordinance. The issuance of a permit based on submitted plans shall not thereafter prevent the Planning Director from requiring correction of errors or apparent violations contained therein, or from preventing operations being carried on there under when in violation of any applicable law or ordinance. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.70.060 Plan review and permit fees.
Every application for a plan review and for a permit required by this chapter shall be accompanied by a fee as prescribed by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.70.070 Term and termination of permit.
Every permit issued by the Planning Director under the provisions of this chapter shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized by the permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date the permit is issued or if the work authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. Before the work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be obtained accompanied by a fee set by City Council resolution. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.70.080 Prohibited fills—Particular standards.
A.    Fill shall not obstruct a natural drainage course unless provisions for an alternative drainage method are made and approved by the Oregon Division of State Lands and the Public Works Director.

B.     Fill shall not be placed in a recorded or platted easement designated for public utilities without consent of the easement holder or, in the case of platted easements, the Public Works Director.

C.     Fill shall not be placed in floodplain overlay zones and waterways, except when such fills are placed under a permit issued by the Oregon Division of State Lands. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.70.090 Alternatives.
The limitations imposed in this chapter may be varied by the Planning Director if a qualified engineer designs and oversees the prescribed work and provides the Planning Director with all supportive data necessary to establish, to the Planning Director’s satisfaction, that the alternative design provides equal or better safety, durability, and protection of adjacent property than compliance with the standards of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.70.100 Surface and subsurface drainage.
Excavation or fill shall not create a slope that causes surface drainage to flow over adjacent public or private property in a volume or location materially different from that which existed before the excavation or fill. Surface and subsurface drainage caused or affected by changing of grade or uncovering subsurface sources such as springs shall be collected by an approved means and carried to an approved discharge point. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.70.110 Grading inspections.
A.    Slopes. The faces of cut and fill slopes shall be prepared and maintained to control against erosion. This control shall consist of effective planting or such other measures as the Public Works Director may determine. The protection for the slopes shall be installed as soon as practicable and prior to final approval. Where cut slopes are not subject to erosion due to the erosion resistant character of the materials, such protection may be omitted.

B.     Other devices or methods shall be employed to control erosion and provide safety. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

20.70.120 Inspections.
The Planning Director shall be notified at least 24 hours, but no more than 72 hours prior to the commencement of any excavation or fill work requiring a permit. Inspections may occur at any time throughout the project. A work schedule may be required at the discretion of the Planning Director when notice of such requirements is given at the time of the permit issuance. A final inspection is required of all fill work and an approved set of plans shall be provided to the inspector. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 
Chapter 21.80 DARK SKIES
21.80.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the Molalla Dark Skies Ordinance is to regulate outdoor lighting in order to reduce or prevent light pollution. This shall mean, to the extent reasonably possible, reducing or preventing glare and light trespass and conserving energy while also promoting community safety and security. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.80.020 Scope and applicability.
A.    New Lighting. All exterior outdoor lighting installed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter in any and all zones in the City shall conform to the requirements established by this chapter and other applicable ordinances unless otherwise exempted. This chapter does not apply to indoor lighting.

B.     Existing Lighting. All existing lighting shall be modified to conform to the provisions of this chapter at the time the City issues a development permit or building permit for the property on which the lighting is located. If the value of work done to the location exceeds $50,000.00, all lighting on the property must be brought into full compliance before reoccupation or reuse.

C.     Nonconforming Use or Structure. If a nonconforming use or structure has been abandoned for more than 12 months, all lighting on the property must be brought into full compliance before reoccupation or reuse.

D.    Conformity shall occur prior to issuance of Certificate of Occupancy, Final Inspection, or Final Plat Recording, when applicable. For other permits, the applicant shall have a maximum of 30 days before reoccupation or reuse.

E.     Preferred Light Source. Low-pressure sodium (LPS) lamps are the preferred illumination source throughout the City and their use is encouraged.

F.     When an existing fixture is replaced, the replacement fixture shall meet the requirements of this chapter.

G.    Lighting may be more restrictive elsewhere in the Molalla Municipal Code, but not less restrictive.

H.    All governmental agencies, federal, state or county, which operate within the City limits of Molalla, may obtain exceptions as approved by the City Manager and/or City Council to comply with the provisions of this chapter.

I.      In the event a provision of this chapter conflicts with a provision of any other chapter of the Molalla Municipal Code, the more restrictive requirement shall apply. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.80.030 Exemptions and exceptions.
A.    Residential fixtures consisting of lamp types with 2,050 lumens or less. Examples include:

1.     100 watt standard incandescent and less;

2.     100 watt mid break tungsten-halogen (quartz) and less;

3.     25 watt T-12 cool white fluorescent and less;

4.     18-watt low pressure sodium and less.

B.     Federally funded and state funded roadway construction projects to the extent necessary to comply with federal and state requirements.

C.     Fossil Fuel Light. Fossil fuel light produced directly or indirectly by the combustion of natural gas or other utility-type fossil fuels.

D.    Full cutoff street lighting, which is part of a federal, state, or municipal installation.

E.     Holiday lighting.

F.     Lighting of sports facilities or stadiums.

G.    Specialized lighting necessary for the safety, such as navigation or runway lighting of airports, or temporary lighting associated with emergency operations, road hazard warnings, etc.

H.    Traffic control signals and devices. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.80.040 Approved materials and methods of installation.
A.    The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of any design, material or method of installation or operation not specifically prohibited by this chapter, provided such alternative design material or method conforms to the intent of this division and has been approved by the building official.

B.     The Building Official may approve an alternative design provided the Building Official finds that:

1.     It complies with the applicable specific requirements of this chapter.

2.     It has been designed or approved by a registered professional engineer and complies with the purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.80.050 Submittals.
All applications for building permits or land use planning review that include installation of outdoor lighting fixtures shall include lighting plans conforming to the provisions of this chapter. The Planning Director and/or Building Official shall have the authority to request additional information in order to achieve the purpose of this chapter.

A.    The submittal shall contain the following information and submitted as part of the site plan to the Planning and Building Department for approval:

1.     Plans indicating the location, type, intensity, and height of luminaries including both building and ground mounted fixtures.

2.     A description of the luminaries, including lamps, poles or other supports and shielding devices, which may be provided as catalogue illustrations from the manufacturer.

3.     Photometric data, such as that furnished by the manufacturer, showing the angle of light emission and the foot-candles on the ground.

B.     Applications for single/multifamily residential or other projects where any single outdoor light fixture exceeds 2,050 lumens output shall be required to comply with subsection A above. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.80.060 General standards.
The following general standards apply to all outdoor lighting installed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter unless exempted above:

A.    Area Lights. All area lights, including street lights and parking area lighting shall be full cutoff fixtures and are encouraged to be 85-degree full cut-off type fixtures. Street lights shall be high pressure sodium, low-pressure sodium, or metal halide, unless otherwise determined by the City that another type is more efficient street lights along residential streets shall be limited to 70-watt high-pressure sodium (hps) light. Street lights along nonresidential streets or at intersections shall be limited to 100 watts hps, except that lights at major intersections on state highways shall be limited to 200 watts hps. If the City permits a light type other than high-pressure sodium the equivalent output shall be the limit for the other light type.

B.     Canopy Lights. All lighting shall be recessed sufficiently so as to ensure that no light source is visible from or causes glare on public rights-of-way or adjacent property.

C.     Illumination Levels. Illumination levels and uniformity shall be in accordance with current recommended practices of the Illuminating Engineering Society. Recommended standards for the illuminating engineering society shall not be exceeded.

D.    Temporary Lighting. Temporary lighting that conforms to the requirements of this ordinance shall be allowed. Nonconforming temporary exterior lighting may be permitted by the Building Official only after considering:

1.     The public and private benefits which will result from the temporary lighting.

2.     Any annoyance or safety problems that may result from the use of the temporary lighting.

3.     The duration of the temporary nonconforming lighting. The applicant shall submit a detailed description of the proposed temporary nonconforming lighting to the Building Official.

E.     Towers. All radio, communication and navigation towers that require lights shall have dual lighting capabilities. Lights may only be used in accordance with FAA requirements. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.80.070 Prohibited lighting.
A.    Newly installed fixtures, which are not full cutoff fixtures.

B.     Lighting which presents a clear hazard to motorists, cyclists, or pedestrians.

C.     Laser Source Light. The use of laser source light or any similar high intensity light for outdoor advertising or entertainment is prohibited. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.80.080 Appeals.
If an application is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Planning Commission. The fee for an appeal shall be set by City Council resolution. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.80.090 Violations.
This section may be enforced on the basis of a formal complaint filed in writing with the City. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.80.100 Lighting requirements.
 

Table 21.80.100.1 - Requirements for Lighting

 

Lamp Type

25

30

35

40

50

60

75

100

100+

Low Pressure Sodium

Unshielded

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

High Pressure Sodium

Unshielded

Unshielded

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Metal Halide

Unshielded

Unshielded

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Fluorescent

Unshielded

Unshielded

Unshielded

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Quartz

Unshielded

Unshielded

Unshielded

Unshielded

Unshielded

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Tungsten Halogen

Unshielded

Unshielded

Unshielded

Unshielded

Unshielded

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Mercury Vapor

Unshielded

Unshielded

Unshielded

Unshielded

Unshielded

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Directed Shield

Incandescent

Unshielded

Unshielded

Unshielded

Unshielded

Unshielded

Unshielded

Unshielded

Unshielded

Unshielded

 

A.    For the purpose of this section wattage ratings for lamp types will be for either a single lamp source or multiple lamp sources when installed in a cluster.

B.     Lamp types not listed in the table may be approved for use by the Building Official providing installation of these lamps conforms to the lumen limits established in this section.

C.     Glass tubes filled with argon, neon or krypton do not require shielding.

 

Table 21.80.100.2 - Typical Lumen Values for Various Lamp Wattage*

 

Wattage

Low Pressure Sodium

High Pressure Sodium

Metal Halide

Fluorescent

Quartz

Mercury Vapor

Incandescent

9

-

-

-

600

-

-

-

18

1,800

-

-

-

-

-

-

35

4,725

2,250

-

-

-

-

-

40

-

4,000

-

2,250

-

-

480

50

-

-

-

-

1,400

1,140

480

55

7,925

-

-

-

-

-

-

60

-

-

-

-

-

-

870

70

-

5,800

5,500

-

-

-

-

75

-

-

-

-

-

2,800

1,190

90

14,400

-

-

-

-

-

-

100

-

9,500

8,000

-

-

4,300

1,750

110

-

-

-

6,600

-

-

-

150

-

16,000

-

-

-

-

22,850

175

-

-

14,000

-

-

8,600

-

200

-

22,000

-

-

-

-

44,010

250

-

27,500

20,500

-

-

12,100

-

300

-

-

-

-

-

-

6,360

400

-

50,000

36,000

-

-

22,500

-

500

-

-

-

-

-

-

10,850

*       Taken from data supplied by Portland General Electric – Energy Resource Center

 

(Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

Chapter 21.90 TREES
21.90.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a system for tree retention to support and enhance the City’s theme as a recreation community. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.90.020 Tree retention.
A.    A group of trees that is, on average, 8 feet tall or greater shall not be reduced by more than 30%.

B.     This section does not apply to hazardous trees or when there is no practicable alternative to removing the trees, as determined by the Planning Director in the Director’s sole discretion. A “hazardous tree” is one that has foreseeable potential for falling and causing property damage or personal injury. Within commercial and industrial zones, an arborist shall provide a written statement verifying the hazard. In residential zones, the property owner shall provide a written statement and photographs verifying the hazard.

C.     Any tree that is removed shall be replanted on the same lot within 1 year unless the Planning Director determines that an adequate number of trees remain on the property.

D.    All new development shall incorporate trees within the development.

E.     When a protected tree lies within an area where development is scheduled to occur and no alternative exists to removing the tree, a new tree must be planted for every tree that is removed. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

 

21.90.030 Permit required.
A permit shall be obtained for removal of any tree that stands 8 feet tall or higher. A fee shall be paid as approved by the City Council. (Ord. 2010-15 §1; Ord. 2010-04 §1)

