CITY CODE
of
MILTON-FREEWATER
OREGON
Current through ordinances up to and including ordinance 988, passed February
12, 2018
 
Published by:
STERLING CODIFIERS
an
American Legal Publishing Company
One West Fourth Street  *  3rd Floor  *  Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
The City Code of the City of Milton-Freewater has been kept current by regular
supplementation. In 2008, Sterling Codifiers began providing supplement service
for the City Code.
This City Code of the City of Milton-Freewater, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 988, passed February 12, 2018.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of
this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular
provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
PENDING ORDINANCES
 
MILTON-FREEWATER CHARTER
BE IT ENACTED BY THE PEOPLE OF THE CITY OF MILTON-FREEWATER, UMATILLA COUNTY,
OREGON:
CHAPTER I
NAME, BOUNDARIES AND SUCCESSION
Section 1. Title Of Act.
This act shall be known as the 1993 CHARTER OF THE CITY OF MILTON-FREEWATER,
UMATILLA COUNTY, STATE OF OREGON.
Section 2. Name Of City.
The city of Milton-Freewater, Oregon, continues under this charter to be a
municipal corporation with the name "Milton-Freewater."
Section 3. Boundaries.
The city includes all territory within its boundaries as they now exist or
hereafter are modified by annexation. The custodian of the city's records shall
keep an accurate, current description of the boundaries and make a copy of it
available for public inspection in the city during regular city office hours.
Section 4. Ward Boundaries.
The city is divided into three wards, the boundaries of which may be changed by
the council as necessary. A copy of the ward boundary map shall be kept at city
hall and copies made available during regular city hall office hours.
CHAPTER II
POWERS
Section 1. Powers Of The City.
The city has all powers that the constitutions, statutes, and common law of the
United States and of this state now or hereafter expressly or impliedly grant
or allow the city, as fully as though this charter specifically enumerated each
of those powers.
Section 2. Construction Of Powers.
In this charter, no specification of a power is exclusive or restricts
authority that the city would have if the power were not specified. The charter
shall be liberally construed, so that the city may exercise fully all its
powers possible under this charter and under United States and Oregon law. All
powers are continuing unless a specific grant of power clearly indicates the
contrary.
Section 3. Distribution Of Powers.
Except as this charter prescribes otherwise and as the Oregon constitution
reserves municipal legislative power to the voters of the city, all powers of
the city are vested in the council.
CHAPTER III
FORM OF GOVERNMENT
Section 1. Council.
The council shall be composed of a mayor and six councilors, or, in case of one
or more vacancies in the council, the council members whose offices are not
vacant. There shall be one councilor elected from each of the three wards and
three councilors elected from the city at large. The mayor shall be elected
from the city at large.
Section 2. Councilors.
   (1)   The councilors in office at the time this charter takes effect
continue in office until the expiration of the term to which they were elected.
   (2)   At the first biennial general election following the adoption of this
charter, three councilors shall be elected from the city at large. Councilors
elected to at large positions no. 2 and no. 3 shall be elected to serve four
year terms at the 1994 biennial general election. At large position no. 1 shall
serve an initial two year term. The at large position no. 1 councilor shall be
elected for a four year term at the 1996 biennial general election.
   (3)   A councilor shall be elected to ward position no. 1 at the 1994
biennial general election to serve a four year term. Councilors shall be
elected to ward positions no. 2 and no. 3 at the 1996 biennial general election
to serve four year terms.
Section 3. Mayor.
The mayor is elected from the city at large. The term of office of the mayor in
office when this charter is adopted continues until the mayor's term of office
expires. At the 1996 general election and each subsequent general election
prior to the expiration of the mayor's term of office, a mayor shall be elected
for a four year term.
Section 4. Terms Of Office.
The term of office of an elective officer who is elected at a general election
begins at the first council meeting of the year immediately after the election
and continues until the successor to the office assumes the office.
Section 5. City Manager, City Attorney And Municipal Judge.
Additional offices of the city are the city manager, city attorney and
municipal judge, each of whom shall hold office subject to the discretion of
the council and may be removed by it at any time.
Section 6. Compensation Of Officers.
The council shall fix the compensation of all appointive and elective officers
of the city. The council may change the salaries of the mayor and councilmen,
but no increase in salaries shall take effect until after the first regular
election subsequent to the granting of the increase.
Section 7. Qualifications Of Officers.
   (1)   An elective city officer shall be a qualified elector under the state
constitution and shall have resided in the city the six months immediately
before being elected or appointed to the office. In this subsection, "city"
means an area inside the city limits at the time of the election or
appointment.
   (2)   Councilors elected from a ward shall be a resident of the ward from
which elected.
   (3)   No person may be a candidate at a single election for more than one
elective city office.
   (4)   The council is the final judge of the election and qualifications of
its members.
   (5)   The qualifications of appointive officers of the city are whatever the
council prescribes or authorizes.
Section 8. Oath.
Before assuming city office, an officer shall take an oath or shall affirm that
he or she will faithfully perform the duties of the office and support the
constitution and laws of the United States and of the state of Oregon.
CHAPTER IV
COUNCIL
Section 1. Meetings.
The council shall hold regular meetings at least once a month at a place in the
city which it may designate and shall adopt rules for the governing of its
members and proceedings.
Section 2. Quorum.
A majority of the members of the council, excluding the mayor, shall constitute
a quorum to do business, but a smaller number may meet and compel the
attendance of absent members in the manner specified by ordinance.
Section 3. Mayor's Duties.
   (1)   When present at council meetings the mayor shall:
      (a)   Preside over deliberations of the council,
      (b)   Preserve order,
      (c)   Enforce council rules, and
      (d)   Determine the order of business under the rules.
   (2)   The mayor may temporarily cease to chair a council meeting and
delegate the functions described in subsection (1) to another council member.
   (3)   The mayor may vote only to break a tie.
Section 4. President Of The Council.
At its first meeting after this charter takes effect and thereafter at its
first meeting of each odd-numbered year, the council shall elect a president
from its membership. In the mayor's absence from a council meeting the
president shall preside over it. Whenever the mayor is unable on account of
illness or other cause to perform the functions of his or her office, the
president of the council shall act as mayor. When the president functions as
the mayor at a council meeting, the president shall retain the right and duty
to vote as a councilor, and not as a mayor, and the president shall be
considered a councilor, and not a mayor, for the purposes of determining
whether a quorum is present.
Section 5. Vote, Required.
Except as this charter otherwise provides, the concurrence of a majority of the
members of the council present at a council meeting, excluding the mayor unless
the mayor's vote is needed to break a tie vote, shall be necessary to decide
any question before the council.
CHAPTER V
POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS
Section 1. Mayor.
The mayor shall appoint the committees provided for under the rules of the
council. The mayor shall sign all approved records of proceedings of the
council. The mayor shall have no veto power and shall sign all ordinances
passed by the council within three days after their passage. Upon the approval
of the council the mayor shall endorse all bonds of officers of the city.
Section 2. City Manager.
   (1)   Qualifications. The city manager shall be the administrative head of
the government of the city. The manager shall be chosen by the council without
regard to political considerations and solely with reference to his or her
executive and administrative qualifications. The manager need not be a resident
of the city or of the state at the time of his or her appointment. Before
taking office the manager shall file with the city a bond for faithful
performance of his or her duties as manager, payable to the city in the amount
of not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), or a greater amount which
may be prescribed by the council, the premium of which the city shall pay.
   (2)   Term. The manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term and may be
removed at the pleasure of the council. Upon any vacancy occurring in the
office of the city manager the council shall appoint a new city manager within
a reasonable time.
   (3)   Powers And Duties. The powers and duties of the city manager shall be
as follows:
      (a)   The manager shall devote his or her entire time to the discharge of
his or her official duties, attend all meetings of the council unless excused
therefrom by the council or the mayor, keep the council advised at all times of
the affairs and needs of the city and make reports annually or more frequently
if requested by the council of all the affairs and departments of the city.
      (b)   The manager shall see that all ordinances are enforced and that the
provisions of all franchises, leases, contracts, permits and privileges granted
by the city are observed.
      (c)   The manager shall appoint and remove all appointive city officers
and employees, except as this charter otherwise provides and shall have general
supervision and control over them and their work, with power to transfer
employees from one department to another, and shall exercise supervision over
the control of the departments to the end of obtaining the utmost efficiency in
each of them. The manager shall have no control over the council or the
judicial activities of the municipal judge.
      (d)   The manager shall act as purchasing agent for all departments of
the city. All purchases shall be made by requisition signed by the manager.
      (e)   The manager shall be responsible for preparing and submitting to
the budget committee the annual budget estimates and such reports as that body
requests.
      (f)   The manager shall supervise the operation of all public utilities
owned and operated by the city and shall have general supervision over all city
property.
      (g)   The manager shall be entitled to sit with the council and to take
part in the discussion of the matters coming before the council but shall have
no vote on questions before the council.
      (h)   In the event of the absence, illness, or inability for any reason
of the manager to perform his or her duties, the council shall appoint a
manager pro tem, who shall possess the powers and discharge the duties of the
manager during such absence or disability only; provided, however, that no
manager pro tem shall have authority to appoint or remove any city official or
employee except with the approval of a majority of the council.
Section 3. Municipal Judge.
The municipal judge shall be the judicial officer of the city. The municipal
judge shall be appointed and may be removed by the council. He or she shall
hold within the city a court known as the municipal court of the city of
Milton-Freewater, Umatilla County, Oregon. Except on nonjudicial days, court
shall be open for the transaction of judicial business. All areas within the
city shall be within the territorial jurisdiction of the court. The municipal
judge shall exercise original and exclusive jurisdiction of all crimes and
offenses defined and made punishable by ordinances of the city and of all
actions brought to recover or enforce forfeitures or penalties defined or
authorized by an ordinance of the city. He or she shall have authority to issue
process for the arrest of any person accused of an offense against the
ordinances of the city, to commit any such person to jail or admit him or her
to bail pending trial, to issue subpoenas, to compel witnesses to appear and
testify in court on the trial of any cause before the judge, to compel
obedience to such subpoenas, to render judgment which may include incarceration
and fines, to issue any process necessary to carry into effect the judgment of
the court, and to punish witnesses and others for contempt of the court. When
not governed by ordinances or this charter, all proceedings in the municipal
court for the violation of a city ordinance shall be governed by the applicable
general laws of the state governing justices of the peace and justice courts.
Trials in the municipal court of cases for violation of city ordinances shall
be had without juries, except as otherwise provided in the constitution of the
United States and of the state of Oregon. The council may authorize the
municipal judge to appoint municipal judges pro tem for terms of office set by
the judge or the council. Notwithstanding this section, the council may
transfer some or all of the functions of the municipal court to an appropriate
state court.
CHAPTER VI
VACANCIES IN OFFICE
Section 1. What Creates Vacancy.
An office shall be deemed vacant upon the incumbent's death, adjudicated
incompetency, recall from office, incapacitation, conviction of a felony,
resignation or absence from the city for 30 days without the consent of the
council in case of mayor or councilor, upon the incumbent ceasing to possess
the qualifications necessary, for his or her office, or upon the failure of the
person elected or appointed to an office to qualify therefor within three days
after the time for his or her term of office to commence, or in the case of
mayor or councilor, upon his or her absence from meetings of the council for 60
days without the consent of the council.
Section 2. Filling Of Vacancies.
A vacancy in the council shall be filled by appointment by a majority of the
council positions currently filled, not including the mayor, unless the mayor's
vote is needed to break a tie. The appointee's term of office runs from the
time of his or her qualifying for the office after the appointment and until
expiration of the term of the predecessor who has left the office vacant.
During a council member's disability to serve on the council or during a
member's absence from the city, a majority of the other council members, not
including the mayor, unless the mayor's vote is needed to break a tie, may by
appointment fill the vacancy pro tem.
CHAPTER VII
ORDINANCES
Section 1. Enacting Clause.
The enacting clause of all ordinances hereafter enacted by the council shall
be, "THE CITY OF MILTON-FREEWATER ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS:"
Section 2. Introduction, Reading And Passage.
Every ordinance shall be fully and distinctly read in an open council meeting
on two different days previous to being put upon its final passage. Any
ordinance, however, may be introduced, read twice, once in full and once by
title, and put on its final passage at a single meeting by an unanimous vote of
all members of the council present at the meeting, not including the mayor.
Upon the final vote on any ordinance, the ayes and nays of the members of the
council shall be taken and recorded in the journal. If the ordinance passes,
the custodian of city records shall endorse it with the date of its passage and
the endorser's name and title of office, and within three days thereafter, the
mayor shall sign it with his or her name, and the mayor's title and date of
signature. With unanimous consent of the council, not including the mayor, any
reading of an ordinance required by this section may be by title only, and full
reading waived.
Section 3. When Ordinances Take Effect.
An ordinance enacted by the council shall take effect on the thirtieth (30th)
day after its enactment and publication. When the council deems it advisable,
however, an ordinance may provide a later time for it to take effect, and, in
case of an emergency, it may take effect immediately. For the purpose of this
section, "publication" means making one copy of the full text of the ordinance
available for public inspection at the office of the city manager and printing
the title only in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
CHAPTER VIII
ELECTIONS
Section 1. State Law.
Except as this charter or a city ordinance prescribes to the contrary, a city
election shall conform to state law applicable to the election.
Section 2. Nominations.
A person may be nominated in a manner prescribed by general ordinance to run
for an elective office of the city.
CHAPTER IX
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Section 1. Procedure.
The time, method, and manner of making street, sidewalk, sewer, and other
public improvements, the method of financing improvements, and the procedure
for vacating, appointing, or abandoning streets and other public improvements
shall be governed by ordinance.
Section 2. Special Assessments.
The procedure for fixing, levying, and collecting special assessments against
real property for public improvements or other public services shall be
governed by general ordinance.
CHAPTER X
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 1. Limitation Of Indebtedness.
Except by consent of the voters the voluntary floating indebtedness of the city
for general purposes shall not exceed $25,000.00 at any one time provided, that
the legally authorized debt of the city of Milton-Freewater existing at the
time of the adoption of this charter shall not be included in such indebtedness
for purposes of calculating the limitation.
Section 2. Set Aside Of Utility Revenues.
The city council is authorized to set aside for general fund purposes not less
than three percent (3%) of the gross revenues of city utilities, and not more
than eight percent (8%) of such gross revenues.
Section 3. Time Charter Takes Effect.
This charter shall take effect January 1, 1994.
Section 4. Repealing Clause.
All charter provisions adopted, before this charter takes effect, are hereby
repealed.
Section 5. Continuation Of Ordinances.
Insofar as consistent with this charter, and until amended or repealed, all
ordinances in force when the charter takes effect retain the effect they have
at that time.
Section 6. Severability.
The terms of this charter are severable. If a part of the charter is held
invalid, that invalidity does not affect another part of the charter, except as
the logical relation between the two parts requires.
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alteration
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the council, this code is hereby declared to be and shall
hereafter constitute the official city code of the city of Milton-Freewater.
This code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the MILTON-FREEWATER CITY
CODE, and it is hereby published by authority of the council and shall be kept
up to date as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter under the direction of the city attorney, acting for the
said city council. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein
shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause,
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (1978 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. However, this section shall not be construed so as to
prohibit the receipt of ordinances in their original form. (1978 Code; amd.
Ord. 668, 10-8-1984)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately prepared for
insertion in its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement
page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy
of this code. (1978 Code; amd. Ord. 668, 10-8-1984)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
city council. The city manager shall see that the replacement pages are
properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the city
manager. Any person having in his custody an official copy of this code shall
make every effort to maintain said code in an up to date and efficient manner.
He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such
are delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the city
manager. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and shall be
returned to the office of the city manager when directed so to do by order of
the city council. (1978 Code; amd. Ord. 795, 6-27-1994)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
city; and all special ordinances. (1978 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case this code shall be considered as amending such ordinance
or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1978 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable, if
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to
any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city herein repealed
and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this code shall be
deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this code. (1978 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this code, or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would
have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1978 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is
used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single
matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive
words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this code by words
importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters,
parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be
deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be
applied to any section of this code, which contains any express provision
excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context may be
repugnant thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city has been changed
in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section", or "subsection"
or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only.
Such change to the city ordinances is not meant to amend passage and effective
dates, of such original ordinances. (1978 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
CITY: The city of Milton-Freewater, county of Umatilla, state of Oregon.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Milton-Freewater".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business,
profession, or occupation.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession,
or occupation.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the city; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard
to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the
community.
OCCUPANT: The word "occupant" applied to a building or land shall include any
person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether
alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Milton-Freewater".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business, or
profession.
OWNER: The word "owner" applied to a building or land shall include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of
a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government, or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels, effects,
evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary
obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred,
increased, defeated, discharged, or diminished and every right or interest
therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STREET: Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places, and sidewalks.
TENANT: The word "tenant" applied to a building or land shall include any
person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether
alone or with others.
WHOLESALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to
relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to
persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in
the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his
proper mark. (Ord. 796)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (1978 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: Application Of Provisions
1-4-2: Liability Of Officers
1-4-3: Classes Of Offenses
1-4-4: Disposition Of Offenders
1-4-5: Violation Of A Provision Identical To A State Statute
1-4-6: Establishment Of Assessment On Certain Violations Of Ordinances For
Police Training Purposes
1-4-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The penalties provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every
section of this code as though it were a part of each and every separate
section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code where
a duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action which is of a
continuing nature is forbidden, or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed
guilty of an offense unless this code otherwise provides. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed for each day such duty or obligation remains
unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in
this code. (Ord. 789)
   B.   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code, not more than one recovery shall be
had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation
of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to
bar any other penalty being enforced.
   C.   Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do an act constitutes
a breach of any section or provision of this code, and there shall be no fine
or penalties specifically declared for such breach, the general provisions of
this chapter designating penalties as set forth in section
1-4-4 of this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 780)
1-4-2: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intent of
the council to impose such a fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (Ord. 780)
1-4-3: CLASSES OF OFFENSES:
   A.   An offense is conduct for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment or
to a fine is imposed by a provision of this code. An offense is either a
misdemeanor or a violation, unless otherwise specifically provided for.
   B.   An offense is a misdemeanor if it is so designated in provisions of
this code or if a person convicted thereof may be sentenced to a term of
imprisonment.
   C.   An offense is a violation if:
      1.   The offense is so designated in the ordinance defining the offense;
      2.   The ordinance prescribing the penalty for the offense provides that
the offense is punishable only by a fine, forfeiture, fine and forfeiture or
other civil penalty; or
      3.   The offense is declared to be a violation for purposes of the
particular case, as provided in subsection D of this section.
   D.   Upon appearance of the defendant upon any misdemeanor charge other than
a misdemeanor created under the Oregon vehicle code, and before asking how the
defendant pleads to the charge, the court may declare on the record its
intention, absent objection by the prosecuting city attorney, to treat the
offense in the case as a violation. If the prosecuting city attorney does not
object to such treatment, the accusatory instrument shall be amended to
denominate as a violation, the offense in the case, and the offense for
purposes of the case shall thereafter be treated as a violation, subject to a
fine as provided for in this chapter.
If the prosecuting city attorney does object, the offense in such case shall
thereafter continue to be treated as a misdemeanor. If the offense is
denominated a violation pursuant to this subsection, the court shall when it
enters judgment in the case clearly denominate the offense as a violation in
the judgment order. Nothing stated in this subsection shall prohibit the citing
officer or prosecuting city attorney from moving the court for treatment of the
offense in the case as a violation at any time during the proceedings, and the
city officer or city attorney, as the case may be, upon subsequent approval by
the court designate upon the accusatory instrument that the offense be treated
as a violation when the accusatory instrument is completed in the first
instance or when thereafter amended.
   E.   Conviction of a violation does not give rise to any disability or legal
disadvantage based on conviction of a crime. (Ord. 780)
1-4-4: DISPOSITION OF OFFENDERS:
   A.   Misdemeanors:
      1.   Sentences for imprisonment for misdemeanors shall be for a definite
term. If the municipal court sentences an offender to imprisonment for the
commission of a misdemeanor, the court shall fix the term of imprisonment
within the maximum limitation of six (6) months.
      2.   A sentence to pay a fine for a misdemeanor shall be a sentence to
pay an amount, fixed by the court, not exceeding one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) unless otherwise provided for in this code. In addition to such
fine, the court may, in its discretion, impose a sentence that the defendant
pay restitution to the victim of the offense for any pecuniary loss.
   B.   Violations: A sentence to pay a fine for a violation shall be a
sentence to pay an amount, fixed by the court, not exceeding five hundred
dollars ($500.00), unless otherwise provided for in this code. In addition to
such fine, the court may, in its discretion, impose a sentence that the
defendant pay restitution to the victim of the offense for any pecuniary loss.
   C.   Imprisonment: In the disposition of a misdemeanor, the court may, but
is not required to, impose both a sentence of imprisonment and a sentence to
pay a fine. (Ord. 780)
1-4-5: VIOLATION OF A PROVISION IDENTICAL TO A STATE STATUTE:
Violation of a provision identical to a state statute is punishable by a fine
not to exceed the penalty prescribed by the state statute. (Ord. 780)
1-4-6: ESTABLISHMENT OF ASSESSMENT ON CERTAIN VIOLATIONS OF ORDINANCES FOR
POLICE TRAINING PURPOSES:
   A.   Assessments shall be imposed whenever the municipal court of the city
of Milton-Freewater imposes a fine for infractions, violations or bail
forfeitures.
   B.   Exceptions to this assessment are crimes, misdemeanors and parking
violations.
   C.   The assessment shall be paid to the city of Milton-Freewater.
   D.   The amount of the assessments shall be set by resolution.
   E.   When any deposit of bail is made for an offense to which this section
applies, the person making such deposit shall also deposit a sufficient amount
to include the assessment prescribed by resolution as authorized by subsection
D of this section. The assessment shall be in addition to the fine or
forfeiture.
   F.   If bail is forfeited, the assessment prescribed shall be deposited as
provided for in subsection E of this section. If bail is returned, the
assessment thereon shall also be returned.
   G.   Monies collected for the assessment shall be used to defray the
training costs and/or purchases of training equipment incurred by the police
department throughout the year. (Ord. 876, 11-22-1999)
CHAPTER 5
RESERVED
(Ord. 800)
CHAPTER 6
RESERVED
(Ord. 781)
CHAPTER 7
ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-7-1: Wards Designated
1-7-2: Generally
1-7-3: Primary Election
1-7-4: General Election
1-7-1: WARDS DESIGNATED:
The number of election wards is determined by city charter. The boundaries of
the wards shall be designated by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 778)
1-7-2: GENERALLY:
City elections shall be held at the same time and place as state elections in
accordance with applicable state laws, including section 14a of article II of
the state constitution and Oregon Revised Statutes 254.056. (Ord. 772)
1-7-3: PRIMARY ELECTION:
   A.   Selection Of Date: The primary election for the mayor and/or members of
the city council shall be held in conformance with section 14a of article II of
the state constitution, and Oregon Revised Statutes 254.056. (The third Tuesday
in May of each even numbered year.)
   B.   Notice Of Primary Election: In addition to the notice of election
required by the state, the city manager/recorder shall publish a notice of
election in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than sixty
(60) days prior to the date when nominations will be accepted.
   C.   Declarations Of Candidacy: Declarations of candidacy for the offices of
city council and/or mayor shall be accepted beginning sixty (60) days prior to
the date established by the state for the close of nominations.
   D.   Nomination: Any registered elector may become a candidate for any
elective office to which he or she is constitutionally eligible by filing a
declaration of his or her candidacy as herein provided and paying a filing fee
of five dollars ($5.00). Declarations of candidates shall be filed with the
city manager/recorder, and the filing of said declarations with said city
manager/recorder shall be conclusive evidence that the elector in question is a
candidate for nomination to said office. Said declaration shall be filed by the
city manager/recorder.
Declaration of candidacy shall be substantially as follows:
To the City Manager/Recorder of the City of Milton- Freewater, Oregon and to
the Electors of the City of Milton-Freewater, in the State of Oregon:
I,                             , reside at                                    
   and my post office address is                       . I am a duly registered
elector and I reside in Ward No.       . If I am nominated for the office of  
                       at the Primary Nominating Election to be held in the
City of Milton-Freewater, Oregon on the                day of                  
, 20    , I will accept the nomination and will not withdraw, and if I am
elected I will qualify as such officer.
Upon the proper filing of notice of candidacy and the payment of the filing fee
as above provided, said candidacy shall be deemed complete, and unless the
candidate shall withdraw and state his or her reasons for withdrawal hereunder
and file the same with the city manager/recorder not later than sixty seven
(67) days prior to the date of the primary election, the city manager/recorder
shall cause the name of said candidate to be printed upon the official ballot
in the ensuing election, and no additional signatures shall be required to make
said candidacy complete and effective.
All declarations of candidates required to be filed with the city recorder
shall be filed not later than seventy (70) days prior to the primary nominating
election.
   E.   Names On Ballots: When any petition is filed by or on behalf of or a
declaration of candidacy is made by only one person as a candidate for
nomination to any specific office, when there is but one vacancy to be filled,
the name of such person shall not be placed upon the primary ballot but such
person shall be the nominee for such office, and the position to be held shall
not appear on said ballot; provided, however, that when there are two (2)
vacancies to be filled from a single ward and only one petition is filed for
each of said vacancies, the name of such person filing for said vacancies shall
not be placed upon the primary ballot but such person shall be declared the
nominee for the respective vacancy or position. At any primary election where
two (2) or more petitions or declarations of candidacy for nomination for
candidate for any specific office have been filed there shall be prepared and
furnished separate ballots upon which shall be placed the names of the
candidates for such office and after the name the words "Nonpartisan". Said
ballot shall be entitled "Non-partisan Ballot" and shall contain no other
designation except to show the ballot is the ballot of the city of Milton-
Freewater, Oregon. When any candidate shall receive a majority of all votes
cast for the office for which he is a candidate at primary election the name of
the candidate receiving such majority shall be printed separately on the
general election ballot under the designation "Vote for One" and the name of no
opposing candidate shall be printed on such ballot in opposition to such
candidate, but one space shall be left following such name in which the elector
may insert the name of any person for whom he wishes to cast his ballot.
In event there are more than two (2) candidates for the same position and no
one of them receives a majority vote at the primary election, the names of the
two (2) candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall appear on the
general election ballot under the designation "Vote for One".
   F.   Rotation Of Names: When there is more than one candidate for any office
of any election the names of the candidates shall be rotated on the ballot in
the same manner as the names of the candidates are rotated in partisan
elections.
   G.   Qualifications Of Electors: No person shall vote at any city election
unless he is a qualified elector of the state. (Ord. 772)
1-7-4: GENERAL ELECTION:
The general election for the mayor and/or members of the city council shall be
held in conformance with section 14a of article II of the state constitution,
and Oregon Revised Statutes 254.056. (The first Tuesday in November following
the first Monday of each even numbered year.) (Ord. 772)
CHAPTER 8
CORPORATE SEAL
SECTION:
1-8-1: Seal
1-8-2: Keeping Seal
1-8-1: SEAL:
The corporate seal of the city shall bear the name of the city surrounded by a
hurled outer ring and a dotted inside ring with the words "Official Seal"
within the inner circle. The seal shall be used to authenticate all acts of
this corporation. (1956 Code § 1-001)
1-8-2: KEEPING SEAL:
The seal of the city shall be kept by the city recorder and shall be affixed by
him to all acts required to be authenticated. (1956 Code § 1-001)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
LIBRARY BOARD
SECTION:
2-1-1: Created, Members
2-1-2: Duties
2-1-3: Authority
2-1-1: CREATED, MEMBERS:
There shall be and there is hereby created the city library board which shall
consist of five (5) members.
The mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall appoint the members of
the city library board to serve a term of four (4) years. In case of vacancy on
the library board, the mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall
appoint a citizen to the library board for the unexpired term. (Ord. 189, 2-2-
1960)
No person shall hold appointment as a member of the board for more than two (2)
full consecutive terms, but any person may be appointed again to the board
after an interval of one year.
The board shall elect a chairman from among its members who shall serve a term
of one year. The librarian shall serve as secretary to the board and keep a
record of its actions. (1978 Code)
Members of the library board will be required to be in regular attendance. If a
member is absent without being excused by the chairman, for more than three (3)
consecutive meetings, the position will be assumed vacant, and at the request
of the secretary to the board, a new appointment will be made by the mayor in
the same manner as in any other vacancy on the board. (Ord. 758, 6-10-1991)
2-1-2: DUTIES:
The city library board shall act in an advisory capacity to the city council,
city manager and librarian concerning all matters relating to policy and
management of the library. In this capacity the board shall have the personnel
policies, selection of personnel, fines and fee schedules, and to annually
submit a proposed operating budget for consideration by the budget committee
and city council. The board shall meet at least on a monthly schedule. (Ord.
666, 9-10-1984)
2-1-3: AUTHORITY:
The library board shall have the authority to investigate and become informed
on all matters concerning city library operation. The city manager shall
cooperate with and assist the library board required to carry out their
responsibilities. (Ord. 666, 9-10-1984)
CHAPTER 2
PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-2-1: Membership
2-2-2: Terms
2-2-3: Organization, Officers
2-2-4: Meetings
2-2-5: Powers Of Commission
2-2-6: Expenditures
2-2-1: MEMBERSHIP:
The planning commission of the city shall consist of seven (7) members
appointed by the city council. Six (6) members must reside within the city
limits, however one member may be a resident outside the city limits but within
the city's urban growth boundary. (1956 Code; amd. Ord. 721, 1-25-1988)
2-2-2: TERMS:
Term of office shall be four (4) years. Any vacancy shall be filled by the
mayor for the unexpired portion of the term. (1956 Code; amd. Ord. 721, 1-25-
1988)
2-2-3: ORGANIZATION, OFFICERS:
The planning commission shall elect a chairman and vice chairman each year, who
shall be members appointed by the mayor and who shall hold office during the
pleasure of the commission. (1956 Code § 9-003; amd. 1978 Code; Ord. 758, 6-10-
1991)
The city manager shall select a secretary who need not be a member of the
commission. The secretary shall keep an accurate record of all commission
proceedings. The commission shall, on October 1 of each year, make and file a
report of all its transactions with the city council. (1956 Code § 9-004; amd.
1978 Code)
Members of the planning commission will be required to be in regular
attendance. If a member is absent without being excused by the chairman, for
more than three (3) consecutive meetings, the position will be assumed vacant,
and a new appointment will be made in the same manner as in any other vacancy
on the commission. (1956 Code)
2-2-4: MEETINGS:
Four (4) members of the planning commission shall constitute a quorum. The
commission may make and alter rules and regulations for its government and
procedure consistent with laws of the state and with the city charter and code.
It shall meet at such times and places as may be fixed by the commission.
Special meetings may be called at any time by the chairman or by three (3)
members by written notice served upon each member of the commission at least
twenty four (24) hours before the time specified for the proposed meeting.
(1956 Code; amd. Ord. 721, 1-25-1988)
2-2-5: POWERS OF COMMISSION:
   A.   Employment: The planning commission may employ consulting advice on
municipal problems, a secretary and such clerks as may be necessary; and pay
for their services, and for such other expenses as the commission may lawfully
incur, including the necessary disbursements incurred by its members in the
performance of their duties as members of the commission, out of funds at the
disposal of the commission, as authorized by the city council.
   B.   Recommendations: The commission may make recommendations and
suggestions to the city council, other public officials and individuals
concerning any matter relating to community planning and development. The
commission shall also have all the powers which are now or hereafter including,
but not limited to, Oregon Revised Statutes chapter 92, relating to
subdivisions and Oregon Revised Statutes chapter 227, relating to planning and
zoning. The city council and administrative officer shall procure the
recommendations of the commission, where required by such state laws and city
code on such matters as land subdivision, street alteration, property
acquisition, zoning and location, design of improvements and annexation. (1956
Code § 9-007; amd. 1978 Code)
All recommendations made to the city council by the commission shall be in
writing. (1956 Code § 9-008)
2-2-6: EXPENDITURES:
The planning commission shall have no authority to make any expenditures on
behalf of the city, nor to obligate the city for the payment of any sum of
money, except as herein provided, and then only after the city council shall
first authorize such expenditures by appropriate ordinance (or resolution)
which ordinance (or resolution) shall provide the administrative method by
which such funds shall be drawn and expended. (1956 Code § 9-009)
CHAPTER 3
RECREATION COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-3-1: Establishment
2-3-2: Duties
2-3-3: Membership
2-3-4: Term Of Office
2-3-5: Attendance At Meetings
2-3-6: Organization
2-3-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby established a parks and recreation committee to be organized,
and to function as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 809)
2-3-2: DUTIES:
It is the duty of the parks and recreation committee to advise the city council
on any matter of city parks and/or recreation administration or policy as they
think proper. This shall include, but not be limited to, recommendations for
the establishment of new facilities, the maintenance and operation of existing
facilities, recommendations for expenditures and fees for services, and the
establishment of rules and regulations for the use of city parks and recreation
facilities. The committee shall meet no less than monthly for the purpose of
meeting these responsibilities. (Ord. 809)
2-3-3: MEMBERSHIP:
The parks and recreation committee shall be composed of seven (7) members
appointed by the mayor with consent of the city council. (Ord. 945, 11-13-2007)
2-3-4: TERM OF OFFICE:
The term of office for members of the parks and recreation committee shall be
four (4) years. (Ord. 809)
2-3-5: ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS:
Members of the parks and recreation committee shall be required to have regular
attendance at meetings of the committee. If a member is absent without having
been excused by the chair for three (3) or more consecutive meetings, then the
position shall be vacant and the vacancy may be filled by the city council.
(Ord. 809)
2-3-6: ORGANIZATION:
The committee shall select one of their members to serve as chair and another
to serve as vice chair at the first meeting of each calendar year. The officers
shall serve for a one year term.
The city manager shall see that appropriate staff members shall attend meetings
of the committee for the purpose of providing information and assistance to the
committee and for the purpose of preparing minutes and agendas.
The committee shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations for the
conduct of its business. In absence of such rules, "Robert's Rules Of Order"
shall apply. (Ord. 809)
CHAPTER 4
PURCHASING AUTHORITY
SECTION:
2-4-1: Adoption Of Purchasing System
2-4-2: Centralized Purchasing Department
2-4-3: Purchasing Officer
2-4-4: Board Established
2-4-5: Board To Adopt Rules
2-4-1: ADOPTION OF PURCHASING SYSTEM:
In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies and
equipment, to secure for the city supplies and equipment at the lowest possible
cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control
over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function and to
assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system is hereby adopted. The
city council hereby expressly finds and determines that the purchasing
procedure herein described in this chapter will discourage favoritism and
improve competition in the awarding of city contracts and will result in
substantial cost savings to the city. (Ord. 633, 7-13-1981)
2-4-2: CENTRALIZED PURCHASING DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created a centralized purchasing department in which is vested
authority for the purchase of supplies and equipment. (Ord. 633, 7-13-1981)
2-4-3: PURCHASING OFFICER:
The city manager shall be the city purchasing officer. The duties of the
purchasing officer may be combined with or assigned to any other office or
position by the city manager. The purchasing officer shall have the authority
to:
   A.   Purchase or contract for supplies, and equipment required by any using
agency in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this chapter,
such administrative regulations as the purchasing officer shall adopt for the
internal management and operation of the purchasing department, and such other
rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the city council.
   B.   Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of
supplies and equipment.
   C.   Act to procure for the city, the needed quality in supplies and
equipment at least expense to the city.
   D.   Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain a full and open
competition as possible on all purchases.
   E.   Act to procure for the city the needed quality in supplies and
equipment at least expense to the city.
   F.   Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open
competition as possible on all purchases.
   G.   Prepare and recommend to the city council rules governing the purchase
of supplies and equipment for the city.
   H.   Prepare and recommend to the city council revisions and amendments to
the purchasing rules.
   I.   Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing,
prices, market conditions and new products.
   J.   Prescribe and maintain such forms as reasonably necessary to the
operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations.
   K.   Supervise the inspection of all supplies and equipment purchased to
ensure conformance with specifications.
   L.   Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment
between departments, as needed.
   M.   Maintain a bidder's list, vendor's catalog file, and records needed for
the efficient operation of the purchasing department. (Ord. 474, 12-22-1974;
amd. 1978 Code; Ord. 633, 7-13-1981)
2-4-4: BOARD ESTABLISHED:
The city council is hereby designated as the local public contract review
board. (Ord. 798)
2-4-5: BOARD TO ADOPT RULES:
The city council, acting in its capacity as local public contract review board,
shall adopt such purchasing rules as may be required. Purchasing rules shall be
adopted by resolution of the local public contract review board. (Ord. 798)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
REGULATION OF MOBILE VENDORS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Definitions
3-1-2: License Required
3-1-3: Display Of License
3-1-4: Geographical Restrictions
3-1-5: License Application
3-1-6: License Fee
3-1-7: Revocation Of License
3-1-8: Compliance With Regulations
3-1-9: Penalty
3-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
AUTHORIZED CONCESSION STAND: A concession stand operated or maintained for the
sale of food or merchandise, in the public parks in the city, or on other
property, in accordance with a city approved agreement or franchise therefor.
FOOD: Includes all items designed for human consumption, including, but not by
way of limitation, candy, gum, popcorn, hot dogs, sandwiches, peanuts, soft
drinks, and dairy products.
MERCHANDISE: Clothing, toys, electronics, pictures, games, or other nonfood
products for sale or rent.
MOBILE VENDOR: A vendor or seller of merchandise or food from a vehicle or
other conveyance upon the public streets, alleys or property in the city.
PUBLIC CELEBRATION: Any other time of public celebration designated by the
mayor.
VEHICLE: Any device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be
transported, and includes vehicles that are propelled or powered by any means,
and includes trailers of any type. (1978 Code)
3-1-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in the business of a mobile vendor
without having first obtained a license therefor from the city. The license can
be waived for special events by prior approval of the city council upon set
conditions that will consider public safety, traffic, business experience,
responsibility and other matters that relate to the public. (Ord. 851)
3-1-3: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
All licenses for mobile vendors shall be prominently displayed upon all
vehicles from which a mobile vendor conducts business. (1978 Code)
3-1-4: GEOGRAPHICAL RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   No mobile vendor license shall include the privilege to conduct the
business of a mobile vendor unless the vehicle or conveyance is parked and
operated in full compliance with the traffic and sidewalk ordinances of the
city as now in effect or as hereafter amended. It shall be a violation of this
chapter for any person selling or offering for sale any article to obstruct or
cause to be obstructed the passage of any sidewalk, street, avenue, alley or
any other public place, through any means, including, but not limited to, by
causing people to congregate at or near the place where any article is being
sold or offered for sale. No merchandise shall be offered, displayed, or sold,
and no customers served, in any vehicle travel lane.
   B.   No mobile vendor shall sell or vend any wares from his vehicle or
conveyance:
      1.   Within four hundred feet (400') of any public or private school
grounds during the hours of regular school session, classes, or school related
events in said public or private school, except when authorized by said school;
or
      2.   In front of the premises of any business establishment which is open
for business offering as a main featured item or items of similar goods for
sale; or
      3.   In front of the premises of any restaurant, cafe or eating
establishment which is open for business. (1978 Code)
3-1-5: LICENSE APPLICATION:
   A.   Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to secure a license as a
mobile vendor shall make application to the department of administrative
services, upon forms to be provided by the city.
   B.   The application for mobile vendor license shall state the name and
address of the applicant; the vehicle license numbers of all vehicles from
which the applicant proposes to conduct business; a description of the general
type of merchandise or food proposed to be sold by the applicant; and the place
or places where the applicant proposes to engage in business as a mobile
vendor.
   C.   Such application shall be accompanied with the license fee as provided
for in this chapter, together with a photocopy of a valid motor vehicle
operator's license for all operators, proof of automobile liability insurance
coverage in an amount required by state law. (1978 Code)
3-1-6: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee for mobile vendors shall be established by resolution in the
same manner as fees for other businesses. (1978 Code)
3-1-7: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The license of a mobile vendor shall, after notice in writing and an
opportunity to be heard by the city council at its next regular meeting, be
revoked, and such mobile vendor shall not be entitled to a subsequent license
to engage in business as a mobile vendor for one year after such revocation,
for any of the following reasons:
   A.   Fraud or misrepresentation contained in the application for the
license;
   B.   Fraud or misrepresentation, or false or misleading statements, made in
the course of conducting the licensed business;
   C.   Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude in which a minor
child was the victim or was otherwise involved;
   D.   The conduct of business in areas prohibited by this chapter; or
   E.   Any other violation of this chapter.
The decision of the city council shall be final subject only to the right of
the license holder to appeal said decision to the Umatilla County circuit court
within fifteen (15) days of the decision rendered by the city council. (1978
Code)
3-1-8: COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS:
All mobile vendors engaged in the sale of food shall comply with all local,
federal and state laws, rules and regulations regarding food handling, and all
vehicles used for the sale of food or merchandise by mobile vendors shall
comply with all applicable local, federal and state laws, rules and regulations
respecting such vehicles. All mobile vendors shall further be responsible for
cleaning up each day all litter originating from his/her business and within a
one hundred fifty foot (150') radius of the location where any sales occur.
(1978 Code)
3-1-9: PENALTY:
In addition to establishing grounds for revocation of a license, the failure to
perform any act required by this chapter, or the performance of any act
prohibited by this chapter, is designated as a violation punishable by a fine
not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each separate violation.
(1978 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SOCIAL GAMES
SECTION:
3-2-1: Authorization
3-2-2: Regulations And Requirements
3-2-3: Revocation Of License
3-2-1: AUTHORIZATION:
"Social games", defined as a game, other than a lottery, between players in a
private home where no house player, house bank or house odds exist and there is
no house income from the operation of the social game; and if authorized
pursuant to state statute, a game, other than a lottery, between players in a
private business, private club, or place of public accommodation where no house
player, house bank, or house odds exist and there is no house income from the
operation of the social game, are hereby authorized in private businesses and
private clubs in the city. (Ord. 804)
3-2-2: REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
No private business or private club shall allow or permit a social game on its
premises without compliance with the following provisions: (Ord. 745, 1-27-
1976)
   A.   Payment of a business license fee is required to conduct any social
games in any establishment within the city, said business license fee to be for
social games that are permitted under the provisions of Oregon Revised Statutes
167.117, which said fees may be paid quarterly. (Ord. 760, 9-9-1991)
   B.   No social games shall be played or permitted in any private business or
private club, except in a designated and private, but unlocked, portion of said
establishment, and these social games shall be open to inspection at all times
by law enforcement officers.
   C.   No social games shall be played or permitted in any private business or
private club between the hours of two thirty o'clock (2:30) A.M. and eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M.
   D.   Violations of the provisions of subsections A, B and C of this section
shall be deemed "promoting unlawful gambling" and punished pursuant to Oregon
Revised Statutes 167.122.
   E.   No social games shall be played or permitted in any private business or
club unless such club or business exists for the purpose of providing other,
substantial, legitimate commercial services which are not otherwise associated
with gambling or social games. No club or business may operate for the sole
purpose of providing a place at which social games may be conducted. (Ord. 475,
1-27-1976)
3-2-3: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A business license of a private business or private club for social games may
be revoked, or not renewed by the city, if the holder of said license is
convicted of any federal, state or city statute or ordinance relating to
gambling, after hearing by the city council. (Ord. 475, 1-27-1976; amd. 1978
Code)
CHAPTER 3
SOLICITATION
SECTION:
3-3-1: Definitions
3-3-2: Prohibited Acts, Penalties
3-3-3: Consent To Enter Onto Real Property, Exemptions
3-3-4: No Solicitation Sign
3-3-5: Evidentiary Matters
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The terms "solicit" and "solicitation" shall mean the entry onto real property
used for residential purposes by a person for the purpose of communicating with
an occupant of the property, whether the communication is verbal, visual, or in
writing. (Ord. 783)
3-3-2: PROHIBITED ACTS, PENALTIES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Solicit before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00)
P.M. when the local time is daylight savings time, or after eight o'clock (8:
00) P.M. when the local time is standard time, without the consent of the
occupant to do so.
      2.   Allow, suffer, or permit any person soliciting on their behalf or
under their direction to commit any act prohibited by this section.
      3.   Leave written materials upon real property where a sign conforming
to the requirements of section
3-3-4 of this chapter is posted.
      4.   Solicit upon real property where a sign conforming to the
requirement of section
3-3-4 of this chapter is posted.
   B.   Violation of subsections A1, A2, A3 and/or A4 of this section is
punishable as a civil infraction. (Ord. 783)
3-3-3: CONSENT TO ENTER ONTO REAL PROPERTY, EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   It shall be an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of
subsection
3-3-2A1 of this chapter that the person charged with the violation or crime had
received actual or constructive consent of the occupant prior to entering the
real property. Constructive consent to enter real property may be implied from
the circumstances of each instance, the relationship of the parties and actual
or implied contractual relationships.
   B.   The occupant of real property shall be considered to have given
constructive consent to enter real property for the purpose of solicitation
between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.,
when the local time is daylight savings time or between nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. when the local time is standard time, if
they have not posted a "No Solicitation" sign.
   C.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the entry into
a structure located on real property. The right to enter any structure must be
otherwise provided for by law.
   D.   Officers, employees or agents of a governmental entity while performing
activities within the scope of their office, employment, or agency are exempt
from the requirements of this chapter.
   E.   No person may be charged with a violation of subsection
3-3-2A of this chapter in connection with an act committed between four o'clock
(4:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on each October 31. (Ord. 783)
3-3-4: NO SOLICITATION SIGN:
   A.   If an occupant of real property chooses to not invite solicitors onto
their property the occupant may post a "No Solicitation" sign pursuant to this
section. The effect of the posting of such a sign is to express the refusal of
the occupant to grant consent to any person to enter their real property to
solicit, except to those persons exempt from these provisions by subsections 3-
3-3D and E of this chapter.
   B.   Signs posted pursuant to this section shall be posted on or near the
boundaries of the property at the normal points of entry, and:
      1.   Signs must be no smaller than six inches (6") in height by eight
inches (8") in width; and
      2.   Signs must contain the words "No Solicitation" and the reference "M-
F City Code
3-3-2" in characters no less than one-half inch (1/2") in height.
For real property possessing no apparent barriers to entry at the boundaries of
the property which limit access to the primary entrance of a structure located
on the property, placement of the sign at the primary entrance to the structure
constitutes compliance with this section. (Ord. 783)
3-3-5: EVIDENTIARY MATTERS:
   A.   It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of subsection
3-3-2A3 of this chapter if written material is found on real property upon
which a sign conforming to the requirements of section
3-3-4 of this chapter has been posted. The person responsible for such written
material is its proponent, sponsor, distributor, or potential beneficiary of
the communication conveyed. (Ord. 783)
CHAPTER 4
TAXICABS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definition
3-4-2: Application Of Provisions
3-4-3: License Required, Operators
3-4-4: Application For And Granting Of License
3-4-5: Fees
3-4-6: Insurance
3-4-7: Driver's Permit
3-4-8: Driver's Conduct
3-4-9: Soliciting Fares
3-4-10: Taxi Fares
3-4-11: Load Limit
3-4-12: Direct Route Traveled; Disabled Vehicle
3-4-13: Cruising
3-4-14: Report Of Lost Articles
3-4-15: Vehicle Condition
3-4-16: Cancellation, Revocation Of License
3-4-1: DEFINITION:
The word "taxicab" shall mean every motor vehicle having a seating capacity of
five (5) passengers or less, as per manufacturer's rating, except cars for rent
without drivers, used for the transportation of passengers for hire and not
operated exclusively over a fixed and defined route. (1956 Code § 2-200)
3-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
No person shall use any motor vehicle other than a taxicab for the carrying of
passengers for hire within the city. Motor vehicles for rent without drivers or
motor vehicles operated exclusively over a fixed and defined route are excepted
from this section. (1956 Code § 2-201)
3-4-3: LICENSE REQUIRED, OPERATORS:
No person shall engage in the business of operating any taxicab without first
securing a license. (1956 Code § 2-202)
3-4-4: APPLICATION FOR AND GRANTING OF LICENSE:
Every person desiring to obtain a license for the operation of a taxicab shall
file a written application with the city manager, setting forth the name of the
person to whom the license is to be issued, the number of taxicabs proposed to
be operated, the name of the make and the motor number of each, the seating
capacity of each and the number of the state vehicle license of each taxicab.
If the city council finds that there is a public need for such taxicab service
and that the granting of such license is in the best interest of the public, it
may approve the application and, after such approval, the city manager shall
issue a license upon the receipt of the required license fee. (1956 Code § 2-
203)
3-4-5: FEES:
An annual license fee shall be paid to the city for each taxicab operating
within the city for the entire year or any part of a year. Such fees shall
cover the cost of the regulation and inspection of taxicabs and are to be paid
in advance. (1956 Code § 2-204)
3-4-6: INSURANCE:
Upon filing application for a license, the owner, proprietor or lessee or
lessor of such taxicab shall file with his application an insurance policy for
each taxicab issued by an insurance company authorized to transact business in
the state of Oregon, in the following amounts:
   Property damage, $10,000.00
   Bodily injury, not less than $15,000.00 for 1 person
   Bodily injury, not less than $30,000.00 for 2 or more persons
Such insurance must be issued and applied to the taxicab to which application
is being made.
The license to operate a taxicab shall expire of itself or terminate upon the
cancellation of said insurance, and no license shall be granted or be effective
unless the taxicab for which such license is required and requested has been
fully covered with insurance as heretofore specified. (1956 Code § 2-205; amd.
1978 Code)
3-4-7: DRIVER'S PERMIT:
   A.   No person shall drive a taxicab without first securing a permit. No
person shall be issued a permit unless he is eighteen (18) years of age or
over; has at least six (6) months' experience as an operator; and possesses a
valid state of Oregon chauffeur's license. A written application for a permit
shall be submitted to the city manager with such information as may be
required. Upon submission of satisfactory proof of the applicant's competence
and the payment of the required fee, the city manager shall issue such person
an identification card and a badge with a number which shall be recorded upon
the identification card. The identification card shall have upon it a front
view picture of the applicant not less than two inches by two and one-half
inches (2" x 21/2") in size. The identification card shall also carry the right
thumbprint of the applicant and shall have the name of the applicant, his
weight, height, age, color of hair, color of eyes, nationality, the name of the
employer, and shall bear the signature of the applicant in his own handwriting.
The identification card shall not be transferable and shall remain posted in a
conspicuous place in the taxicab which the driver is operating. The badge shall
remain the property of the city and shall be surrendered to the city whenever
the driver discontinues his employment. If the badge is lost or destroyed, upon
affidavit made as to its loss or destruction, the same may be replaced upon
payment by the applicant of the required fee to the city manager. Any applicant
for a permit as a taxicab driver shall also furnish to the police department,
voluntarily, a complete set of fingerprints for each hand. It shall be a
violation for any owner or proprietor, lessor or lessee of taxicabs to permit
or allow any taxicab driver to operate a taxicab within the city without such
driver first obtaining the required identification card and badge and posting
the identification card in a conspicuous place in the taxicab operated by such
driver. (1956 Code § 2-206; amd. 1978 Code)
   B.   The chief of police shall have the authority to temporarily revoke a
permit issued to any driver of any taxicab when he has reasonable grounds to
believe that the driver is an incompetent or improper person to operate a
taxicab. Any driver, having his permit temporarily revoked by the chief of
police may apply within five (5) days from the date of said revocation to the
city council for reinstatement of such order.
   C.   Whenever the chief of police temporarily revokes the permit of any
driver, he shall report such fact with a statement of his reason therefor to
the city manager. In the event of a emergency caused by sickness, accident or
other cause, the chief of police may issue a temporary permit to a relief
driver effective for a period of not more than twenty four (24) hours. (1956
Code § 2-206)
3-4-8: DRIVER'S CONDUCT:
The driver of a taxicab shall not drive nor operate the same while intoxicated,
nor operate the same in a careless or reckless manner, nor use any profane or
obscene language, nor smoke without the consent of the passenger. (1956 Code §
2-209)
3-4-9: SOLICITING FARES:
The driver of a taxicab, while seated within such vehicle, may solicit
patronage of passersby in a tone of voice not louder than an ordinary
conversational tone, but such driver shall not use any mechanical or
noisemaking device of any kind to solicit patronage, nor shall he take hold of
or obstruct the way of any person for the purpose of solicitation. (1956 Code §
2-210)
3-4-10: TAXI FARES:
   A.   Rate Schedule: The owner, proprietor or driver of every taxicab shall
not charge excessive rates, and shall, before operating any taxicab, post in
the taxicab and in the taxicab office or stand, a rate schedule which shall not
be exceeded in any case; and a copy shall also be delivered to the chief of
police before beginning operation or before changing any rate. (1956 Code § 2-
211)
   B.   Unauthorized Fare; Suspension: Any driver of a taxicab who shall charge
any passenger a rate of fare other than provided for in subsection A of this
section shall, upon conviction, be punished, in addition to any other penalty,
by having his permit suspended for a period of not less than six (6) months nor
more than one year. (1956 Code § 2-212)
3-4-11: LOAD LIMIT:
The driver of a taxicab shall not carry more than two (2) persons in excess of
the ordinary seating capacity for which the taxicab was designed and built. No
more than two (2) persons shall be permitted in the seat with the driver and no
persons or passengers shall be allowed to be or remain on doors, steps or the
running board of any cab while the same is in motion. (1956 Code § 2-213)
3-4-12: DIRECT ROUTE TRAVELED; DISABLED VEHICLE:
Any driver of a taxicab employed to carry passengers to a definite point shall
take the most direct route possible that will carry the passenger safely and
expeditiously to his destination. In the event any taxicab shall, while
conveying for hire or reward any passenger or baggage, become disabled, or
shall break down, the time of stoppage shall be deducted from the charge. (1956
Code § 2-214)
3-4-13: CRUISING:
The driver of a taxicab shall not cruise, drive or operate a taxicab repeatedly
or persistently along any public street for the purpose of soliciting
passengers. (1956 Code § 2-215)
3-4-14: REPORT OF LOST ARTICLES:
The driver of a taxicab shall notify the nearest police station within twenty
four (24) hours of all property of value left in his vehicle by any passenger.
(1956 Code § 2-216)
3-4-15: VEHICLE CONDITION:
All taxicabs shall be inspected from time to time by the chief of police for
the purpose of determining whether the same are clean, properly equipped, of
good appearance and in safe condition for the transportation of passengers. The
chief of police shall, at the time of such inspection, determine for the
guidance of the public the classification and capacity of the vehicle
inspected; and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate, or
engage in the business of operating any taxicab, unless and until the same has
been inspected and approved by the chief of police. (1956 Code § 2-217)
3-4-16: CANCELLATION, REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Any license may be canceled by the city council or any permit may be
revoked by the city manager upon proof that the holder of such license or
permit or his agent has been convicted of a violation of any provision of the
motor vehicle laws of the state of Oregon or any provision of the city code or
of a violation of any federal, state or municipal laws involving intoxicating
liquors, narcotics or illicit human traffic. For this purpose the driver of a
taxicab shall be held to be the agent of the owner of such taxicab if the owner
was a part to such conduct or had knowledge of such conduct or should have
known of such conduct by the exercise of reasonable diligence.
   B.   Any driver of a taxicab who has been found guilty in the municipal
court of any incompetency in driving, or of any violation of the traffic
regulations of the city or of this chapter may be barred from driving any
taxicab in the city for a period not to exceed one year thereafter. If the
owner of any taxicab operated in the city shall knowingly permit such barred
driver, during said period of one year, to operate any such vehicle, the
license of such owner may be revoked by the city council. (1956 Code § 2-218)
CHAPTER 5
RESERVED
(Ord. 672)
CHAPTER 6
RESERVED
(Ord. 672)
CHAPTER 7
YARD SALES
SECTION:
3-7-1: Number Allowed
3-7-2: Permit Required, Fee
3-7-3: Signs
3-7-4: Time Limit For Sales
3-7-5: Violation, Penalty
3-7-1: NUMBER ALLOWED:
Each residential property within the city limits of the city shall be allowed
to hold two (2) yard sales per calendar year, but under no circumstances will
the residential property be allowed to hold more than two (2) yard sales per
calendar year. (Ord. 554, 10-8-1979)
3-7-2: PERMIT REQUIRED, FEE:
A permit shall be required to hold a yard sale and said permit shall be set by
resolution. The permit may be obtained from the accounting office at city hall,
where a record of such permits will be kept. (Ord. 554, 10-8-1979)
3-7-3: SIGNS:
No sign shall be placed on city property in conflict with city ordinances
regulating signs, nor upon any city street sign poles, nor upon any city
electric power poles. (Ord. 554, 10-8-1979)
3-7-4: TIME LIMIT FOR SALES:
No single yard sale will be permitted to be held longer than three (3) days per
each residential property, and a permit will be issued only on this basis.
(Ord. 554, 10-8-1979)
3-7-5: VIOLATION, PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter shall be dealt with in accordance with title 1,
chapter 4, "General Penalty", of this code. (Ord. 554, 10-8-1979)
TITLE 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
SECTION:
4-1-1: Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings
4-1-2: Housing Code
4-1-1: ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS:
   A.   The 1997 edition of the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous
buildings published by the International Conference of Building Officials is
hereby adopted with the following amendments:
      1.   All references to the "building official" shall mean the city
manager or his designee.
      2.   All references to the "board of appeals" shall mean the Milton-
Freewater planning commission.
      3.   All references to the "health officer" shall mean any employee of
the city of Milton-Freewater designated administratively by the city manager,
or the city manager's designee, to perform the duties of health officer as
provided for in this code. (Ord. 892)
4-1-2: HOUSING CODE:
   A.   The 1997 edition of the uniform housing code published by the
International Conference of Building Officials is hereby adopted with the
following amendments:
      1.   All references to the "building official" shall mean the city
manager or his designee. (Ord. 892)
      2.   All references to the "housing advisory and appeals board" shall
mean the city of Milton-Freewater planning commission. (Ord. 813, 2-13-1995)
      3.   All references to the "health officer" shall mean any employee of
the city of Milton-Freewater designated administratively by the city manager,
or the city manager's designee, to perform the duties of health officer as
provided for in this code. (Ord. 892)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE DAMAGED PROPERTY
SECTION:
4-2-1: Property Owner To Secure Fire Damaged Property
4-2-2: Building Declared A Nuisance
4-2-3: Notice Of Fire Damage To Structure
4-2-4: Inspection
4-2-5: Notice To Property Owner
4-2-1: PROPERTY OWNER TO SECURE FIRE DAMAGED PROPERTY:
No person shall allow property under his control or ownership that has been
damaged by fire to remain unsecured or littered by debris resulting from fire
for a period longer than forty eight (48) hours following the fire. Every
person owning or controlling property damaged by fire shall take immediate
action following fire damage to secure the property against unauthorized entry,
to remove fire debris, to secure utility services and take any actions
necessary to protect the public safety and welfare. Any person who shall be the
owner of, or shall be in possession of, or in responsible charge of any fire
damaged building and who shall knowingly suffer or permit any such building or
property to remain unsecured or who shall fail to clean up and remove debris
resulting from fire damage, or who shall fail to secure utility services, or
who shall fail to take any action necessary to protect the public safety and
welfare shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 675; amd. Ord.
742; Ord. 799)
4-2-2: BUILDING DECLARED A NUISANCE:
Every building or part thereof that is maintained in violation of this chapter
is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the same may be summarily
secured and brought into conformance with this chapter by the department of
public works, or a suit requiring compliance may be brought by the city in
circuit court. (Ord. 675; amd. Ord. 742; Ord. 799)
4-2-3: NOTICE OF FIRE DAMAGE TO STRUCTURE:
Whenever the fire department responds to a structure fire, the fire department
secretary shall notify the public works department no later than the next
succeeding business day. (Ord. 675; amd. Ord. 742; Ord. 799)
4-2-4: INSPECTION:
The public works department shall inspect the damaged structure and shall
determine what measures are needed to secure the property against unauthorized
entry, to remove fire debris from the immediate vicinity, to secure the utility
health services in a safe manner, to protect the public health, and to prevent
damage to adjacent properties. (Ord. 675; amd. Ord. 742; Ord. 799)
4-2-5: NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNER:
The public works department shall ascertain the name of the property owner and
shall advise the owner and any lien holders known to the department of the
findings made in compliance with section
4-2-4 of this chapter. The notice shall advise the owner of the terms of this
chapter and shall require the owner to render the structure and the underlying
real property safe, secure and in full compliance with this chapter within
forty eight (48) hours. In the event the property owner fails to take
corrective action in the time specified, then the city may do so at the owner's
expense. Time will be of the essence in securing the structure. (Ord. 675; amd.
Ord. 742; Ord. 799)
CHAPTER 3
PUBLIC NUISANCE WARRANT
SECTION:
4-3-1: Issuance Of Warrant
4-3-2: Grounds For Issuance
4-3-3: Procedure For Issuance
4-3-4: Execution Of Warrant
4-3-1: ISSUANCE OF WARRANT:
   A.   The municipal judge of the city of Milton-Freewater may, upon
application of any city officer, agent or employee acting in the course of
official duties, issue an inspection warrant whenever an inspection or
investigation of any property, real or personal, is required or authorized by
any provision of this code or other regulation or ordinance of the city
relating to health, safety, sanitation, zoning, or public nuisance. The
inspection warrant is an order authorizing the health, safety, sanitation,
zoning, or public nuisance inspection at a designated place for the purposes
set forth in the authorizing regulation. (1978 Code)
4-3-2: GROUNDS FOR ISSUANCE:
   A.   An inspection warrant shall be issued only upon cause, supported by
affidavit, particularly describing the applicant's status in applying for the
warrant, the ordinance or regulation requiring or authorizing the inspection or
investigation, the place to be inspected or investigated, and the purposes for
which the investigation or inspection is to be made including the basis upon
which cause exists to inspect. In addition, the affidavit shall contain either
a statement that entry has been sought and refused or facts or circumstances
reasonably showing that the purposes of the inspection or investigation might
be frustrated if entry were sought without an inspection warrant.
   B.   Cause shall be deemed to exist if one or more of the following is shown
by the affidavit:
      1.   There is probable cause to believe that a condition of or on the
property is in violation with the authorizing regulation with respect to the
particular place for where an inspection or investigation is sought; or
      2.   An investigation or inspection is reasonably believed to be
necessary in order to determine or verify the cause of an occurrence such as a
structure collapse, fire, or injury to person or property, reasonably believed
to be a result of a condition of property regulated by the authorizing
regulation; or
      3.   The property has been previously inspected or investigated, a
violation of health, safety, sanitation, zoning, or public nuisance regulation
was found to exist during the investigation or inspection, and the current
inspection or investigation is for purposes of follow up to assure that all
violations have been corrected; or
      4.   That the inspection or investigation is part of a routine, periodic,
or area inspection based upon one or more of the following standards being
satisfied with respect to the subject property;
      5.   The property has not previously been inspected within a twenty four
(24) month period, or if the property is held out as rental or leased property
for human habitation has not been inspected within a twelve (12) month period;
      6.   The property is in a given area for which individual properties have
not, on average, received an inspection within a twenty four (24) month period,
and for which all properties within the area are being inspected or
investigated, provided that the subject property has not been inspected within
the previous twelve (12) months; or
      7.   The property is of a type such as age of structure, type of use, or
type of construction, common to other properties, which indicates a heightened
concern for public safety, such that all structures within the stated category
are being inspected, provided that the subject property has not been inspected
within the previous twelve (12) months. (1978 Code)
4-3-3: PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE:
   A.   Before issuing an inspection warrant, the municipal judge may examine
under oath the applicant and any other witness and shall be satisfied of the
existence of grounds for granting such application.
   B.   If the municipal judge is satisfied that cause for the inspection or
investigation exists and that the other requirements for granting the
application are satisfied, the municipal judge shall issue the warrant,
particularly describing the name and title of the person or persons authorized
to execute the warrant, the place to be entered and the purpose for the
inspection or investigation. The warrant shall contain a direction that it be
executed on any day of the week between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
and six o'clock (6:00) P.M., or where the municipal judge has specifically
determined upon a showing that it cannot be effectively executed between those
hours, that it be executed at any additional or other time of the day or night.
If the inspection cannot be completed within one day, the warrant shall be
authorization for the indicated person or persons to reenter on as many days
reasonably required to complete the inspection. (1978 Code)
4-3-4: EXECUTION O`F WARRANT:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, in executing an
inspection warrant, the person authorized to execute the warrant shall, before
entry, make a reasonable effort to present the person's credentials, authority
and purpose to an occupant or person in possession of the place to be inspected
or investigated designated in the warrant and show the occupant or person in
possession of the place the warrant or a copy thereof upon request.
   B.   In executing an inspection warrant, the person authorized to execute
the warrant need not inform anyone of the person's authority and purpose, as
described in subsection A of this section, but may promptly enter the
designated place if it is at the time unoccupied or not in the possession of
any person or at the time reasonably is believed to be in such condition.
   C.   A peace officer may be requested to assist in the execution of the
inspection warrant.
   D.   An inspection warrant must be executed and returned to the municipal
judge by whom it was issued within ten (10) days from its date, unless such
municipal judge before the expiration of such time, by endorsement thereon,
extends the time for five (5) days. After the expiration of the time prescribed
by this subsection, the warrant is void; however, upon the initiation of a new
application may be again issued if the terms of this chapter are otherwise
satisfied. (1978 Code)
TITLE 5
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
SECTION:
5-1-1: Initiating Improvements
5-1-2: City Manager's Report
5-1-3: Action On City Manager's Report
5-1-4: Resolution And Notice Of Hearing
5-1-5: Manner Of Doing Work
5-1-6: Hearing
5-1-7: Calls For Bids
5-1-8: Assessment Method And Alternative Methods Of Financing
5-1-9: Assessment Ordinance
5-1-10: Notice Of Assessment
5-1-11: Lien Record And Foreclosure Proceedings
5-1-12: Error In Assessment Calculation
5-1-13: Supplemental Assessments
5-1-14: Rebates
5-1-15: Remedies
5-1-16: Abandonment Of Proceedings
5-1-17: Curative Provisions
5-1-18: Reassessment
5-1-1: INITIATING IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   When the council considers it necessary to require that improvements to
a street, sewer, water, sidewalk, parking, curbing, drain, or other public
improvement defined in Oregon Revised Statutes 223.387 be paid for in whole or
in part by special assessment according to benefits conferred, the council
shall declare by resolution that it intends to make the improvement and direct
the city manager to make a survey of the improvement and file a written report
with the city council.
   B.   When owners of two-thirds (2/3) of the property that will benefit by
improvements defined in subsection A of this section request by written
petition that the council initiate an improvement, the council shall declare by
resolution that it intends to make the improvement and direct the city manager
to make a survey of the improvement and file a written report with the city
council. (Ord. 681, 3-25-1985)
5-1-2: CITY MANAGER'S REPORT:
Unless the council directs otherwise, the city manager's report shall contain
the following:
   A.   A map or plat showing the general nature, location and extent of the
proposed improvement and the land to be assessed for payment of the cost.
   B.   Plans, specifications and estimates of work to be done. If the proposed
project is to be carried out in cooperation with another governmental agency,
the city manager may adopt plans, specifications and estimates of that agency.
   C.   An estimate of probable cost of the improvement, including legal,
administrative and engineering costs.
   D.   An estimate of unit costs of the improvement of the benefited
properties, per square foot, per front foot, or another unit of cost.
   E.   A recommendation concerning the method of assessment to be used to
arrive at a fair apportionment of the whole or a portion of the cost of the
improvement to benefited properties.
   F.   A description of each lot, parcel of land, or portion of land to be
benefited, with names of the record owners and, when readily available, names
of contract purchasers as shown on books and records of the Umatilla County tax
department. To describe each lot or parcel of land under provisions of this
section, it shall be sufficient to use the tax account number assigned to the
property by the tax department or the book and page designations shown on books
and records of the Umatilla County clerk.
   G.   A recommendation on the rate of interest to be paid on assessments
bonded under the Bancroft bonding act and Oregon Revised Statutes chapter 223.
(Ord. 681, 3-25-1985)
5-1-3: ACTION ON CITY MANAGER'S REPORT:
After the city manager's report is filed with the city council, the council may
by resolution approve the report, modify the report and approve it as modified,
require the city manager to supply additional or different information for the
improvement, or abandon the improvement. (Ord. 681, 3-25-1985)
5-1-4: RESOLUTION AND NOTICE OF HEARING:
After the council has approved the city manager's report as submitted or as
modified, the council shall declare by resolution that it intends to make the
improvement and direct the city manager to give notice of the council's intent
by two (2) publications, one week apart, in a newspaper of general circulation
in the city. The notice shall contain the following:
   A.   That the report of the city manager is on file in the office of the
city manager and is subject to public examination.
   B.   That the council will hold a public hearing on the proposed improvement
on a specified date, which shall be not less than ten (10) days after the first
publication of notice, at which objections and remonstrances to the improvement
will be heard by the council, and that the improvement will be suspended for
not less than six (6) months if written remonstrances are filed before or
during the hearing by owners of two-thirds (2/3) of the property to be
assessed.
   C.   A description of the property to be benefited by the improvement,
owners of the property as shown on books and records of the Umatilla County tax
department, and the city manager's estimate of total cost of the improvement to
be paid by special assessments to benefited properties. For purposes of this
section it shall be sufficient to describe the property to be benefited by the
tax account number assigned to the property and used by the Umatilla County tax
department or the book and page designations shown on books and records of the
Umatilla County clerk. (Ord. 681, 3-25-1985)
5-1-5: MANNER OF DOING WORK:
The council may provide in the improvement resolution that the construction
work may be done in whole or in part by the city, by contract, by another
governmental agency, or by a combination thereof. (Ord. 681, 3-25-1985)
5-1-6: HEARING:
If written remonstrances are less than the amount required to suspend the
proposed improvement, the council may by motion, at the time of the hearing or
within sixty (60) days thereafter, on the basis of written remonstrances and
oral objections, order the improvement carried out in accordance with the
resolution or, if the project was initiated by council motion and not by
petition of property owners, abandon the improvement. (Ord. 681, 3-25-1985)
5-1-7: CALLS FOR BIDS:
The council may direct the city manager to advertise for bids for construction
of all or part of the improvement project. If part of the improvement work is
to be done under contract bids, the council shall proceed in accordance with
procedures of state law for public contracting. (Ord. 681, 3-25-1985)
5-1-8: ASSESSMENT METHOD AND ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF FINANCING:
   A.   The council, in adopting a method of assessing the cost of the
improvement, may:
      1.   Use any just and reasonable method to determine the extent of an
improvement district consistent with the benefits derived.
      2.   Use any just and reasonable method to apportion the sum to be
assessed among the benefited properties.
      3.   Authorize payment by the city of all or part of the cost of an
improvement when in the opinion of the council the topographical or physical
conditions, unusual or excessive public travel, or other character of the work
warrants only partial payment or no payment of the cost by owners of benefited
properties.
   B.   Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the council from using
other means of financing improvement, including federal and state grants in
aid, sewer charges or fees, revenue bonds, general obligation bonds, or other
legal means of finance. If other means of finance are used, the council may
levy special assessments according to benefits derived to cover any remaining
cost. (Ord. 681, 3-25-1985)
5-1-9: ASSESSMENT ORDINANCE:
   A.   If the council determines the public improvement shall be made, when
the estimated cost is determined on the basis of the contract award or city
departmental cost or after the work is done and the cost has been actually
determined, the council shall decide whether the benefited property shall bear
all or a portion of the cost. The city manager shall prepare the proposed
assessment for each lot within the assessment district and file the assessments
in the recorder's office.
   B.   Notice of the proposed assessment shall be mailed to the owner of each
lot proposed to be assessed at the address shown on the Umatilla County tax
assessor's roll. The notice shall state the amount of assessment proposed on
the property and fix a date by which time objections shall be filed with the
city manager or city recorder. An objection shall state the grounds for the
objection.
   C.   At the hearing the council shall:
      1.   Consider objections and may adopt, correct, modify or revise the
assessment against each lot in the district according to special and peculiar
benefits accruing to it from the improvement.
      2.   By ordinance, spread the assessment. (Ord. 681, 3-25-1985)
5-1-10: NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT:
   A.   Within ten (10) days after the ordinance levying assessments has been
passed, the city manager shall send a notice of assessment to each owner of
assessed property by registered or certified mail and publish notice of the
assessment twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The first
publication of notice shall be not later than twenty (20) days after the date
of the assessment ordinance.
   B.   The notice of assessment shall include the name of the property owner,
a description of the assessed property, the amount of the assessment, and the
date of the assessment ordinance, and shall state that interest will begin to
run on the assessment and the property will be subject to foreclosure unless
the owner either makes application to pay the assessment in installments within
ten (10) days after the date of the first publication of notice or pays the
assessment in full within thirty (30) days after the date of the assessment
ordinance. (Ord. 681, 3-25-1985)
5-1-11: LIEN RECORD AND FORECLOSURE PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   After the assessment ordinance is adopted, the city manager shall enter
into the docket of liens a statement of the amount assessed on each lot, parcel
of land or portion of land, a description of the improvement, names of property
owners, and the date of the assessment ordinance. On entry into the lien docket
the amounts shall become liens and charges on the lots, parcels of land or
portions of land that have been assessed for improvement.
   B.   Assessment liens of the city shall be superior and prior to all other
liens or encumbrances on property insofar as state law permits.
   C.   Thirty (30) days after the date of the assessment ordinance, interest
shall be charged at a rate of three percent (3%) more than the interest rate in
subsection
5-1-2G of this chapter, and the city may foreclose or enforce collection of
assessment liens in the manner provided by state law.
   D.   The city may enter a bid on property being offered at a foreclosure
sale. The city bid shall be prior to all bids except those made by persons who
would be entitled under state law to redeem the property. (Ord. 681, 3-25-1985)
5-1-12: ERROR IN ASSESSMENT CALCULATION:
Claimed errors in the calculation of assessments shall be called to the
attention of the city manager, who shall determine whether there has been an
error. If there has been an error, the city manager shall recommend to the
council an amendment to the assessment ordinance to correct the error. On
enactment of the amendment, the city manager shall make the necessary
correction in the docket of liens and send a corrected notice of assessment by
registered or certified mail. (Ord. 681, 3-25-1985)
5-1-13: SUPPLEMENTAL ASSESSMENTS:
If an assessment is made before the total cost of the improvement is
determined, and if the amount of the assessment is insufficient to defray
expenses of the improvement, the council may declare the insufficiency by
motion and prepare a proposed supplemental assessment. The council shall set a
time for hearing objections to the supplemental assessment and direct the city
manager to publish one notice of the hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city. After the hearing the council shall make a just and
equitable supplemental assessment by ordinance, which shall be entered in the
docket of liens as provided by section
5-1-11 of this chapter. Notice of the supplemental assessment shall be
published and mailed, and collection of the assessment shall be made, in
accordance with sections
5-1-11 and
5-1-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 681, 3-25-1985)
5-1-14: REBATES:
On completion of the improvement project, if the assessment previously levied
on any property is found to be more than sufficient to pay the cost of the
improvement, the council shall determine the excess and declare it by
ordinance. When declared, the excess amounts must be entered in the lien docket
as a credit on the appropriate assessment. If an assessment has been paid, the
person who paid it or that person's legal representative shall be entitled to
payment of the rebate credit. (Ord. 681, 3-25-1985)
5-1-15: REMEDIES:
Subject to curative provisions of section
5-1-17 of this chapter and rights of the city to reassess as provided in
section
5-1-18 of this chapter, proceedings for writs of review and other appropriate
equitable or legal relief may be filed as provided by state law. (Ord. 681, 3-
25-1985)
5-1-16: ABANDONMENT OF PROCEEDINGS:
The council may abandon proceedings for improvements made under sections
5-1-1 to
5-1-18 of this chapter at any time before final completion of the improvements.
If liens have been placed on property under this procedure, they shall be
canceled, and payments made on assessments shall be refunded to the person who
paid them or to that person's legal representative. (Ord. 681, 3-25-1985)
5-1-17: CURATIVE PROVISIONS:
   A.   An improvement assessment shall not be rendered invalid by reason of:
      1.   Failure of the city manager's report to contain all information
required by section
5-1-2 of this chapter.
      2.   Failure to have all the required information in the improvement
resolution, assessment ordinance, lien docket, or notices required to be
published and mailed.
      3.   Failure to list the name of or mail notice to an owner of property
as required by this chapter.
      4.   Any other error, mistake, delay, omission, irregularity or other
act, jurisdictional or otherwise, in the proceedings or steps specified, unless
it appears that the assessment is unfair or unjust in its effect on the person
complaining.
   B.   The council shall have authority to remedy and correct all matters by
suitable action and proceedings. (Ord. 681, 3-25-1985)
5-1-18: REASSESSMENT:
When an assessment, supplemental assessment, or reassessment for an improvement
made by the city has been set aside, annulled, declared or rendered void, or
its enforcement restrained by a court of this state or by federal court having
jurisdiction, or when the council doubts the validity of the assessment,
supplemental assessment, reassessment, or any part of it, the council may make
a reassessment in the manner provided by state law. (Ord. 681, 3-25-1985)
CHAPTER 2
SIDEWALKS, STREETS AND DRIVEWAYS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Definitions
5-2-2: Duty To Repair; Permit Required
5-2-3: Liability Of Owner
5-2-4: Nonliability Of City
5-2-5: Notification
5-2-6: Grade And Width
5-2-7: Right To Hearing; Failure Of Owner To Appeal Issuance Of Notice Or To
Repair
5-2-8: Lien On Property
5-2-9: Sidewalk Plan
5-2-10: Damaging Streets
5-2-11: Improvements; Permit, Insurance, Bond Required
5-2-12: Trench Installations
5-2-13: Driveways
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
APRON: That portion of the driveway approach extending from the gutter flow
line to the sidewalk section and lying between the end slopes of the driveway
approach.
CURB RETURN: The curved portion of a street curb at street intersections or the
curbed portion of a curb in the end slopes of a driveway approach.
DRIVEWAY: An area on private property where automobiles and other vehicles are
operated or allowed to stand.
DRIVEWAY APPROACH: An area, construction or improvement between the roadway of
a public street and private property intended to provide access for vehicles
from the roadway of a public street to a definite area of the private property,
such as a parking area, a driveway, or a door at least seven feet (7') wide,
intended and used for the ingress and egress of vehicles. The component parts
of the driveway approach are termed the apron, the end slopes or the curb
return, and the sidewalk section.
END SLOPES: Those portions of driveway approach which provide a transition from
the normal curb and sidewalk elevations to the grade of the apron, either by
means of a sloping surface or by means of a curb return together with the area
between the projected tangents of the curb return.
SIDEWALK SECTION: That portion of the driveway approach lying between the back
edge of the sidewalk and apron, plus the end slopes measured at the front edge
of the sidewalk. (1956 Code)
5-2-2: DUTY TO REPAIR; PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is hereby made the duty of all owners of land adjoining any street in the
city to construct, reconstruct, repair and maintain in good condition the
sidewalks in front of, along or abutting said lands. (1956 Code § 3-201)
The owner, agent or occupant, before making said repairs, shall obtain from the
city engineer a permit which shall prescribe the kind of repair to be made, the
material to be used and other specifications. (1956 Code § 3-206)
5-2-3: LIABILITY OF OWNER:
The owner of land adjoining any street shall be liable for all damages to
whomsoever resulting, arising from defects in, or want of repairs and
maintenance to, the sidewalks in front of, along or abutting upon the land of
such owner or owners. (1956 Code)
5-2-4: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
Neither the city, or any of its officers, agents, employees or city council
members, shall be liable to any person who is injured or otherwise suffers
damage by reason of any defects in or want of repairs or maintenance to any
sidewalk. However, if this exemption from liability is unenforceable, and in
any event, the person identified in section
5-2-3 of this chapter, shall be primarily liable to the injured party and shall
indemnify the city, its officers, agents, city council members, and employees
for any judgment against any of them, and shall be liable to them for any
expense paid or incurred, including attorney fees, to defend themselves or to
settle the claim of any injured person. (1956 Code; amd. Ord. 750)
5-2-5: NOTIFICATION:
Whenever the city manager learns of a condition in a sidewalk requiring
repairs, the city manager may issue a notice. The notice shall describe the
needed repairs, and shall require the persons described in this section to
commence proper construction, and repair of the sidewalk within thirty (30)
days after the service of such notice, and to diligently prosecute such work. A
true copy of the notice shall be served by first class mail upon the owner and
occupant addressed to the last known address of each. If any such person
entitled to receive notice resides within the city, service may also be
accomplished by personal service. In the event that mailed notices are returned
as not deliverable to the addressee for any reason, then service of notice may
be accomplished by posting the notice in a conspicuous place on the premises,
and such posting shall have the same effect as mail or personal service. The
city manager shall, immediately upon making service, or of posting the notice,
as hereinbefore described, make a written return or certificate of service of
the time, place, and manner of service and a sample of the original notice.
This record shall constitute an official record of the city, and shall be kept
on file with other city records in the place so designated by the city manager.
(Ord. 944, 6-25-2007)
5-2-6: GRADE AND WIDTH:
The city council shall have the power by resolution and authority to determine
the grade and width of all sidewalks, the material to be used and the
specifications for the construction thereof upon any street or part thereof or
within any district in the city. (1956 Code § 3-205)
5-2-7: RIGHT TO HEARING; FAILURE OF OWNER TO APPEAL ISSUANCE OF NOTICE OR TO
REPAIR:
   A.   If the notice referred to in section
5-2-5 of this chapter is served by mail, notice shall be effective upon the
earlier of the actual receipt thereof or four (4) days after mailing if mailed
to an address within this state, or ten (10) days after mailing if mailed to an
address outside this state. If the notice referred to in section
5-2-5 of this chapter is personally served, notice shall be effective
immediately.
   B.   An owner or occupant shall have a right to an administrative hearing
before the city manager to contest the need for repairs or the extent thereof.
A request for hearing shall be made in writing and shall be delivered or mailed
to the city manager's office within ten (10) days of the date of the notice
referred to in section
5-2-5 of this chapter becomes effective. The request for hearing shall be
effective if received by the city manager within the said ten (10) days or if
the envelope of a mailed request bears a postmark dated within the said ten
(10) days.
   C.   Upon receipt of a timely request for hearing, the city manager shall
fix a time for the hearing so that the person requesting the hearing may show
why the repairs, or the extent thereof, stated in the notice is incorrect. The
city manager shall receive the evidence and testimony, but shall not be bound
by the technical rules of evidence in the conduct of the hearing. After the
hearing, the city manager shall issue a decision within five (5) days of the
close of the hearing. If the nature of the work or extent thereof stated in the
notice is amended as a result of the hearing, the city manager shall state in
writing the full extent of the amendment. (1956 Code)
   D.   If no timely request for hearing is received by the city manager or if
the repairing or constructing of the sidewalk or any portion thereof is not
commenced within thirty (30) days after service of notice has been made or the
construction or repairing is not prosecuted with diligence after having been
commenced, then the city manager may have the same repaired in a proper manner
and at a reasonable cost. Upon ascertaining the amount of such reasonable cost
for so doing, he or she shall immediately put such information in writing,
which notice shall set forth the time and manner of making repairs and the
costs. The notice shall be attached to the original notice and constitute a
part of the record of lien for improvements; and together with all expenses in
the "lien docket" of the city against the lot and premises abutting on that
portion of the sidewalk so repaired. (1956 Code; amd. Ord. 786)
5-2-8: LIEN ON PROPERTY:
Upon entry being made by the city manager as above provided, in the "lien
docket", the city shall have a lien on the lot and premises abutting on that
portion of the sidewalk so repaired, for the full amount of the costs and
expenses above mentioned with interest thereon at the rate of six percent (6%)
per annum and may proceed to foreclose the same, in the manner prescribed by
law. (1956 Code § 3-208)
5-2-9: SIDEWALK PLAN:
The following provisions shall be applicable to sidewalks within the city:
   A.   Definitions:
    ARTERIAL STREET: A street of considerable continuity which is primarily for
intercommunication between large areas.
   COLLECTOR STREET: A street supplementary to the arterial street system and a
means of intercommunication between this system and smaller areas, used partly
by through traffic and partly for access to abutting properties.
   B.   Placement: Sidewalks shall be located on at least one side of collector
streets, and at the discretion of the city council, shall be located on
arterial streets and collector streets so as to form a grid interconnecting all
neighborhoods with city schools, parks, shopping areas and other neighborhoods.
   C.   Width: Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet (4') wide on all
streets and where the council deems appropriate; sidewalks may be required to
be wider. Sidewalks shall be four inches (4") deep and six inches (6") deep at
driveways. Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete cement.
   D.   Curb Cuts: Sidewalks shall have curb cuts at intersections for
bicycles, carts and wheelchairs.
   E.   Abutting Curbs: Sidewalks shall abut curbs whenever possible.
   F.   Repairs: Where existing sidewalks not listed on the master plan reach a
state of disrepair, or prior to such a time, the property owners fronting the
sidewalk may either repair the sidewalk to city standards or remove it.
   G.   Time Of Construction: New sidewalks shall be constructed at the same
time as new streets when such streets are shown on the master sidewalk plan to
include sidewalks. (Res. 550, 1-23-1978)
   H.   Obstructions: No obstructions shall be placed so as to reduce the width
of sidewalks to four feet (4'), nor height clearance to ten feet (10').
Regulatory signs, mailboxes and other required obstructions, as approved by the
city, are exceptions to this section, but they shall not reduce clearance to
less than three feet (3') in width and seven feet (7') in height. (Ord. 532,
10-23-1978)
   I.   Outdoor Display Of Merchandise; Limitations: Outdoor display of
merchandise is limited in time, dimension and location according to the
standards set forth below. This section is not intended to prohibit the
placement of decorative planters, benches and other decorative objects on the
sidewalk in conformance with the standards, as long as the objects are not
aesthetically displeasing to the general public.
   J.   Outdoor Display Of Merchandise; Permitted Zones: Outdoor display of
merchandise may be permitted in the Main Street residential (MSR), downtown
business (DB), civic overlay (CO), retail and service commercial (C-1) and
general commercial (C-2) zones.
   K.   Outdoor Display Of Merchandise; Development Permit: Prior to placement
of any merchandise for outdoor display, a development permit is required to be
issued through the planning department.
   L.   Outdoor Display Of Merchandise; Hours: Outdoor display of merchandise
shall only be allowed during normal business hours. The merchandise shall not
be placed or maintained any more than three feet (3') from the storefront into
the sidewalk; provided in any event that a minimum of four feet (4') of
unobstructed sidewalk is maintained (see figure 1 of this section). The
merchandise shall be allowed to be placed along the length of the building,
whether displayed on tables, racks or individual items, except that two feet
(2') at each end of the display must be kept clear.
   FIGURE 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9fce89613db33abafc9763fa7174eb0da9638a04/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1671.jpg]
 
   M.   Exceptions: Notwithstanding the foregoing restrictions on the use of
sidewalks, the city council may, by motion or resolution, as a part of a
community event or celebration, authorize the use of portions of sidewalks for
a period not to exceed three (3) days during which exhibits, sidewalk sales or
other special events may take place on sidewalks of sufficient width to allow
the passage of pedestrian traffic in addition to the operation or existence of
the special event. As a part of such motion or resolution, the city council may
impose conditions for the welfare, safety and convenience of the public.
   N.   Nuisance Declaration: Any obstruction of, or encroachment on,
sidewalks, curbs, gutters or planting strips in the city of Milton-Freewater
that is not in conformance with this section is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and may be abated by the city as herein provided, or by any other
lawful procedure or means.
   O.   Abatement Procedure: The city of Milton-Freewater shall have the power
and right to use the following procedure, in addition to other lawful
procedures, in abating any public nuisance as defined in this section:
      1.   Upon receiving notice or discovery of the existence of a public
nuisance as defined herein, the city, through any of its officers, shall issue
a written warning to the owner or user of such nuisance in writing to abate and
remove such nuisance from an open public way within twenty four (24) hours from
the date of such notice. If the property is not in compliance within the twenty
four (24) hour period a written citation shall be issued.
      2.   If the owner or user of such nuisance shall have good and sufficient
reason to require an extension of time for the removal of the same, the owner/
user may submit a written request to the city manager which shall state the
reasons for an extension, and the city manager may, at his/her discretion,
grant additional time for the removal of such nuisance, but such additional
time shall not exceed a period of thirty (30) days.
      3.   Upon the expiration of the twenty four (24) hour period for
abatement and removal of the nuisance, and the owner or user of such nuisance
has not complied with the terms of this section, the owner or user shall be
issued a citation.
      4.   In addition to the penalties provided herein, after the expiration
of the period of time allowed for the abatement and removal of the nuisance as
herein provided, or immediately if the owner or user of said nuisance is
unknown or cannot be found after reasonable search, the city may remove, or
cause to be removed and abated, the encroachment or obstruction to the public
right of way; provided, however, that neither the city nor any of its officers
or employees shall be held liable for the destruction of, or damage to, such
obstruction or encroachment of an open public way where there has been
substantial compliance with the provisions of this section.
   P.   Violation; Penalty: Violation of, or failure to comply with, any
provision of this section is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and is
punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00). Each day that such violation shall continue to exist shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation of this section. (Ord. 970, 7-13-
2015)
5-2-10: DAMAGING STREETS:
   A.   No person shall injure or obstruct any street or alley within the city
by digging a ditch through, over or across the same except where a person shall
construct a substantial culvert over such ditch and keep the culvert in good
repair or where a permit is granted by the city engineer.
   B.   No tractor or vehicle having rough surfaced metal tracks or rough
surfaced metal wheels shall be operated on oiled or paved city streets without
prior approval of the city engineering department. (1956 Code § 7-046)
5-2-11: IMPROVEMENTS; PERMIT, INSURANCE, BOND REQUIRED:
   A.   Street Opening Permits Required, Application: No person shall remove,
alter or construct any curb, sidewalk, driveway approach, gutter, pavement, or
other improvement in any public street, alley, or other property owned by or
dedicated to, or used by this city and over which it has jurisdiction to
regulate the matters covered hereby, without first obtaining a permit from the
public works department, and no permit shall be granted until the applicant
shall file with the public works department one copy of a drawing showing the
location and size of all such proposed improvements to serve the property
affected. (1956 Code § 3-311; amd. 1978 Code)
Application for permits to construct improvements shall be made to the public
works department on forms provided for that purpose. (1956 Code § 3-312; amd.
1978 Code)
   B.   Insurance Requirements: Liability and property damage insurance in the
amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each occurrence and
five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for aggregate operations shall be
filed with the public works department naming the city as an insured prior to
the issuance of any permits.
   C.   Bond Required: Persons filing for permits shall provide a bond whereby
the city shall not be responsible for losses or claims caused by the permit
holder and shall guarantee the full and faithful completion of all requirements
of the permit, and additionally shall guarantee the repair or replacement of
defective material or workmanship for a period of twelve (12) months after the
work has been completed. The bond shall be in the amount of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00). (1978 Code)
5-2-12: TRENCH INSTALLATIONS:
   A.   Open trenching shall not be allowed on paved streets unless the permit
holder or person in charge has exhausted all possibilities to force, drill, jet
or tunnel under the street. Permits, when allowed, to open trench in paved
areas, must include an approved construction design and time schedule for
completing the work.
   B.   Included in the design shall be provision for sawing pavement.
Jackhammers or pavement breakers may only be used for emergency repair work
with resawing to follow.
   C.   All excavated material must be removed. A select material approved by
the city must be imported and compacted in lifts to maximum density obtainable.
   D.   Pavement bases and AC pavement must be replaced at least equal to the
original construction but in no case may the roadway section have less than
eight inches (8") of base material and three inches (3") of AC pavement.
   E.   Sealing of construction joints must be accomplished after placement of
the final patch.
   F.   No trench may be left unattended for any length of time while open.
   G.   Temporary or permanent patches must be placed no more than forty eight
(48) hours after closing of the trench. Temporary patches must be used where
weather or other problems would cause delays beyond forty eight (48) hours in
placing permanent patches. Removal of temporary patches and placement of
permanent patches are the responsibility of the permit holder.
   H.   Failure of any portion of the trench construction or pavement shall be
repaired at the permit holder's expense.
   I.   Proper barricades and signs must he provided by the permit holder to
afford the public the least possible inconvenience. Closing of streets for any
period of time will only be granted in circumstances where this method of
construction appears to be the only available solution within reason.
   J.   Any work requirements not carried out or corrected promptly will be
resolved by the city and any costs involved shall be charged to the permit
holder. (1978 Code)
5-2-13: DRIVEWAYS:
   A.   Prohibited Locations:
      1.   No driveway approach shall be permitted to encompass any municipal
facility. Under the permit provided for herein, applicant may be authorized to
relocate any municipal facility, including any within the limits of a curb
return which may be encroached upon as allowed under subsections A3 and A4 of
this section.
      2.   At street intersections no portion of any driveway approach,
including end slopes, shall be permitted between the limits of the intersection
of the prolonged property lines and the curb.
      3.   At street intersections no portion of any driveway approach,
including end slopes, shall be permitted between the limits of the intersection
of the prolonged back edges of the sidewalks and the curb.
      4.   At street intersections and at curves having a radius of less than
fifty feet (50') no driveway approach, to include end slopes, shall be located
nearer than ten feet (10') from the point where a curb radius meets a straight
curb. On winding streets or unusual intersections, the city engineer will
determine an approximate point to establish the ten foot (10') criteria. (Ord.
346, 8-24-1970)
   B.   Length And Number Of Curb Driveway Approaches:
      1.   Residential:
         a.   For standard lots of six thousand (6,000) square feet (50 foot to
80 foot frontage):
One 12-foot driveway approach, or one 20-foot approach.
         b.   Lots of seven thousand (7,000) to ten thousand (10,000) square
feet (90 foot to 120 foot frontage):
A twelve foot (12') driveway approach, or one 20-foot driveway approach, or two
(2) 12-foot approaches for circular driveways.
         c.   A safety island of not less than ten feet (10') of full curb
height shall in all cases be provided between driveway approaches serving any
one property frontage.
      2.   Commercial Property:
         a.   In a twenty five (25) mile per hour or less speed zone, up to
thirty foot (30') driveway approach is permitted.
         b.   In a zone where the speed limit is above twenty five (25) miles
per hour but under forty five (45) miles per hour, a thirty five foot (35')
driveway approach is permitted.
         c.   Where forty five (45) miles per hour or more speed is permitted,
a forty foot (40') driveway approach is permitted.
         d.   A safety island of not less than twenty feet (20') of full curb
height shall in all cases be provided between driveway approaches serving any
one property frontage.
         e.   Property frontage referred to herein includes approach areas
directly in front of property owned or under the control of the applicant, and
such area as may be opposite adjoining property which is used for approach
purposes by right of easement or agreement with the adjoining property owner.
(1956 Code § 3-315)
   C.   Construction Details:
      1.   All driveway approaches between the curb line and the property line
may be constructed of Portland cement concrete or as provided in subsection E
of this section. The concrete of the driveway approach, including the sidewalk
section, shall be four inches (4") thick for residential approaches and six
inches (6") thick for commercial approaches.
      2.   The sidewalk section of the driveway approach shall be finished and
scored as specified by the public works department for typical sidewalk
construction. Apron and end slope areas of the driveway approach stall be
finished, after troweling smooth and scoring, with a fiber push broom drawn
over the surface parallel to the curb line.
      3.   Driveway approaches shall be constructed in accordance with the
standard plans for driveway approaches as filed with the public works
department, copy of which shall be furnished the applicant at the time the
application is filed. (1956 Code § 3-316; amd. 1978 Code)
   D.   Driveway Approaches Near Alleys: Driveway approaches located within
five feet (5') of the existing curb return at an alley intersection may be
merged with the alley intersection pavement, thus requiring the removal of the
existing curb return; the total apron length plus the alley width, measured at
the curb line of the apron to the opposite alley line, shall not exceed forty
feet (40'). (1956 Code § 3-317)
   E.   Areas Of Limited Street Improvements:
      1.   Where standard gutters and curbs have been installed but, concrete
sidewalks have not been, the permit may authorize the applicant to construct
the driveway approach from the curb line to the applicant's premises of the
same materials as those used for paving applicant's premises. Such driveway
approach shall be constructed to establish grade and shall be adequate and
suitable for the traffic to be carried by it. The permit shall provide and the
applicant shall agree that if and when thereafter concrete sidewalks are
constructed, the applicant or his successor shall install concrete driveway
approaches.
      2.   Where standard gutters and curbs have not been installed, the apron
lengths set forth in subsection B of this section shall be measured along the
property line and there shall be not less than twenty feet (20') of frontage
between driveway approaches serving any one property. Permits shall not be
issued for any surface improvement or paving on the street right of way between
driveway approaches unless a concrete curb or other physical obstruction, of a
design satisfactory to the public works department is constructed and
maintained by the applicant along his property line, so that the entrance and
exit of vehicles to and from applicant's property will be restricted to the
established driveway approaches. Pursuant to the permit provided for herein,
applicant may surface the driveway approaches or other area within the right of
way by extending the same type of paving used on applicant's premises so that
it merges with the street pavement, provided applicant's paving is adequate and
suitable for traffic to be carried; such extended paving between the property
line and the street pavement shall be to established grade or other slope fixed
by the public works department to provide for proper runoff. Such paving
between the property line and the street pavement may meet the street pavement
at a point ahead of the curb opening in order to provide for safe deceleration
of vehicles turning into the applicant's premises. If applicant's paving is
extended beyond the property line into a street right of way at an intersection
or crossroad, the public works department may require applicant to construct a
suitable traffic island or curb to provide for the protection of such municipal
facilities as may be necessary. (1956 Code § 3-318; amd. 1978 Code)
   F.   Public Property: City street rights of way may not be used for private
commercial purposes. A permit for construction of driveway approaches shall not
be issued unless vehicles to be served or serviced can be parked entirely
within the private property lines. (1956 Code § 3-319)
   G.   Unusual Conditions: The public works department is hereby authorized to
grant in writing variances from the regulations and requirements of this
chapter, provided he first determines that the following conditions are
present:
      1.   The variance requested arises from peculiar physical conditions not
ordinarily existing in similar districts in the city, or is due to the nature
of the business or operation upon the applicant's property.
      2.   The variance requested is not against the public interest,
particularly safety, convenience and general public welfare.
      3.   The granting of the permit for the variance will not adversely
affect the right of adjacent property owners or tenants.
      4.   The terms of this chapter will work unnecessary hardship upon the
applicant, property owner or tenant. (1956 Code § 3-320; amd. 1978 Code)
CHAPTER 3
STREET NAMES AND NUMBERS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Designation Of Streets, Avenues, Courts; Naming Streets
5-3-2: Baselines
5-3-3: Designation Of Numbered Streets
5-3-4: Schedule Of Street Names Adopted
5-3-5: Dividing Line, Street Numbers
5-3-6: Assignment Of Numbers
5-3-1: DESIGNATION OF STREETS, AVENUES, COURTS; NAMING STREETS:
   A.   Streets: All streets in the city running in a northerly and southerly
direction shall be, and are known and designated as streets. (1956 Code § 9-
100)
   B.   Avenues: All streets in the city running in an easterly and westerly
direction shall be, and are known and designated as avenues. (1956 Code § 9-
101)
   C.   Courts: All cul-de-sacs shall be called courts.
   D.   Naming Streets:
      1.   Streets in the northwest and southwest portions of the city shall be
named after females.
      2.   Streets in the southeast section of the city shall be named after
trees.
      3.   Streets in the northeast section of the city shall be named after
flowers. (Res. 506, 6-14-1976)
5-3-2: BASELINES:
Main Street shall be the north and south baseline for the establishment of
quadrants, and Broadway shall be the east and west baseline for the
establishment of quadrants, each of said baselines to be considered as extended
to the city limits.
For the purpose of establishing these baselines, Main Street shall include the
following: Starting at the south city limits of the former city of Milton and
former South Main Street; continue northerly on former Main Street to former
Frazier Street; thence continue northerly on former Main Street in the former
city of Milton to former Broadway; thence north on former Ward Street to former
Cleveland Street; thence west on former Cleveland Street to former Depot
Street; thence north and west on former Depot Street to the north limits of the
former city of Freewater.
Broadway shall include the following: Commencing at Main Street; thence west to
former Commercial Street; thence north on former Commercial Street to former
Olive Street; thence west on former Olive Street to end of street projected to
the city limits. (1956 Code § 9-102)
5-3-3: DESIGNATION OF NUMBERED STREETS:
All the numbered streets lying northerly of Broadway and westerly of North Main
Street shall be preceded by the word "Northwest"; all the numbered streets
lying northerly of Broadway and easterly of North Main Street shall be preceded
by the word "Northeast"; all the numbered streets lying southerly of Broadway
and westerly of South Main Street shall be preceded by the word "Southwest";
and all the numbered streets lying southerly of Broadway and easterly of South
Main Street shall be preceded by the word "Southeast". The preceding
designations shall be designated by the letters "N.W.", "N.E.", "S.W." and
"S.E.", respectively. (1956 Code § 9-103; amd. 1978 Code)
5-3-4: SCHEDULE OF STREET NAMES ADOPTED:
The old street names and new street names shall be as designated and set forth
in a schedule which is hereby adopted by reference. Said schedule shall be and
remain on file in the office of the city manager. (1978 Code)
5-3-5: DIVIDING LINE, STREET NUMBERS:
Broadway is designated as the dividing line for all houses numbering to the
north and to the south; and Main Street is designated as the dividing line for
the houses numbering to the east and to the west. Beginning at these streets as
dividing lines, the house numbers will be increased by 100 for each block
distance away from said base streets. One number shall be allotted to twenty
five feet (25') of frontage on each street and avenue. The numbers on all
streets and avenues on these aforementioned base streets shall be even numbers
on the right side and odd numbers on the left side going from base streets.
Provided, however, that where a short street one block in length intersects
another street or avenue on one side only, such short street shall be
disregarded in the assigning of numbers on said intersected street or avenue
and the numbers shall run consecutively to the next regularly intersecting
street or avenue. (1956 Code § 9-105)
5-3-6: ASSIGNMENT OF NUMBERS:
In case of doubt or where a question arises as to the proper number to be
assigned to any lot or building, the city manager shall decide the question and
fix the number of each lot or building. The city manager is also authorized to
assign new numbers to all existing houses and buildings within the city and is
empowered to assign new numbers to all new buildings or houses hereafter
constructed within the city in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
All persons hereafter obtaining permits for the construction of new residences
or buildings within the city shall, at the time of obtaining said permit also
obtain from the city manager the street number to be assigned to said new
residence or building. (1956 Code §§ 9-106, 9-107)
CHAPTER 4
SEWER REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-4-1: General Regulations
5-4-2: Sewer Rate Schedule
5-4-3: Duty Of Owners
5-4-4: Power Of Inspector
5-4-5: License Required
5-4-6: Location, Separate Connections
5-4-7: Quality And Size Of Drains, Catch Basin
5-4-8: Grades And Changes
5-4-9: Opening, Refilling Trenches
5-4-10: Tampering With Manholes, Public Sewers
5-4-11: Prohibited Wastes
5-4-12: Private Sewage Disposal
5-4-13: Connection Required
5-4-14: Sewer Extensions
5-4-15: Reserved
5-4-16: Reserved
5-4-17: Sewer System Development Charge (Hookon Fees)
5-4-18: Temporary Adjustment Of Charges
5-4-1: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Independent System:
      1.   The drainage and plumbing system of each new building and of new
work installed in an existing building shall be separate from and independent
of that of any other building, except as provided below, and every building
shall have an independent connection with a public or private sewer when
available.
      2.   Where one building standing in the rear of another building on an
interior lot held under one ownership and no private sewer is available or can
be constructed to the rear building through adjoining alley, court, yard or
driveway, the house drain from the front building may be extended to the rear
building and the whole will be considered as one house drain. Except that
buildings on properties held under separate ownership shall be connected only
through satisfactory rights of way or easements.
      3.   Every building connected to a water delivery system shall be
required to connect to the sewer system in compliance with this code.
   B.   Old House Sewers And Drains: Old house sewers and drains may be used in
connection with new buildings or new plumbing only when they are found, on
examination and test, to conform in all respects to the requirements governing
new sewers or drains, as prescribed in this code. If the old work does not meet
current code requirements, the plumbing inspector shall notify the owner to
make the necessary changes to conform with this code.
   C.   Connection Of Main Sewer: Connections to the main sewers or laterals
must be made into a "Y" branch. Where no branch is available within a
reasonable distance, a "Y" branch shall be inserted in the sewer line. The
sewer shall not be tapped below the centerline of the pipe, and all taps shall
be inspected, and meet with the approval of the city engineer or city manager.
(1956 Code § 8-323)
5-4-2: SEWER RATE SCHEDULE:
   A.   Schedules of sewer rates shall be fixed by the city council by
resolution and may, in like manner, be amended or altered from time to time at
the discretion of the city council. The city council shall further be
authorized to establish by resolution such rules and regulations with respect
to use of sewers by the consumer.
   B.   All monthly fees and/or charges shall be paid in accordance with
chapter 7 of this title. (1956 Code)
5-4-3: DUTY OF OWNERS:
It shall be the duty of the owner of any property upon which facilities for
sewage disposal are required by section
5-4-13 of this chapter to provide such facilities. Sewer charges must be paid
when master metered water charges apply pursuant to subsection
5-5-5A of this title. The property owner shall be required to maintain the
sewer line from its point of origin inside the property owner's building to the
city's sewer main. (Ord. 937, 8-28-2006)
5-4-4: POWER OF INSPECTOR:
The city, through the city manager and authorized employees, shall have general
supervision over the installation and construction of all building connections
to the sanitary sewer system, which are now constructed or installed by its
authority, and shall have charge of all alterations and repairs of same, and
all matters in connection with the general sewerage system of the city. Such
authorized employees of the city shall be known as the inspector of sewers. The
inspector of sewers shall have full power to suspend the work of any contractor
for neglect to properly perform the work as required by this chapter, and shall
at once report the fact to the city manager. (1956 Code)
5-4-5: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No connections shall be made with any sewers or drains except by persons
regularly licensed and bonded under the regulations of this code and without
having obtained a permit from the city as required by the regulations of this
code. No house drains or private sewer will be allowed to be put in, nor any
work in connection therewith commenced unless the person is so licensed and has
acquired such permit. (1956 Code)
5-4-6: LOCATION, SEPARATE CONNECTIONS:
Applications for permits shall state the location of the property, in lot and
block numbers within platted areas, the name of the owner, number of the
building to be connected and how occupied. Every house or building shall be
separately and independently connected with the public sewer to existing "Ys"
unless permission is granted by the inspector to do otherwise. (1956 Code)
5-4-7: QUALITY AND SIZE OF DRAINS, CATCH BASIN:
The materials of all drains laid in any streets, alleys or public or private
places shall be cast iron pipe or any other pipe approved by the utility, not
less than four inches (4") in diameter, the size of the pipe to be used to be
determined by the inspector of sewers, extending from the public sewer to the
right of way line of the property to be connected with said sewer.
All floor drains installed in public garages, repair shops and similar places
shall be provided with a catch basin through which the drainage shall pass
before entering the sewer. The said basin shall not be less than two feet six
inches (2'6") in cross sectional dimension and two feet (2') in depth below
outlet connection, when a four inch (4") drain is installed. A trap shall be
provided in the outlet connection between the catch basin and the main drain,
and said trap shall be vented. Such plumbing shall comply with the Oregon state
plumbing code. No septic tanks, cesspools, or dry wells shall be used between
the building and the sanitary sewer. A property owner in whose plumbing
installation catch basins are required shall keep such catch basins clean and
remove sediment regularly. The city shall be authorized to inspect all catch
basins periodically and may order the cleaning of catch basins at any time
deemed necessary. All floor drains shall be provided with suitable and
accessible cleanout, and same shall never be removed except for the purpose of
opening stoppages and cleaning the drain. (1956 Code § 4-105; amd. 1978 Code)
5-4-8: GRADES AND CHANGES:
All house drains and private sewers laid in any street, alley or public place
shall conform to such grades and lines as may be approved by the inspector, and
as little as possible of the trench shall be dug until the branch pipe is found
in the public sewer. All drains shall be laid as nearly as possible in straight
lines and uniform grades, and any change in direction or grades shall be made
with fittings or curves as may be approved by said inspector. (1956 Code)
5-4-9: OPENING, REFILLING TRENCHES:
See subsection
5-2-11A, "Street Opening Permits Required, Application", and section
5-2-12, "Trench Installations", of this title. (1956 Code)
5-4-10: TAMPERING WITH MANHOLES, PUBLIC SEWERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, without authority from the inspector of
sewers, to open any manhole or interfere with or tamper with, in any manner,
any manhole, flush tank or public sewer of the city. (1956 Code)
5-4-11: PROHIBITED WASTES:
The following substances shall not be deposited in the sewer system:
   A.   Petroleum, coal tar, vegetable and mineral oils and products, and their
derivatives and wastes.
   B.   Greases, oils and sludges from service stations, garages, repair shops,
machine shops, cleaning establishments or other industries or establishments.
   C.   Explosive or inflammable liquids and gases.
   D.   Acids, alkalies or other corrosive liquids, gases or substances of
sufficient strength to damage sewers, manholes, pumping stations, or treatment
plant units.
   E.   Paints or waste products from paint manufacture.
   F.   Substances which will form deposits or obstructions in sewers or which
when mixed with sewage will precipitate material and thus form deposits in
sewers.
   G.   Ashes, cinders, sand, earth, coal, rubbish or metals of any kind.
   H.   Live steam, exhaust steam or water having a temperature above one
hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F).
   I.   Ground or unground fruit peelings and cores from canneries or packing
plants.
   J.   Cull fruits and vegetables.
   K.   Fruit and vegetable pits and seeds such as those from peaches,
apricots, cherries, prunes, pumpkins and squash.
   L.   Roof drains, subsurface drains or any other water generated as storm
runoff. (1978 Code)
5-4-12: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in an unsanitary manner within the city, any human or animal
excretion, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   B.   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
section
5-4-13 of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
disposal system complying with this chapter and the requirements imposed by the
state board of health, department of environmental quality, or any other
governmental agency having jurisdiction.
   C.   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from ODEQ and the city
manager. The application for such permit shall be stated and all information
given as is deemed necessary by the city manager. If the application is
acceptable, a permit will be issued by the inspector for a fee as set forth by
the city council by resolution.
   D.   The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private disposal plant
shall comply with the regulations of all governmental agencies having
jurisdiction.
   E.   At such time as a public sewer is available to a property served by a
private disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer
in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tank, cesspool, and similar
private disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material.
   F.   This chapter shall not be construed to interfere with any additional
requirements that may be made by other governmental or regulatory agencies.
(1956 Code)
5-4-13: CONNECTION REQUIRED:
Every residence, building or place where human beings reside, assemble or are
employed within the city, shall be required to connect to the city sanitary
sewer system where such connection is available within two hundred feet (200').
In areas where city sanitary sewers are not available for connection, every
residence, building or place where human beings reside, assemble or are
employed shall be required to have a sanitary method for disposal of sewage.
(1956 Code)
5-4-14: SEWER EXTENSIONS:
Extensions to the city's sewer system will be made in accordance with the
following provisions:
   A.   Regulations: Extensions to the sewer trunk lines will be made along
street or other satisfactory rights of way within the city and the applicant or
developer will be required to extend the sewer line to the extremes of all
property lines abutting a street or right of way. No new service will be
allowed outside the city limits.
   B.   Contracts Required: Contracts or construction agreements must be
entered into between the utility and legal representative of any person or
group of persons planning to construct facilities which, after construction,
will become the property or responsibility of the utility to maintain. All
facilities constructed within public rights of way or easements require
contracts or agreements.
   C.   Required Contract Provisions: Contracts of construction agreements
shall include written provisions, or by reference, or exhibit attachment, the
following:
      1.   Design plan together with any supporting data required.
      2.   Standards for material and installation.
      3.   Individual or corporation who will perform the construction.
      4.   Bonding requirements. (Both performance bonds and maintenance bonds
may be required.)
      5.   Time limits for completion of project.
      6.   Insurance requirements protecting the utility from damages or claims
by third parties.
      7.   The utility's right to take over the work and complete same if the
contract is in default.
      8.   Procedures for enforcement of the contract or agreement.
      9.   Inspection fees due the utility, normally three percent (3%) of
total construction cost of the project.
      10.   Projects or construction must be completed, tested, accepted, fees
paid, and as built plans filed with the utility prior to utilization of any
portion of the project.
   D.   Standards Of Construction: All components, parts, portions,
installation practices or methods required to complete a portion of the city
owned utility system shall be subject to approval of the utility. Street
opening permits shall be obtained for any portion of construction or
installation within a public right of way or easement. (1956 Code)
5-4-15: RESERVED:
(Ord. 669, 10-8-1984)
5-4-16: RESERVED:
(Ord. 669, 10-8-1984)
5-4-17: SEWER SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE (HOOKON FEES):
No person shall make a new connection or expand the size of an existing
connection to the city sewer system unless they have first paid a sewer
connection fee according to a fee schedule and procedure established by
resolution. All fees required by this section shall be paid prior to the
issuance of a zoning permit, or where no zoning permit is required, prior to
the start of construction. (Ord. 657, 12-27-1983)
5-4-18: TEMPORARY ADJUSTMENT OF CHARGES:
When a multiple use building (e.g., apartment complex) is temporarily totally
vacated for the purpose of major repairs, and all tenants have vacated the
building, a customer may request that the monthly charges for each unit be
suspended and one charge for the entire building be charged for up to three (3)
months. If the building is being remodeled or repaired one unit at a time, no
adjustment of the normal charges shall be made. (1956 Code)
CHAPTER 5
WATER REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-5-1: General Regulations
5-5-2: Responsibility Of Customer And Utility
5-5-3: Application For Service
5-5-4: Water Meters And Services
5-5-5: Rate Schedules And Contracts
5-5-6: Water System Development Charge (Hookon Fees)
5-5-7: Payment Of Rates
5-5-8: Water Turnoff At Customer's Request
5-5-9: Guarantee Deposit
5-5-10: Refusal Of Service
5-5-11: Discontinuance Of Service
5-5-12: Extensions Of Water Mains
5-5-1: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Water service will be supplied by the city through its duly authorized
utility to its customers in the city and outside of the city.
   B.   These rules shall apply to any person who is now or may hereafter
become a residential, commercial or industrial customer of the water utility.
   C.   The city manager is responsible for the operation of the water utility.
(1956 Code § 5-001)
   D.   The water utility will exercise reasonable diligence and care to
furnish and deliver a continuous and sufficient supply of pure water to the
customer, and to avoid any shortage or interruption of delivery of same. The
utility will not be liable for high or low pressure conditions, chemical or
bacteriological conditions, interruptions or shortage or insufficiency of
supply or any loss or damage occasioned thereby. The use of water upon the
premises of the customer is at the risk of the customer and the responsibility
of the utility shall cease at the point of delivery of water as identified in
subsection
5-5-2B of this chapter.
   E.   The utility, whenever it shall find it necessary for the purpose of
making repairs or improvements to its system, shall have the right to suspend,
temporarily, the delivery of water, but in all such cases as reasonable notice
thereof as circumstances will permit, will be given to the customers, and the
making of such repairs or improvements will be prosecuted as rapidly as may be
practicable, and if practicable at such times as will cause the least
inconvenience to the consumer.
   F.   In case of shortage of supply, the utility reserves the right to give
preference in the matter of furnishing service to customers as in the judgment
of its representatives shall be for the best interest of the city from the
standpoint of public convenience or necessity.
   G.   All outside city services shall be held at all times liable to
disconnection in the event of a shortage of water supply within the city.
Pressure and other conditions, in or out of the city, are to be at the risk of
the customer without guarantee by the utility. (1956 Code § 5-009)
   H.   Whenever it becomes necessary for the utility to issue an order
restricting or prohibiting the use of water for any class of service or
customer, the order so issued shall affect all like customers served by the
system. The city manager shall designate those sprinkling hours which are most
beneficial to the city water system. (Res. 249, 1-13-1964; amd. 1978 Code)
5-5-2: RESPONSIBILITY OF CUSTOMER AND UTILITY:
   A.   The customer must obtain and furnish to the water utility all necessary
permits to enable the utility to supply service except permits for city owned
space which will be obtained by the utility.
   B.   The customer shall be responsible for all damage to, or loss of
utility's property located upon his premises, including damage by hot water,
unless occasioned by an act of God, or by neglect of the utility. The use of
water upon the premises of the customer is at the risk of the customer and the
responsibility of the utility shall cease at the meter, or at unmetered
service, at the customer's service cutoff meter box, or customer's property
line, whichever requires the least distance to the utility's water main in the
street, alley or easement.
   C.   The customer shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance
of piping, plumbing and equipment on the customer's premises, from the meter or
edge of the public right of way. The utility shall not be liable for loss or
damage of any nature whatsoever caused by any defect in the customer's piping
or in the customer's equipment upon the premises of the customer. The utility
does not assume the duty of inspecting the customer's line, plumbing and
equipment and shall not be responsible therefor.
   D.   The utility does not undertake or agree to furnish or supply continuous
or uninterrupted service to its customers and shall not be held responsible or
liable to any customer for any loss or damage caused or occasioned by or
arising from, any water or due to accident, breakdowns, washouts or other cases
which are unavoidable or beyond the reasonable control of the utility, or on
account of strikes, riots, wars, or civil or military authority; not in any
event shall the utility be responsible or liable for any consequential damages,
unless occasioned or caused by the utility's wilful neglect. (1956 Code § 5-
007)
5-5-3: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE:
   A.   All applications for service or changes in service shall be made in
accordance with chapter 7 of this title.
   B.   No person supplied with water from the city mains will be entitled to
use water for any purpose other than those stated in his application, or to
supply, in any way, water to another person or families. (1956 Code § 5-002)
5-5-4: WATER METERS AND SERVICES:
   A.   Water meters are required on all new water services within the city
which receive service from the water utility. The customer shall be responsible
for the cost of the meter and its installation. Meters shall be set as close to
the property line as practicable at sites approved by the city. (Res. 529, 5-
23-1977)
   B.   Every connection to the city water system is required to have a
separate meter installed for that connection except that, at the sole
discretion of the city, multiple service connections such as apartment
complexes, business/commercial combination, business complexes, RV parks,
motels, nursing homes, and other existing combination uses may be served by one
"master" meter as long as there is only one responsible party for the multiple
service connection. These shall be considered one account for billing purposes
and individual units may not be shut off separately because of vacancy, nonuse
or any other reason.
   C.   All water customers outside the incorporated limits of the city shall
be metered. (1978 Code)
   D.   Installation of water services shall be the financial responsibility of
the water customer. The utility will install services on a cost of installation
plus overhead charge basis, when requested in writing by the property owner and
must be paid prior to service being provided. Connections or taps to utility
water mains shall only be made by city crews or by persons certified by the
utility as being qualified. (Res. 502, 5-24-1976; amd. Res. 529, 5-23-1977)
   E.   Cost shall be the cost to the city of the pipe, valves, connections,
meters and appurtenances necessary to complete installation of service line,
applicable charges for city vehicles, and of the charges for labor required to
complete the installation.
   F.   The service line from the utility main to the property line and all
meters regardless of location, shall become the property of and be retained by
the utility.
   G.   If any existing asphalt or concrete walks, driveways, or streets are
torn up in the process of making any of the above water line extensions or
putting in water services the customer or customers shall be charged with the
cost of replacing the damaged portion of sidewalks, driveways, street surfaces,
or other facilities and structures necessary to complete the installation. No
street shall be cut into without the customer having first obtained the
required street opening permit from the city. (1978 Code)
5-5-5: RATE SCHEDULES AND CONTRACTS:
   A.   Schedules of water rates and fees shall be fixed by the city council by
resolution, and may in like manner be amended or altered from time to time, at
the discretion of the city council. The city council shall further be
authorized to establish by resolution, such rules and regulations with respect
to use of water by the customer for sprinkling purposes, and may in its
discretion, fix the hours during which water may be used for such purpose.
(1956 Code)
5-5-6: WATER SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE (HOOKON FEES):
No person shall make a new connection or expand the size of an existing
connection to the city water system unless they have first paid a fee in an
amount and according to a procedure established by resolution. All fees
required by this section shall be paid prior to the issuance of a zoning
permit, or where no zoning permit is required, prior to the start of
construction. (Ord. 657, 12-27-1973)
5-5-7: PAYMENT OF RATES:
All water rates will be payable in accordance with chapter 7 of this title.
Failure to receive bills in no way relieves the customer from the obligation to
pay as set forth in chapter 7 of this title. The city shall have the right to
discontinue service to delinquent accounts in accordance with chapter 7 of this
title. (Res. 249, 1-13-1964; amd. 1978 Code; Ord. 718, 10-26-1987)
5-5-8: WATER TURNOFF AT CUSTOMER'S REQUEST:
A shutdown of water at the request of a water user occasioned by some condition
on water user's property may entail a charge to the water user. A shutdown of
water for convenience of the city not due to a condition on water user's
premises or at water user's request shall be the city's responsibility. (Res.
387, 1-8-1973)
5-5-9: GUARANTEE DEPOSIT:
   A.   Cash deposits as guarantee of payment may be required in accordance
with chapter 7 of this title. (1956 Code)
5-5-10: REFUSAL OF SERVICE:
   A.   The water utility may decline to serve any customer until he has
complied with the federal, state, and municipal regulations governing water
service and with the rules and regulations of the utility.
   B.   The utility may decline to serve or to increase the service to any
customer if the utility does not have adequate facilities to render the service
applied for, or if the service desired is likely to unfavorably affect service
to other customers.
   C.   The utility may refuse to serve a customer if the customer's plumbing
or equipment is such that satisfactory service cannot be given, or if the
customer's proposed use of the water service endangers either the utility or
other customers through possible cross connections or contamination of the
utility's water supply. (1978 Code)
   D.   The utility may refuse to reconnect under the name of any other member
of a family when the head of the household is unchanged, and when service
remains disconnected for nonpayment of bills.
   E.   The utility reserves the right to deny any application for water
service of over three-fourths inch (3/4") if, in its opinion, the system would
not be able to adequately serve such larger connection without interfering with
the water service of others. (Ord. 305, 3-27-1967)
   F.   The utility reserves the right to deny any application for water
service if adequate pressure may not be provided at the proposed point of use.
(1978 Code)
   G.   The utility may refuse to give service to any customer whose piping
system is connected directly with a well or any other source of supply other
than the transmission mains of the utility and if such cross connection is
detected on the premises after service has been installed by the utility, the
utility shall discontinue service immediately and without notice to the
customer. (1956 Code § 5-004)
   H.   Devices to control cross connections with sources of contamination if
required by either the utility or state or federal regulatory agencies, must be
installed and maintained at the customer's expense regardless of whether a
customer is new or existing. (1978 Code)
5-5-11: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
   A.   Notice: Notice to discontinue service by the customer must be made at
the finance department in the city hall, twenty four (24) hours in advance of
the discontinuance date. Intent to discontinue service given to an employee in
the field is not valid. Until the city shall have such notice, the customer
shall be held responsible for all service rendered at this location. (Ord. 718,
10-26-1987)
   B.   Violation: Service may be discontinued for nonpayment of bills or for
violation of the rules or regulations in accordance with chapter 7 of this
title.
   C.   Restored Service: Whenever service is discontinued because of
fraudulent use, the utility may require a satisfactory payment for service
rendered (in addition to the reconnection charge) before service is restored.
   D.   Wasting Water Prohibited: Municipal water shall not be permitted to be
wasted in any manner. Wasting of water upon streets or public ways is
prohibited hereunder. (1956 Code)
5-5-12: EXTENSIONS OF WATER MAINS:
   A.   Installation: Extensions of water mains shall be made only along
streets or other satisfactory rights of way within the city. All extensions of
existing water mains must be installed to the extreme of the property front
footage. New services outside the city limits will be allowed only by council
decision following presentation of findings appropriate for the benefit of the
city as determined by the city council. (Ord. 305, 3-27-1967; amd. Ord. 909, 8-
12-2002)
   B.   Obligation Of Property Owner: Water main extensions required by the
utility are an obligation of the property owner requesting service. All
extensions must be constructed according to a plan approved by the utility, and
according to an agreement in writing specifying the requirements both of the
property owner and the utility. (1978 Code)
   C.   Larger Main Installed: The utility may elect to install a larger main
than required of the property owner. If so, the utility shall bear the
additional cost of the pipe fittings and valves for the larger main. A minimum
of eight inch (8") size is required of the property owner.
Inspection fees and other work required of the utility shall be billed to the
property owner. Water main extensions and all components necessary to the
extension shall include, but are not limited to, fire hydrants, valves, dead
end blowoffs, valve boxes, pressure reducing valves, and booster pumps.
   D.   Contracts Required: Contracts of construction agreements must be
entered into between the utility and legal representative of any person or
group of persons planning to construct facilities which after construction will
become the property or responsibility of the utility to maintain. All
facilities constructed within public rights of way or easements require
contracts or agreements.
   E.   Required Contract Provisions: Contracts or construction agreements
shall include written provisions, or by reference, or exhibit attachment, the
following:
      1.   Design plan together with any supporting data required.
      2.   Standards for material and installation.
      3.   Individual or corporation who will perform the construction.
      4.   Bonding requirements, both performance bonds and maintenance bonds
may be required.
      5.   Time limits for completion of project.
      6.   Insurance requirement protecting the utility from damages of claims
by third parties.
      7.   The utility's right to take over the work and complete same if the
contract is in default.
      8.   Procedures for enforcement of the contract or agreement.
      9.   Inspection fees due the utility, normally three percent (3%) of
total construction cost of the project.
      10.   Projects or construction must be completed, tested, accepted, fees
paid, and as built plans filed with the utility prior to utilization of any
portion of the project.
   F.   Standards Of Construction: All components, parts, portions,
installation practices or methods required to complete a portion of the city
owned utility system shall be subject to approval of the utility. Street
opening permits shall be obtained for any portion of construction or
installation within a public right of way or easement. (1956 Code)
CHAPTER 6
ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-6-1: Scope Of Regulations
5-6-2: Revision Of Rules And Regulations
5-6-3: Conflicting Provisions
5-6-4: Application For Service
5-6-5: Deposit Required
5-6-6: Metering Requirements
5-6-7: Meter Reading And Payment Of Bill
5-6-8: Billing Procedure, Partial Month Basis
5-6-9: Discontinuance Of Service By City
5-6-10: Reconnection, Point Of Service Charge
5-6-11: Interest On Delinquent Bills
5-6-12: Residential Or Commercial Service Rates
5-6-13: Customer's Wiring Standards
5-6-14: Inspections
5-6-15: Contractor's Responsibility
5-6-16: Damage To City Property
5-6-17: Right Of Access
5-6-18: Termination Of Contract By Customer
5-6-19: Service Charge For Temporary Service
5-6-20: Interruption Of Service, Risk Of Injury
5-6-21: Voltage Fluctuations Caused By Customers
5-6-22: Additional Load
5-6-23: Notice Of Impairment
5-6-24: Meter Tests
5-6-25: Line Extension Policy
5-6-26: Reactive Power Charge
5-6-27: Motor Starting
5-6-28: Resale Of Energy And Standby Or Emergency Power Systems
5-6-29: Trailer Houses Outside Trailer Court
5-6-30: Underground Service Lines
5-6-31: New Subdivisions
5-6-32: Residential Service Requirements
5-6-33: Nonlinear Loads
5-6-1: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
The rules and regulations contained in this chapter are a part of all contracts
for receiving electric service from the city and apply to all service received
from the city, whether service is based upon contract, agreement, signed
application or otherwise. A copy of the city's schedule of rates and charges
shall be kept open for inspection at the city business office in the city hall.
(Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-2: REVISION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The rules and regulations contained in this chapter may be revised from time to
time by the city council. Such changes, when effective, shall have the same
force as the present rules and regulations. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-
2010)
5-6-3: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
In case of conflict between any provision of a rate schedule and rules and
regulations provisions, the rate schedules shall apply. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010,
eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-4: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE:
The city requires every prospective electric utility customer to sign an
application for service on forms available in the city hall. Said application
shall indicate the type of service, the date on which service connection is
desired, and any other information required by the utility. If service
application is for new or converted load (additional, different voltage, etc.),
application shall indicate amperage requirements. For services exceeding the
free limits of the extension rules set forth in section
5-6-25 of this chapter, the customer must sign an additional agreement
guaranteeing to pay required contribution before service is rendered. The
application itself shall in no way obligate the city to serve such an applicant
with any service rendered by the city. In the absence of a signed agreement or
application for service, the delivery of electric service by the city and the
acceptance thereof by the customer shall be deemed to constitute an agreement
hereunder. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-5: DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
There shall be a minimum deposit for service, which in the event of nonpayment
of the utility bill, shall be applied to the amounts due to the electric,
water, sewer, and garbage accounts proportionately. Deposits must be paid in
full prior to receiving service. Deposit shall be determined by the finance
director based on council approved resolutions. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-
2010)
5-6-6: METERING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   A separate service and meter is required for each dwelling unit,
business office, commercial or industrial account.
   B.   The customer shall provide a suitable service entrance to the premises
at a point of easiest access to the city distribution lines. The city will
provide the necessary wiring and meter up to this point. Such entrance shall be
continuous and free from the possibility of unwarranted tampering or
interfering. The customer shall furnish and install, on the exterior of the
building, a suitable meter socket for the city's meters as a part of the
service entrance equipment. In cases where additions to the existing building
would place a meter on the inside of the building, the meter shall be relocated
so that it will be on the outside. When metering transformers are required, the
customer shall furnish and install a suitable enclosure as specified by the
city. Meter sockets shall be placed in locations that are always accessible and
will afford proper protection against damage to the city's meter. Unless
special permission is obtained, the meter sockets shall be located at least
four feet (4') above the ground, floor or platform, and no higher than five
feet six inches (5'6") above the ground, floor or platform. All new or rewired
permanent services shall be at least two hundred forty (240) volts. No
plumbing, gas, oil supply or any other equipment shall be installed under the
meter. No person shall connect, disconnect, or reconnect any wire with the
city's electric system unless he is specifically authorized to do so by the
electric department of the city.
   C.   On or before six (6) months from the effective date of this subsection,
all customers of the electric utility of the city shall, at their expense, have
their electric meters on the outside of their premises in such a manner as to
enable the meter to be read from the outside.
   D.   When installing electric meters on new residences, or when relocating
electric meters on existing residence, the meter shall be installed on the
front of the structure or on either side of the structure within five feet (5')
of a front corner.
   E.   In certain instances, the electric department may agree to provide
service to the customer at primary voltage. The metering and instrument
transformers will be installed at the primary take off point. The city will own
and maintain the transformer installation and the primary feed to the
transformer. The customer ownership and responsibility will begin at the
secondary terminals of the transformer. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-7: METER READING AND PAYMENT OF BILL:
All meters shall be read, billed and due according to chapter 7, "Utility
Administrative Regulations", of this title. Failure to receive bills in no way
relieves the customer from his obligation to pay as set forth in this chapter.
Bills will be rendered for service from the time the service has been made
available at the request of the customer until such time as the customer
requests that service be discontinued and a final meter reading has been
obtained. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-8: BILLING PROCEDURE, PARTIAL MONTH BASIS:
When service is billed for a period of less than one month, kWhs billed shall
be the actual amount used plus one month's service charge. Demand charge, if
applicable, shall be billed as if services were rendered for a full billing
period. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-9: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE BY CITY:
The city may refuse to connect or may discontinue all services for the
violation of any of its rules and regulations, or for failure to pay for any
services when due, or for violation of any provision of the schedule of rates
and charges, or of the application of customer or contract with the customer.
The city reserves the right to refuse to supply service to loads of a customer
which may seriously impair service to any other customer, and shall have the
right to discontinue service to any customer who shall continue to use
appliances or apparatus detrimental to the service after being notified by the
city. The city may discontinue service to a customer for the theft of current
or the appearance of current theft devices on the premises of the customer. The
discontinuance of service by the city for any cause as stated in this chapter
does not release the customer from the obligations to the city for the payment
of bills as specified in the application of a customer or contract with a
customer. This policy affects all services except as may be required by state
law. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-10: RECONNECTION, POINT OF SERVICE CHARGE:
The city shall charge those rates as specified by resolution when performing
any of the following:
   A.   Whenever service has been disconnected by the city, as provided for in
this chapter, a minimum charge or a charge of actual labor will be required if
disconnection is made during the ordinary working week hours of the electric
department.
   B.   Reconnection after hours and on weekends.
   C.   If a service call is made by the city to disconnect for nonpayment, and
payment is made by the customer at the point of service. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010,
eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-11: INTEREST ON DELINQUENT BILLS:
The city electric department is authorized to charge interest on delinquent
bills according to the provisions of section
5-7-4 of this title. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-12: RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL SERVICE RATES:
   A.   Residential Service Rates: Residential service rates are available only
to dwellings of one or more rooms designed for occupancy by one family, and not
having more than one cooking facility. The rental of rooms for sleeping
purposes only in an ordinary residential dwelling does not constitute
commercial service.
   B.   Domestic Farm Use: A farm on which is located a single dwelling and its
outbuildings, and which processes only its own products shall be entitled to
the residential rate for all of its power requirements supplied through a
single point of delivery.
   C.   Irrigation Service: All irrigation pumping installations must have a
separate service and meter. Service cannot be combined with a residential or
commercial service.
   D.   Commercial Rate: A commercial customer shall be any applicant who
wishes to use the city's services for any gainful purposes, unless otherwise
stated in this chapter. Public buildings, religious and fraternal, or
cooperative nonprofit business organizations shall be considered commercial
activities for the purpose of billing.
   E.   Residential 3-Phase Service: 3-phase power shall not normally be
supplied for residential use. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-13: CUSTOMER'S WIRING STANDARDS:
All wiring by customers must conform to state and city requirements and
accepted modern standards, as exemplified by the national electric safety code
and the national wiring code as published by the National Fire Protection
Association. Customer is responsible for securing a state wiring permit, and
having a state inspection and approval before any service is hooked up.
(Exception: Existing service upgrade may be temporarily hooked up with electric
superintendent's approval, based on his good faith opinion that state standards
have been complied with, until such time as a state inspection can be
scheduled.) (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-14: INSPECTIONS:
The city shall have the right, but shall not be obligated, to inspect any
installation before electricity is delivered and periodically at any later
time, and reserves the right to reject and discontinue service to any wiring
not in accordance with the city's standards, but such inspection or failure to
inspect or reject shall not render the city liable or responsible for any loss
or damage resulting from defects in the installation, wiring and appliances, or
from violations of the city's rules or from accidents which may occur on the
customer's premises. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-15: CONTRACTOR'S RESPONSIBILITY:
An electrical contractor shall be responsible for the following:
   A.   To do all wiring in accordance with both city and state requirements.
   B.   To consult with the city electric department on the location and
requirements of each installation prior to starting work.
   C.   To give adequate notice when work has commenced so the city will have
time to make connections without inconveniencing the customer. (Ord. 955, 3-8-
2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-16: DAMAGE TO CITY PROPERTY:
   A.   All meters, instrument transformers, service connections, and other
equipment furnished by the city shall be and remain the property of the city.
Customers shall provide a space for, and exercise proper care to protect the
property of the city on its premises. The customer shall not permit any person
to connect, disconnect, or reconnect discontinued service without city
approval.
   B.   In the event of loss or damage to the city's property arising from
negligence, the party responsible for the damage shall pay for all necessary
repairs or replacements including, but not limited to, complete reconstruction
of the damaged equipment to the extent determined necessary by the city, plus
all applicable overheads. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-17: RIGHT OF ACCESS:
The city's identified employees shall have access to the customer's premises at
all times for the purpose of inspecting wiring and devices, reading meters,
testing, repairing, removing or exchanging any and all equipment belonging to
the city.
No customer shall deny city personnel access to the customer's premises by
means of a fence with no access points, enclosure, locked gate or door,
unrestrained dog, or by any other means. When such access is denied, the
customer shall be notified. Upon such notice, the customer shall as a condition
of continued service make access available within twenty four (24) hours. In
the event access is denied and city personnel are required to return to the
property, the customer shall pay a fee to be established by resolution. The fee
established shall be designed to cover the costs to the city of revisiting the
premises. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-18: TERMINATION OF CONTRACT BY CUSTOMER:
Customers who have fulfilled their contract terms and wish to discontinue
service must give at least twenty four (24) hours' notice to that effect, in
person or by phone, unless the contract specifies otherwise. Notice to
discontinue service prior to expiration of the contract term will not relieve
the customer from any minimum or guaranteed payment under any contract or rate.
Notices to discontinue service by the customer must be made at the electric
department in the city hall. Intent to discontinue service given to an employee
in the field is not valid. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-19: SERVICE CHARGE FOR TEMPORARY SERVICE:
Customers requiring service on a temporary basis will be required to pay all
costs for connection and disconnection incidental to supplying and removing of
service. This provision applies to seasonal fruit stands, field offices,
carnivals and fairs. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-20: INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE, RISK OF INJURY:
The city will use reasonable diligence to provide a regular and uninterrupted
supply of electrical energy. The city will not be liable for interruption or
insufficiency of supply or any loss or damage created thereby. The use of
electrical energy on the premises of the customer is at the risk of the
customer. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-21: VOLTAGE FLUCTUATIONS CAUSED BY CUSTOMERS:
Electric service must not be used in such a manner as to cause unusual
fluctuations or disturbances in the city's system. The city may require the
customer at his own expense to install suitable apparatus which will reasonably
limit such fluctuations. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-22: ADDITIONAL LOAD:
The service connections, transformer, meter and equipment supplied by the city
for each customer have definite capacity, and no addition to the equipment or
load connected thereto will be allowed except by the consent of the city.
Failure to give sufficient notice of additions or changes in load and to obtain
the city's consent for same shall render customer liable for damage to any of
the city's equipment caused by additional or changed installation. (Ord. 955,
3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-23: NOTICE OF IMPAIRMENT:
The customer shall notify the city immediately should the electrical service be
unsatisfactory or impaired. The city shall be responsible for making prompt
repairs to the city's equipment which impairs electrical service or results in
a hazardous condition. When a trouble call is made at a customer's request and
it is determined that the cause is due to failure of customer owned equipment
or wiring, a charge consisting of actual cost will be made. (Ord. 955, 3-8-
2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-24: METER TESTS:
The city will, at its own expense, make periodic tests and inspections of its
meters in order to maintain a high standard of accuracy. The city will make
additional tests of inspections of its meters at the request of the customer.
If the tests made at the customer's request show that a meter is accurate
within two percent (2%) slow or fast no adjustments will be made in customer's
bill and the testing charge will be paid by the customer. In case the test
shows the meter is in excess of two percent (2%) slow or fast, the adjustment
shall be made in the customer's bill over a period of not more than ninety (90)
days prior to date of such tests, and the costs of making the test shall be
borne by the city. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-25: LINE EXTENSION POLICY:
   A.   Costs: Customer and/or developer shall be responsible for costs of line
extensions and/or service improvements and upgrades to existing city electrical
facilities. These costs shall include, but not be limited to, poles, cross
arms, guys, primary conductors, secondary conductors, service wires, meters,
transformers, protective gear, and applicable overhead charges. Included are
material costs of rearranging present facilities necessary to accommodate
requested extension. Except as may be provided in subsection F of this section
and section
5-6-30 of this chapter, labor charges will not be assessed to the customer and/
or developer.
   B.   Extension Allowance: Extension fees shall be established by resolution,
unless the total labor charges exceed the maximum dollar cap set by resolution.
Free limits for transformer installations shall be as established by
resolution. Extensions requiring underground facilities will be considered as
one extension, and will be eligible for only one transformer allowance.
   C.   Route: The route of an extension shall be selected by the city electric
department. The prospective customer shall provide, without cost to city, all
legal necessary right of way or easements properly cleared and adequately
prepared maintenance of the extension.
   D.   Temporary Power: Customers requiring temporary power for construction
purposes will be billed a flat fee for service drop and meter. Additional
construction costs will be billed directly. Actual usage shall be billed as per
subsection
5-6-12A of this chapter.
   E.   Special Considerations: In no event shall the city be required to
construct, or accept under the provisions of this rule, any extension which, in
its opinion, will not be useful in providing service to an additional customer,
or which requires special considerations because of unusual construction
requirements, lack of reasonable assurance as to the permanent continuation of
required revenue, or any other unusual conditions.
   F.   Modifications: Modifications to the city electrical system to provide
service to a customer which is at the customer's request and does not add load,
does not qualify as a line extension, and therefore will not be given an
extension allowance. In these cases, the customer will pay the full cost of the
project, including labor, materials, vehicle charges and trenching plus any
applicable overheads. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-26: REACTIVE POWER CHARGE:
When the service is of a low power factor nature, the city electric department
may install equipment to meter the reactive demand and reactive energy. The
maximum thirty (30) minute reactive demand for the month in kilovolt amperes in
excess of twenty five percent (25%) of the kilowatt demand for the same month
will be billed as provided by resolution. In addition, there will be a ratchet
charge applied for a period of months as set by resolution. (Ord. 955, 3-8-
2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-27: MOTOR STARTING:
   A.   Customers shall be responsible for limiting the current inrush and
voltage drop caused by the starting of motors on their electrical system. The
city may require the installation of reduced motor starters or other means to
limit the current inrush during starting to acceptable limits.
   B.   For customers served by a dedicated transformer bank, voltage dip on
the primary of the service transformer shall not exceed three percent (3%)
during motor starting, except as specifically approved in writing by the city
electric department. If the three percent (3%) voltage dip threshold is
exceeded without prior city approval, the customer will be notified and
expected to remedy the voltage dip condition. If acceptable corrective action
is not taken by the customer to reduce voltage dip, the city in accordance with
section
5-6-9 of this chapter may enforce discontinuation of the service.
   C.   The customer is responsible for determining if the voltage drop on the
secondary side of the transformer is acceptable and for any additional
equipment or devices required to limit the voltage drop on the secondary side
of the service transformer. If the customer requests an oversized transformer
to reduce secondary voltage drop, the city reserves the right to impose an
excess charge for that service.
   D.   For any customer served by a transformer with other customers on the
same transformer secondary, reduced voltage starting is required for all motors
with nameplate horsepower ratings of twenty (20) hp and above. In addition, the
city reserves the right to limit the number of motor starts per day and to
require additional remedial action if the motor starting is causing
objectionable voltage fluctuations as specified in section
5-6-21 of this chapter.
   E.   Prior to the addition of any new motors ten (10) hp and above, customer
shall provide notice to the city of the planned new motors including the
following information for each motor ten (10) hp and above:
      1.   Motor nameplate horsepower.
      2.   Motor full load current.
      3.   Locked rotor current or NEMA starting code letter.
      4.   Motor starting method.
      5.   Maximum number of starts per day for each motor.
   F.   In addition, the city may request additional engineering data on the
proposed motor starting method prior to installation.
   G.   Based on the information provided by the customer and the nature of the
load, the city may impose a limit on the maximum electrical current that may be
drawn by the customer during motor starting, in order to limit the voltage drop
seen by other customers. In such cases, the customer is responsible for
limiting the maximum current and for providing any additional equipment to meet
this restriction. The city reserves the right to monitor the motor inrush
current to determine compliance. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-28: RESALE OF ENERGY AND STANDBY OR EMERGENCY POWER SYSTEMS:
Customer shall not resell any electrical energy provided by the city. Customer
shall notify the city of any standby or emergency power system intended to
provide electrical power to the premises when utility power is not available.
For any standby or emergency power system, customer shall provide a suitable
disconnecting and isolating means to ensure that the customer's generating
equipment cannot be connected to the city's electrical system. All standby and
emergency power systems shall be installed in accordance with the current
version of the national electrical code. This section is not intended to
restrict or prohibit parallel operation of distributed generation equipment
when installed in accordance with the city's net metering interconnection
standards and other applicable city regulations and applicable safety
standards. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-29: TRAILER HOUSES OUTSIDE TRAILER COURT:
Residential trailer houses shall have a separate service and meter. Electric
service will not be allowed through another residential or commercial building.
(Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-30: UNDERGROUND SERVICE LINES:
Customers desiring or receiving underground electric service must pay the cost
of conductors, conduits, related hardware, and reasonable overhead loading. In
addition, customers must pay a flat rate per foot for trenching and backfilling
as established by council resolution. An extension allowance as described in
section
5-6-25, "Line Extension Policy", of this chapter, will apply. Utilities
desiring joint trench use of city electric underground trenches must pay a flat
rate per foot as established by council resolution. Customers may supply their
own trenching and backfilling, meeting city electric department specifications
provided they sign a waiver which absolves the city from responsibility for
conductor and conduit replacement due to damage incurred from the trench and/or
backfilling. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-31: NEW SUBDIVISIONS:
In new subdivisions, the electrical facilities shall be installed underground.
The customer and/or developer shall be responsible for all costs involved under
extension rules and allowances provided in sections
5-6-25, "Line Extension Policy", and
5-6-30, "Underground Service Lines", of this chapter, and any such other fees
and costs as may be provided for by applicable ordinance or resolution.
Individual property owners will pay the cost of their services under the same
regulations. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-32: RESIDENTIAL SERVICE REQUIREMENTS:
All overhead residential services connected to the city lines shall be of the
periscope type. Periscope shall be guyed where service length exceeds eighty
feet (80'), and shall be of sufficient height to allow the city service
conductor adequate clearance over roof, but in no case less than three feet
(3'). An exception to this provision is that when service is to be installed on
the gable end of the building, the service support will be a minimum of
thirteen feet (13') aboveground and of sufficient strength to support the city
service conductor. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
5-6-33: NONLINEAR LOADS:
The city of Milton-Freewater (city) wishes to deliver and maintain quality
electric service to all customers. Without appropriate safeguards, nonlinear
loads can distort the voltage and current sinusoidal waveforms and create
problems for other customers served by the same electrical distribution system.
Such nonlinear loads include, but are not limited to:
   Adjustable speed drives
   Arc and induction furnaces
   DC rectifiers
   Fluorescent lighting (with or without electronic ballasts)
   Power converters
   Switching power supplies
   Variable frequency drives
   Welding devices
To safeguard electric service in the area, all installed nonlinear loads shall
not degrade the quality of voltage and current beyond the limits established in
IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers) standard 519-1992, or
its successor. As noted in the 519 standard, the power consumer with the
nonlinear load shall meet current distortion limits at the PCC (point of common
coupling, "a point of metering, or any point as long as both the utility and
the consumer can either access the point for direct measurement of the harmonic
indices meaningful to both or can estimate the harmonic indices at point of
interference (POI) through mutually agreeable methods"). Where IEEE standard
519-1992 does not apply, the customer shall meet with a city of Milton-
Freewater light and power department representative to determine the
appropriate guideline for the individual application. Any users of nonlinear
loads that degrade the quality of the city electric system will be responsible
for restoring the power quality to an acceptable level. No "grandfather" clause
applies to this policy.
If a device or devices that affect the power quality of the city's electric
system cause distortion beyond the IEEE standard 519-1992 limits or city
specific guidelines where IEEE standard 519-1992 does not apply, the customer
with the device or devices is required to do one of the following:
   A.   Add harmonic filtering at an appropriate system location to mitigate
the device's or devices' harmonic current production, so that the appropriate
guidelines stated in this policy are met. This will be done at the customer's
own cost.
   B.   Determine a system alternate configuration that causes harmonic current
production to fall within the appropriate guidelines stated in this policy. If
this alternate configuration involves the city electrical system, it must first
be approved by the Milton-Freewater light and power department.
   C.   Authorize the city to add harmonic filtering at an appropriate system
location to mitigate the device's or devices' harmonic current production, so
that the appropriate guidelines stated in this policy are met. Customers who
choose this option will be charged a monthly fee to fully reimburse the city
for the cost of the investment over a twelve (12) month period. This monthly
charge will remain in effect as long as the filtering device installed is
maintained and operated by the city. A minimum of twelve (12) payments shall be
made to ensure that the city recovers the initial purchase and installation of
the investment. (Ord. 955, 3-8-2010, eff. 4-11-2010)
CHAPTER 7
UTILITY ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-7-1: Application For Service(s)
5-7-2: Deposits Required
5-7-3: Billing Cycles/Payment Due
5-7-4: Delinquent Account(s)
5-7-5: Account Changes/Termination Of Service(s)
5-7-1: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE(S):
   A.   Exclusive Service(s): The city contracts with individuals to provide
utility service(s) exclusively for their own use as provided in the
application. No person shall be entitled to use any utility service(s) provided
by the city for any purpose other than stated in the application, or to supply,
in any way, utility service(s) to another person, family or business.
   B.   Form Required: Any person/business requesting utility service(s) must
complete an application form at the administrative services department at city
hall before any service will be initiated for that person/business.
   C.   Verification Of Identity: Any person who may be unknown to the
administrative services personnel shall show proof of identity when requested.
No person may sign an application for service for another person without legal
authorization.
   D.   Responsibility For Charges: The original applicant will be responsible
for all charges for services billed to the account until services are
terminated in writing according to section
5-7-5 of this chapter.
   E.   Startup Fee: All new accounts will be assessed a fee, set by
resolution, to cover the initial costs of administration and connecting service
(s). This fee applies to all new accounts whether the customer has other
services in their name either currently or in the past. A new account is one
where the customer is signing up for the service to be put into their name,
completing an application card and paying any applicable deposit. This fee
could be waived if a landlord has a signed and completed automatic cut in
agreement on file in the administrative services department or if the customer
has had a partial temporary disconnection of service and is requesting the
service to be restored, for example: "snowbirds".
   F.   Landlord/Tenant Automatic Cut In Agreement: The city may enter into an
agreement with landlords who have established good credit with the city to
allow for automatic cut in of service(s) in the landlord's name when tenants
move out. (1978 Code)
5-7-2: DEPOSITS REQUIRED:
   A.   Form Of Deposit: Deposits may be in cash and shall be held by the city
until released according to subsection C of this section. Deposits other than
cash that are acceptable are:
      1.   Bond: An irrevocable bond in the full amount of the required deposit
payable to the city upon demand if the account becomes delinquent or must be
shut off for nonpayment.
      2.   Certificate Of Deposit (CD): A CD in the full amount of the required
deposit may be given to the city in lieu of cash or a bond. The city will hold
the CD until released according to subsection C of this section. (1978 Code)
      3.   Debit Or Credit Card: Debit or credit card transaction in the full
amount of the required deposit may be given to the city in lieu of cash, bond
or certificate of deposit. (Ord. 921, 1-24-2005)
   B.   Customers Required To Post Deposits: The following classes of customers
shall be required to pay a deposit guaranteeing payment for utility service(s).
The policies used to determine the amounts of deposit(s) required shall be set
by resolution.
      1.   All new or first time customers of the city.
      2.   Any customers who have not established good credit with the city.
      3.   Customers requesting significantly larger service(s) than previously
or currently furnished (for example: a homeowner wanting to start a business
requiring a large electric load).
      4.   Customers with a history of late payments and customers who have had
services disconnected for failure to pay bills when due will be required to
post new or increased deposits to have service(s) continued or restored in
their name.
   C.   Return Of Deposits: Customers will be entitled to have their deposit(s)
returned after twelve (12) consecutive months without a past due account
status. Other than in the case of a final billing, deposits will be returned in
one of two (2) ways (to be stipulated at the time the deposit is paid):
      1.   As a credit to the account in the full amount plus interest earned,
or
      2.   As a refund to the customer in the full amount plus interest earned.
In the case of a final billing the deposit will be returned as a credit to the
account in the full amount. (1978 Code)
5-7-3: BILLING CYCLES/PAYMENT DUE:
   A.   Monthly Bills: All utility customers will be billed for services every
month. All utility meters will be read and charges computed for the period
since the last read date or the new service start date. All unmetered services
will be billed for the monthly period coinciding with the meter read dates.
Meters which are inaccessible or blocked may subject the customer to disconnect
of services. The exception to this would be pumps that are billed semiannually
and air fans that are billed annually.
   B.   Cycle Billing Periods: The city's utility customers may be partitioned
into convenient routes and billed at differing times of the month, provided
that every customer is billed in compliance with subsection A of this section.
   C.   Payments Due: Each bill will show the billing date and the dates the
meters were read. The bill is considered due and payable on the billing date.
Since meters are read after service has been rendered, the payment for
utilities already used is due upon presentation of the bill. Failure to receive
bills, in no way relieves any customer from the obligation to pay as set forth
in this chapter.
   D.   Payment Period: All customers will be allowed until four o'clock (4:00)
P.M. the business day prior to their next billing date to pay the current bill
without penalty. No customer will be considered past due if payment is made to
city staff in the administrative services department by four o'clock (4:00)
P.M. on the business day prior to their next billing date.
   E.   Past Due Account(s)/Late Fee: All accounts equal or greater than the
allowable minimum amount, as set by resolution, may be subject to a late fee,
also set by resolution. In order to avoid the late fee, payment must be
received by city staff in the administrative services department by close of
posting the third business day of the customer's next billing period. Postmarks
will not be accepted as payment received.
   F.   Grace Period: The ten (10) days immediately following the next billing
date for any one cycle are considered the grace period. During this period,
either payment in full or a payment arrangement must be made to avoid service
(s) interruption.
   G.   Budget Payment Agreements: A customer may request to enter into an
agreement whereby standard monthly payments must be made each month regardless
of the consumption to allow the customer to budget a standard amount each month
for service(s). The agreement will consider high and low usage periods and will
require the customer to pay any accrued balance due at the final month of the
agreement. The city will not be responsible for incorrect calculations when
allowing customers to pay on this method during a year. If it appears that
payments are too small during the year and will not cover the annual charges,
the city may notify the customer and modify the agreement or terminate it at
the sole discretion of the city. To avoid late fees or penalties, the full
budget amount must be paid by the required dates, as stated in subsection E of
this section.
   H.   Billing Errors: If errors in billing for service(s) are discovered that
are not the fault of the customer, refunds will be made for a period of twenty
four (24) months from the date of discovery, but charges to the customer may
only be billed for up to six (6) months since it was the city's error. Errors
found that are the responsibility of the customer will be charged from the date
of the error or will be refunded for a period of twenty four (24) months. (1978
Code)
5-7-4: DELINQUENT ACCOUNT(S):
   A.   Delinquent Status: An account will be considered delinquent and subject
to service(s) being disconnected:
      1.   If not paid in full, including any fees or charges to the account,
or satisfactory payment arrangement made by the tenth calendar day of the next
billing period.
      2.   If any payment made by check is returned by the bank against that
account.
      3.   If the terms of a valid payment agreement are breached.
   B.   Payment Arrangements: A past due customer may request to enter into a
payment agreement with the city to allow service(s) to continue uninterrupted
once every six (6) months. The agreement must be signed by the customer and
approved by an authorized city official. The agreement may allow up to three
(3) equal payments of the past due amount over a ninety (90) day period and
will require all regular monthly charges to be paid when due. If the agreement
is violated, service(s) will be immediately discontinued.
   C.   Service Disconnects: All accounts remaining delinquent after the end of
the grace period will be disconnected. Once service(s) is disconnected for
nonpayment, service(s) will not be restored until the entire amount owing on
the account plus all applicable fees are paid in full or an approved payment
agreement is executed. A substantial deposit may also be required to reconnect
service(s), especially if an account has a history of delinquency. In order to
avoid being disconnected, payment must be received by city staff at city hall
before the order to disconnect has been issued. All payments must be made to
city staff in administrative services department during regular business hours.
   D.   Service Reconnects: A reconnect fee will be charged on all delinquent
accounts disconnected for nonpayment. This fee shall be established by
resolution. The reconnection fee must be paid with all other amounts owing on
the account prior to service(s) being restored. (1978 Code)
5-7-5: ACCOUNT CHANGES/TERMINATION OF SERVICE(S):
   A.   Changes To Account: Any request to change the billing name, address or
other information given on the original application for service must be made in
person at city hall on a form provided by city staff. Changes may be made by
mail by the responsible person on the account if adequate identification is
provided. No changes will be accepted over the phone.
   B.   Continuation Of Service(s) At Death Of Responsible Party:
      1.   For individuals, the account will continue to be billed in the name
of the original responsible party until the city becomes aware of the
individual's death, at which time the account must be terminated in the prior
party's name. In the case of a married person, the surviving spouse may
continue the services by means of a change in the name on the billing. For
others, either an executor or other responsible party must apply to have the
account put into their name to continue the service(s) or show satisfactory
proof of personally paying the utility account on time for the most recent
twelve (12) consecutive months.
      2.   For unincorporated businesses, the account will be billed under the
name of the deceased person until the city becomes aware of the death of the
responsible party. In order for the business to continue to receive service(s)
in the name of the business, an executor or new owner must change the billing
into their name.
      3.   For corporations, no action is required in the event of the death of
a corporate officer. However, if the corporation is sold the new owners should
notify the city and update all records. Where personal guarantees are/were
required, the new owners must satisfy any requirements necessary to assure
continued good payment by the corporation.
   C.   Termination Of Service(s): Service(s) may be terminated for an account
by notifying administrative services personnel at city hall either in person or
by mail. A final bill will be computed and is due and payable at the time of
termination. Any deposits and accrued interest will be applied to the account
and any amount due will be billed, or any credit will be refunded. (1978 Code)
CHAPTER 8
STREET TREES
SECTION:
5-8-1: Permission To Plant
5-8-2: Street Tree Plan
5-8-3: Prohibited Trees
5-8-4: Removal Of Trees
5-8-5: Dangerous Trees
5-8-6: Appeals
5-8-7: Abuse Or Mutilation
5-8-1: PERMISSION TO PLANT:
No trees or shrubs shall hereafter be planted in or removed from any public
parking strip or other public place in the city without permission from the
city manager. (1956 Code § 9-301)
5-8-2: STREET TREE PLAN:
All trees and shrubs hereafter planted in any public parking strip or other
public place in the city shall conform as to species and location to the street
tree plan which is hereby made a part of this chapter by reference. (1956 Code
§ 9-302)
5-8-3: PROHIBITED TREES:
It shall be unlawful to plant in any public parking strip the following trees:
poplar, willow, conifer, cottonwood, fruit trees, nut trees, ailanthus. It
shall be unlawful to plant willow, cottonwood or poplar trees anywhere in the
city unless the city manager approves the site as one where the tree roots will
not interfere with a public sewer. (1956 Code § 9-303)
5-8-4: REMOVAL OF TREES:
The city manager or his duly authorized representative may cause to be trimmed,
pruned or removed any trees, shrubs, plants or vegetation in a parking strip
abutting upon said owner's property, and failure to comply therewith, after
thirty (30) days' notice by the city manager, shall be deemed a violation
hereof. (1956 Code § 9-304)
5-8-5: DANGEROUS TREES:
   A.   Trees or shrubs standing in or on any parking strip, street, alley,
sidewalk, or private grounds, or having branches projecting into or over any
parking strip, street, alley, or sidewalk shall be trimmed by the owner or
owners of the property on which such trees or shrubs are growing in accordance
with this section and any other applicable provisions of this code. For trees
growing within the public right of way, the duty to trim shall be upon the
abutting property owner.
   B.   Any tree or shrub which is endangering or which in any way may endanger
the security, usefulness, or safety of any public street, sewer, alley,
sidewalk, or parking strip, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. It
shall be the duty of the person identified in subsection A of this section to
abate or remove the nuisance.
   C.   Any tree, shrub or vegetation which shall obstruct, partially or
wholly, the visibility of any traffic control sign or device for a minimum
distance of one hundred feet (100'), as viewed from the normal vehicular
approaches, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. It shall be the duty of
the person identified in subsection A of this section to abate or remove the
nuisance.
   D.   Any tree, shrub or vegetation grown in violation of section
10-5-3 of this code is hereby declared a public nuisance. It shall be the duty
of the owner of the property upon which the tree, shrub or vegetation is grown
to abate or remove the nuisance.
   E.   Whether or not a tree or shrub is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance, it shall be the duty of the person identified in subsection A of this
section to cut off and remove all branches and limbs of trees, shrubs, or other
vegetation, which extend over or upon any street, alleyway, parking strip, or
sidewalk, for a distance of at least eight feet (8') above the ground, or to
trim or remove any limbs or branches which could come into contact with or in
any manner interfere with the electric wires of the city.
   F.   The duty to trim or remove vegetation as set forth in this section
shall exist without any notice to the person identified in subsection A of this
section by the city, however, if the person fails to remove or trim vegetation
constituting a nuisance or exceeding the limitations hereof within thirty (30)
days of a written order to do so by the city manager, the city may then enter
the property and remove or trim the vegetation and assess the cost as a lien
against the property and as a personal obligation of the property owner.
   G.   Any person who fails to trim vegetation or abate or remove any nuisance
declared in this section shall be liable to any person who is injured or
otherwise suffers damage by reason of such vegetation or nuisance. (1956 Code)
   H.   Neither the city, or any of its officers, agents, employees, or city
council members, shall be liable to any person who is injured or otherwise
suffers damage by reason of vegetation declared herein to be a public nuisance
or exceeding the limitations hereof. However, if this exemption from liability
is unenforceable, and in any event, the person identified in subsection A of
this section shall be primarily liable to the injured party and shall indemnify
the city, its officers, agents, city council members, and employees, for any
judgment against any of them, and shall be liable to them for any expense paid
or incurred, including attorney fees, to defend themselves or to settle the
claim of any injured person. (1956 Code; amd. Ord. 750, 1-28-1991)
5-8-6: APPEALS:
Appeals from orders made hereunder may be made by filing written notice thereof
with the city manager within ten (10) days after such order is received,
stating in substance that appeal is being made from such order to the city
council. The city manager shall thereupon call such appeal to the attention of
the city council at the next regular succeeding meeting, at which meeting the
appellant and the city manager may present evidence. Action taken by the city
council after such hearing shall be conclusive. (1956 Code § 9-306)
5-8-7: ABUSE OR MUTILATION:
It shall be unlawful to abuse, destroy or mutilate any tree, shrub or plant in
a public parking strip or any other public place, or to attach or place any
rope or wire (other than one used to support a young or broken tree), sign,
poster, handbill or other thing to or on any tree growing in a public place 1 ,
or to cause or permit any wire charged with electricity to come in contact with
any such tree, or to allow any gaseous, liquid or solid substance which is
harmful to such trees to come in contact with their roots or leaves. (1956 Code
§ 9-307)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  8-1-7-4 of this code.
CHAPTER 9
PUBLIC PARKS
SECTION:
5-9-1: Overnight Camping
5-9-2: Hours
5-9-3: Fireworks
5-9-4: Penalty
5-9-1: OVERNIGHT CAMPING:
No person shall camp overnight in any park within the city without special
written authority granted by the city manager. (Ord. 931, 10-10-2005)
5-9-2: HOURS:
   A.   Winter Hours: All city parks will be closed between the hours of nine
o'clock (9:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. between September 1 through
March 31.
   B.   Summer Hours: The city parks will be closed between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. April 1 through August 31.
(Ord. 931, 10-10-2005)
5-9-3: FIREWORKS:
It is hereby unlawful for any person to discharge or use any fireworks in any
city park or upon any public or private place within the city without the
permission of the owner or parties in control thereof. (Ord. 931, 10-10-2005)
5-9-4: PENALTY:
Violation of the provisions of this chapter is punishable by a fine of not more
than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), and imprisonment of not more than
thirty (30) days in jail. (Ord. 931, 10-10-2005)
CHAPTER 10
UTILITY USER TAX
SECTION:
5-10-1: Definitions
5-10-2: Tax Imposed
5-10-3: Exemptions
5-10-4: Payment And Collection Of Tax
5-10-5: Actions To Collect
5-10-6: Duty To Collect Procedures
5-10-7: Enforcement
5-10-8: Refunds, Erroneous Payments
5-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this
section shall govern the construction of this chapter:
CHARGES: Metered energy, minimum charges for service, demand charges, customer
charges, capacity charges, standby charges, use of facilities charges, and all
other annual or monthly charges.
CITY: The city of Milton-Freewater.
MONTH: A calendar month.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, entity, joint venture, association,
social club, fraternal organization, company, corporation, trust, receiver,
trustee, syndicate, society, or any other group or combination acting as a
unit.
SERVICE USER: Any person required to pay the tax imposed under the provision of
this chapter. (Ord. 734)
5-10-2: TAX IMPOSED:
There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the city using electric
energy or services within the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at
a rate as may be set by the council from time to time by resolution based upon
a percent of the charges for such energy and services, and should be paid by
the person responsible for paying for such energy or services. (Ord. 734)
5-10-3: EXEMPTIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person
when the imposition of such tax upon that person would be in violation of the
law. (Ord. 734)
5-10-4: PAYMENT AND COLLECTION OF TAX:
The tax imposed by this chapter shall be collected from the service user at the
time that payment is made for charges for electric energy or service. (Ord.
734)
5-10-5: ACTIONS TO COLLECT:
Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. The
director of finance may take such actions to secure payment as otherwise
provided in this code or as provided by the laws of the state of Oregon. (Ord.
734)
5-10-6: DUTY TO COLLECT PROCEDURES:
The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be
performed as follows:
   A.   The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be collected insofar as
practicable at the same time as, and along with, the charges made in accordance
with regular billing practice of the city. Except in those cases where a
service user pays the full amount of said charges but does not pay any portion
of a tax imposed, or where a service user has notified the city that he is
refusing to pay a tax imposed which the city is required to collect, if the
amount paid by a service user is less than the full amount of the charge and
tax which has accrued for the billing period, a proportionate share of both the
charge and the tax shall be deemed to have been paid.
   B.   The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the
beginning of the first regular billing period applicable to that person which
starts on or after the operative date of this chapter. Where a person receives
more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another,
the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing period. (Ord. 734)
5-10-7: ENFORCEMENT:
The director of finance of the city shall have the power and duty, and is
hereby directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter. The
director of finance, subject to the prior approval of the city manager and city
attorney, shall have power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with
the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing
the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed; and a copy
of such rules and regulations shall be on file and available for public
examination in the office of the director of finance. (Ord. 734)
5-10-8: REFUNDS, ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS:
   A.   Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once
or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the director of
finance under the provisions of this chapter, it may be refunded or the bill
corrected. A claim in writing shall be filed with the director of finance
within one year of the date of payment stating under penalty of perjury the
specific grounds upon which the claim is founded.
   B.   No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section or a bill
corrected unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by his written
records showing entitlement thereto. (Ord. 734)
CHAPTER 11
SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE
SECTION:
5-11-1: Purpose
5-11-2: Scope
5-11-3: Definitions
5-11-4: Established
5-11-5: Methodology
5-11-6: Authorized Expenditures
5-11-7: Expenditure Restrictions
5-11-8: Capital Improvement Plan
5-11-9: Collection Of Charge
5-11-10: Delinquent Charges; Hearing
5-11-11: Exemptions
5-11-12: Credits
5-11-13: Segregation And Use Of Revenue
5-11-14: Appeal Procedure
5-11-15: Prohibited Connection
5-11-16: Penalty
5-11-17: Construction
5-11-18: Severability
5-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the system development charge is to impose a portion of the cost
of capital improvements for water, sewage control, and parks upon those
developments that create the need for or increase the demands on capital
improvements. (Ord. 754)
5-11-2: SCOPE:
The system development charge imposed by this chapter is separate from and in
addition to any applicable tax, assessment, charge, or fee otherwise provided
by law or imposed as a condition of development. (Ord. 754)
5-11-3: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following mean:
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS: Facilities or assets used for:
   A.   Water supply, treatment and distribution;
   B.   Wastewater collection, transmission, treatment and disposal;
   C.   Parks and recreation.
DEVELOPMENT: Conducting a building or mining operation, making a physical
change in the use or appearance of a structure or land, dividing land into two
(2) or more parcels (including partitions and subdivisions), and creating or
terminating a right of access.
IMPROVEMENT FEE: A fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be
constructed after the date the fee is adopted pursuant to section
5-11-4 of this chapter.
LAND ACRE: The area of a parcel of land as measured by projection of the parcel
boundaries upon a horizontal plane with the exception of a portion of the
parcel within a recorded right of way or easement subject to a servitude for a
public street or scenic or preservation purpose.
OWNER: The owner or owners of record title or the purchaser or purchasers under
a recorded sales agreement, and other persons having an interest of record in
the described real property.
PARCEL OF LAND: A lot, parcel, block or other tract of land that is occupied or
may be occupied by a structure or structures or other use, and that includes
the yards and other open spaces required under the zoning, subdivision, or
other development ordinances.
QUALIFIED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS: A capital improvement that is:
   A.   Required as a condition of residential development approval;
   B.   Identified in the plan adopted pursuant to section
5-11-8 of this chapter; and
   C.   Not located on or contiguous to a parcel of land that is the subject of
the residential development approval.
REIMBURSEMENT FEE: A fee for costs associated with capital improvements
constructed or under construction on the date the fee is adopted pursuant to
section
5-11-4 of this chapter.
SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE: A reimbursement fee, an improvement or a combination
thereof assessed or collected at the time of increased usage of a capital
improvement, at the time of issuance of a development permit or building
permit, or at the time of connection to the capital improvement. "System
development charge" includes that portion of a sewer or water system connection
charge that is greater than the amount necessary to reimburse the city for its
average cost of inspecting and installing connections with water and sewer
facilities. "System development charge" does not include fees assessed or
collected as part of a local improvement district or a charge in lieu of a
local improvement district assessment, or the cost of complying with
requirements or condition imposed by a land use decision. (Ord. 754)
5-11-4: ESTABLISHED:
   A.   System development charges shall be established and may be revised by
resolution of the council.
   B.   Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this chapter or other
local or state law, a system development charge is hereby imposed upon all
parcels of land within the city, and upon all lands outside the boundary of the
city that connect to or otherwise use the sewer facilities, or water facilities
of the city. (Ord. 754)
5-11-5: METHODOLOGY:
   A.   The methodology used to establish the reimbursement fee shall consider
the cost of then existing facilities, prior contributions by then existing
users, the value of unused capacity, rate making principles employed to finance
publicly owned capital improvements, and other relevant factors identified by
the council. The methodology shall promote the objective that future systems
users shall contribute no more than an equitable share of the cost of then
existing facilities.
   B.   The methodology used to establish the improvement fee shall consider
the cost of projected capital improvements needed to increase the capacity of
the systems to which the fee is related.
   C.   The methodology used to establish the improvement fee or the
reimbursement fee, or both, shall be contained in an ordinance adopted by the
council. (Ord. 754)
5-11-6: AUTHORIZED EXPENDITURES:
   A.   Reimbursement fees shall be applied only to capital improvements
associated with the systems for which the fees are assessed, including
expenditures relating to repayment of indebtedness.
   B.   Improvement fees shall be spent only on capacity increasing capital
improvements, including expenditures relating to repayment of future debt for
the improvements. An increase in system capacity occurs if a capital
improvement increases the level of performance or service provided by existing
facilities or provides new facilities. The portion of the capital improvements
funded by improvement fees must be related to demands created by development.
A capital improvement being funded wholly or in part from revenues derived from
the improvement fee shall be included in the capital improvement plan adopted
by the city pursuant to section
5-11-8 of this chapter.
   C.   Notwithstanding subsections A and B of this section, system development
charge revenues may be expended on the direct costs of complying with the
provisions of this chapter, including the costs of developing system charge
methodologies and providing an annual accounting of system development charge
expenditures. (Ord. 754)
5-11-7: EXPENDITURE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   System development charges shall not be expended for costs associated
with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an
incidental part of other capital improvements.
   B.   System development charges shall not be expended for costs of the
operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements. (Ord. 754)
5-11-8: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN:
The council shall adopt a plan that:
   A.   Lists the capital improvements that may be funded with improvement fee
revenues;
   B.   Lists the estimated cost and time of construction of each improvement;
and
   C.   Describes the process for modifying the plan. (Ord. 754)
5-11-9: COLLECTION OF CHARGE:
   A.   The system development charge is payable upon issuance of:
      1.   A zoning permit;
      2.   Park dedication fees are due at acceptance of final plat of the
subdivision or issuance of a zoning permit whichever comes first;
      3.   A zoning permit for development not requiring the issuance of a
building permit;
      4.   A permit to connect to the water system; or
      5.   A permit to connect to the sewer system.
   B.   If no zoning or connection permit is required, the system development
charge is payable at the time the usage of the capital improvement is increased
in the opinion of the city manager.
   C.   If development is commenced or connection is made to the water or sewer
systems, without an appropriate permit, the system development charge is
immediately payable upon the earliest date that a permit was required.
   D.   The director of engineering and planning shall collect the applicable
system development charge when a permit that allows building or development of
a parcel is issued or when a connection to the water or sewer system of the
city is made.
   E.   No city official shall issue such permit or allow such connection until
the charge has been paid in full, or unless an exemption is granted pursuant to
section
5-11-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 754)
5-11-10: DELINQUENT CHARGES; HEARING:
   A.   When, for any reason, the system development charge has not been paid,
the city manager shall report to the council the amount of the uncollected
charge, the description of the real property to which the charge is
attributable, the date upon which the charge was due, and the name of the
owner.
   B.   The city council shall schedule a public hearing on the matter and
direct that notice of the hearing be given to each owner with a copy of the
city manager's report concerning the unpaid charge. Notice of the hearing shall
be given either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, or
by both personal and mailed notice, and by posting notice on the parcel at
least ten (10) days before the date set for the hearing.
   C.   At the hearing, the city council may accept, reject, or modify the
determination of the city manager as set forth in the report. If the council
finds that a system development charge is unpaid and uncollected, it shall
direct the city manager to docket the unpaid and uncollected system development
charge in the lien docket. Upon completion of the docketing, the city shall
have a lien against the described land for the full amount of the unpaid
charge, together with interest at the legal rate of ten percent (10%) and with
the city's actual cost of serving notice of the hearing on the owners. The lien
shall be enforceable in the manner provided in Oregon Revised Statutes chapter
223. (Ord. 754)
5-11-11: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Structures and uses established and existing on or before June 30,
1991, are exempt from a system development charge, except water and sewer
charges, to the extent of the structure or use then existing and to the extent
of the parcel of land as it is constituted on that date. Structures and uses
affected by this subsection shall pay the water or sewer charges pursuant to
the terms of this chapter upon the receipt of a permit to connect to the water
or sewer system.
   B.   Additions to single-family dwellings that do not constitute the
addition of a dwelling unit, as defined by the state uniform building code, are
exempt from all portions of the system development charge.
   C.   An alteration, addition, replacement or change in use that does not
increase the parcel's or structure's use of the public improvement facility are
exempt from all portion of the system development charge. (Ord. 754)
5-11-12: CREDITS:
   A.   A system development charge shall be imposed when a change of use of a
parcel or structure occurs, but credit shall be given for the computed system
development charge to the extent that prior structures existed and services
were established on or after June 30, 1991. The credit so computed shall not
exceed the calculated system development charge. No refund shall be made on
account of such credit.
   B.   A credit shall be given for the cost of a qualified public improvement
associated with a residential development. If a qualified public improvement is
located partially on and partially off the parcel that is the subject of the
residential development approval, the credit shall be given only for the cost
of the portion of the improvement not located on or wholly contiguous to the
property. The credit provided for by this subsection shall be only for the
improvement fee charged for the type of improvement being constructed and shall
not exceed the improvement fee even if the cost of the capital improvement
exceeds the applicable improvement fee. (Ord. 754)
5-11-13: SEGREGATION AND USE OF REVENUE:
   A.   All funds derived from a particular type of system development charge
are to be segregated by accounting practices from all other funds of the city.
That portion of the system development charge calculated and collected on
account of a specific facility system shall be used for no purpose other than
those set forth in section
5-11-6 of this chapter.
   B.   The director of finance shall provide the city council with an annual
accounting as part of the annual report, for system development charges showing
the total amount of system development charge revenues collected for each type
of facility and the projects funded from each account. (Ord. 754)
5-11-14: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   A person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of system
development charge revenues may appeal the decision or the expenditure to the
city council by filing a written request with the city manager and the
expenditure from which the person appeals. An appeal of an expenditure must be
filed within two (2) years of the date of the alleged improper expenditure.
   B.   Appeals of any other decision required or permitted to be made by the
city manager under this chapter must be filed within ten (10) days of the date
of the decision.
   C.   After providing notice to the appellant, the council shall determine
whether the staff decision or the expenditure is in accordance with this
chapter and the provisions of Oregon Revised Statutes 223.297 to 223.314 and
may affirm, modify, or overrule the decisions. If the council determines that
there has been an improper expenditure of system development charge revenues,
the council shall direct that a sum equal to the misspent amount shall be
deposited within one year to the credit of the account or fund from which it
was spent. (Ord. 754)
5-11-15: PROHIBITED CONNECTION:
No person may connect to the water or sewer systems of the city unless the
appropriate system development charge has been paid. (Ord. 754)
5-11-16: PENALTY:
Violation of section
5-11-15 of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00). Each day the fee remains unpaid shall constitute a separate
violation. (Ord. 754)
5-11-17: CONSTRUCTION:
The rules of statutory construction contained in Oregon Revised Statutes
chapter 174 are adopted and by this reference made a part of this chapter.
(Ord. 754)
5-11-18: SEVERABILITY:
The invalidity of a section or subsection of this chapter shall not affect the
validity of the remaining sections or subsections. (Ord. 754)
CHAPTER 12
CITY PARKS SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE
SECTION:
5-12-1: Legislative Findings
5-12-2: Title, Authority And Applicability
5-12-3: Purpose
5-12-4: Scope
5-12-5: Definitions
5-12-6: Established
5-12-7: Authorized Expenditures
5-12-8: Collection Of Charge
5-12-9: Delinquent Charges
5-12-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS:
The council of the city of Milton-Freewater finds, determines and declares
that:
   A.   In order to provide and maintain an adequate parks system while
accommodating demand from existing and new development, Milton-Freewater must
adopt a system development charge for parks dedication. This must be done in
order to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare;
   B.   The Oregon legislature through the enactment of Oregon Revised Statutes
223.297 to 223.314 has authorized local governments in Oregon to utilize system
development charges on new development in order to provide funding for a
portion of the cost of needed capital improvements necessitated by new
development;
   C.   The Milton-Freewater development code provides in part through its
parks dedication policies that developers should aid in improving the parks
system by payment of park dedication fees;
   D.   The imposition of park dedication fees is one of the preferred methods
of ensuring that development bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital
facilities necessary to accommodate such development. This must be done in
order to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare;
   E.   The fees established by this chapter are derived from, and based upon,
and do not exceed the costs of providing the improvements called for in the
parks system capital improvement plan necessitated by the new land developments
for which the fees are levied;
   F.   The report entitled "System Development Charge Methodology", and
prepared by the community development department of the city, sets forth a
reasonable methodology and analysis for the determination of the impact of new
development on the need for and costs for additional impact of new development
on the need for and costs for additional parks system capital improvements.
This report is adopted by reference and is contained in ordinance 753, adopted
May 28, 1991. (Ord. 755)
5-12-2: TITLE, AUTHORITY AND APPLICABILITY:
   A.   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the PARKS SYSTEM
DEVELOPMENT CHARGE ORDINANCE.
   B.   The city of Milton-Freewater has the authority to adopt this chapter
pursuant to the Oregon constitution article XI, section 2, Oregon Revised
Statutes 223.297 through 223.314. (Ord. 755)
5-12-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to impose a portion of the capital cost of parks
system improvements upon those developments that create the need for or
increase the demands for such capital improvements. (Ord. 755)
5-12-4: SCOPE:
The charge imposed by this chapter is separate from and in addition to any
applicable taxes, assessments, charges, including, but not limited to, systems
development charges or fees otherwise provided by or imposed as a condition of
development. (Ord. 755)
5-12-5: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning, the following mean:
CITY MANAGER: The person appointed by the city council as the city manager or
the city employee or employees whom the city manager may designate to carry out
the administration of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT: Conducting a building or mining operation, making a physical
change in the use or appearance of a structure or land, dividing land into two
(2) or more parcels (including partitions and subdivisions), and creating,
relocating, enlarging or terminating a right or location of access.
LAND AREA: The area of a parcel of land as measured by projection of the parcel
boundaries upon a horizontal plane to the edge of the existing right of way or
easement subject to a servitude for a public street or greenway, public
riverbed or streambed or other approved public scenic or preservation purpose.
Measurement of land area shall be figured on gross acreage prior to dedication
of property for right of way or easements which may be required or may occur in
connection with development.
OWNER: The owner or owners of record title or the purchaser or purchasers under
a recorded sales agreement, and other persons having an interest of record in
the described real property.
PARCEL OF LAND: A lot, parcel, block or other tract of land that is occupied or
may be occupied by a structure or structures or other legal use, and that
includes the yards and other open spaces required under the Milton-Freewater
development code, subdivision ordinance or related city ordinances or
regulations.  (Ord. 755)
5-12-6: ESTABLISHED:
A system development charge shall be established by council resolution and may
be revised by resolution of the council. (Ord. 755)
5-12-7: AUTHORIZED EXPENDITURES:
   A.   Improvement fees collected under this chapter shall be applied only to
capital improvements described in the parks system capital improvement plan
including expenditures relating to repayment of indebtedness for those
improvements.
   B.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, improvement fees
collected under this chapter may be expended on the direct costs of complying
with the provisions of this chapter, including the costs of developing the
methodology used to develop this chapter or charges thereunder, the methodology
used to develop charges hereunder or the expenditure of revenues, and the costs
providing an annual accounting of revenues and expenditures.
   C.   System development charges shall not be expended for costs associated
with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an
incidental part of other capital improvements, referred to in this section, nor
for costs of the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements.
(Ord. 755)
5-12-8: COLLECTION OF CHARGE:
   A.   The system development charge is payable upon issuance of a building
permit or a public works permit for connection to or enlarging the distribution
of the city park system.
   B.   If construction commences without paying the applicable parks system
charges, the system development charge is immediately payable upon the earliest
date that a permit was required.
   C.   The city staff shall collect the applicable charge from or on behalf of
the owner of the parcel when a permit that allows building or development of a
parcel is issued.
   D.   The city staff shall not issue such permit or allow such connection
until the charge has been paid in full. (Ord. 755)
5-12-9: DELINQUENT CHARGES:
When for any reason, the system development charge has not been paid, the
procedure described in section
5-11-10 of this title shall be followed. (Ord. 755)
CHAPTER 13
WATER SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE
SECTION:
5-13-1: Legislative Findings
5-13-2: Title, Authority And Applicability
5-13-3: Purpose
5-13-4: Scope
5-13-5: Definitions
5-13-6: Established
5-13-7: Authorized Expenditures
5-13-8: Collection Of Charge
5-13-9: Delinquent Charges
5-13-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS:
The council of the city of Milton-Freewater finds, determines and declares
that:
   A.   In order to provide and maintain an adequate water capacity and
pressure levels of service while accommodating demand from existing and new
development, Milton-Freewater must adopt a system development charge for new
water system connections. This must be done in order to promote and protect the
public health, safety and welfare;
   B.   The Oregon legislature through the enactment of Oregon Revised Statutes
223.297 to 223.314 has authorized local governments in Oregon to utilize system
development charges on new development in order to provide funding for a
portion of the cost of needed capital improvements necessitated by new
development;
   C.   The Milton-Freewater development code provides in part through its
water service policies that developers should aid in improving the water system
by payment of water service connection charges;
   D.   The imposition of connection fees is one of the preferred methods of
ensuring that development bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital
facilities necessary to accommodate such development. This must be done in
order to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare;
   E.   The fees established by this chapter are derived from, and based upon,
and do not exceed the costs of providing the improvements called for in the
water system capital improvement plan necessitated by the new land developments
for which the fees are levied;
   F.   The report entitled "System Development Charge Methodology", and
prepared by the community development department of the city, sets forth a
reasonable methodology and analysis for the determination of the impact of new
development on the need for and costs for additional impact of new development
on the need for and costs for additional parks system capital improvements.
This report is adopted by reference and is contained in ordinance 753, adopted
May 28, 1991. (Ord. 756)
5-13-2: TITLE, AUTHORITY AND APPLICABILITY:
   A.   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the WATER SYSTEM
DEVELOPMENT CHARGE ORDINANCE.
   B.   The city of Milton-Freewater has the authority to adopt this chapter
pursuant to the Oregon constitution article XI, section 2, Oregon Revised
Statutes 223.297 through 223.314. (Ord. 756)
5-13-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to impose a portion of the capital cost of water
system improvements upon those developments that create the need for or
increase the demands for such capital improvements. (Ord. 756)
5-13-4: SCOPE:
The charge imposed by this chapter is separate from and in addition to any
applicable taxes, assessments, charges, including, but not limited to, systems
development charges, or fees otherwise provided by or imposed as a condition of
development. (Ord. 756)
5-13-5: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning, the following mean:
CITY MANAGER: The person appointed by the city council as the city manager or
the city employee or employees whom the city manager may designate to carry out
the administration of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT: Conducting a building or mining operation, making a physical
change in the use or appearance of a structure or land, dividing land into two
(2) or more parcels (including partitions and subdivisions), and creating,
relocating, enlarging or terminating a right or location of access.
LAND AREA: The area of a parcel of land as measured by projection of the parcel
boundaries upon a horizontal plane to the edge of the existing right of way or
easement subject to a servitude for a public street or greenway, public
riverbed or streambed or other approved public scenic or preservation purpose.
Measurement of land area shall be figured on gross acreage prior to dedication
of property for right of way or easements which may be required or may occur in
connection with development.
OWNER: The owner or owners of record title or the purchaser or purchasers under
a recorded sales agreement, and other persons having an interest of record in
the described real property.
PARCEL OF LAND: A lot, parcel, block or other tract of land that is occupied or
may be occupied by a structure or structures or other legal use, and that
includes the yards and other open spaces required under the Milton-Freewater
development code, subdivision ordinance, or related city ordinances or
regulations. (Ord. 756)
5-13-6: ESTABLISHED:
A system development charge shall be established by council resolution and may
be revised by resolution of the council. (Ord. 756)
5-13-7: AUTHORIZED EXPENDITURES:
   A.   Improvement fees collected under this chapter shall be applied only to
capital improvements described in the water system capital improvement plan
including expenditures relating to repayment of indebtedness for those
improvements.
   B.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, improvement fees
collected under this chapter may be expended on the direct costs of complying
with the provisions of this chapter, including the costs of developing the
methodology used to develop this chapter or charges thereunder, the methodology
used to develop charges hereunder or the expenditure of revenues, and the costs
providing an annual accounting of revenues and expenditures.
   C.   System development charges shall not be expended for costs associated
with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an
incidental part of other capital improvements, referred to in this section, nor
for costs of the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements.
(Ord. 756)
5-13-8: COLLECTION OF CHARGE:
   A.   The system development charge is payable upon issuance of a building
permit or a public works permit for connection to or enlarging the distribution
of the city water system.
   B.   If construction commences or connection is made to the water system
without an appropriate permit, or without paying the applicable charges, the
system development charge is immediately payable upon the earliest date that a
permit was required.
   C.   The city staff shall collect the applicable charge from or on behalf of
the owner of the parcel when a permit that allows building or development of a
parcel is issued.
   D.   The city staff shall not issue such permit or allow such connection
until the charge has been paid in full. (Ord. 756)
5-13-9: DELINQUENT CHARGES:
When for any reason, the system development charge has not been paid, the
procedure described in section
5-11-10 of this title, shall be followed. (Ord. 756)
CHAPTER 14
SEWER SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE
SECTION:
5-14-1: Legislative Findings
5-14-2: Title, Authority And Applicability
5-14-3: Purpose
5-14-4: Scope
5-14-5: Definitions
5-14-6: Established
5-14-7: Authorized Expenditures
5-14-8: Collection Of Charge
5-14-9: Delinquent Charges
5-14-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS:
The council of the city of Milton-Freewater finds, determines and declares
that:
   A.   In order to provide and maintain an adequate sewer capacity and
pressure levels of service while accommodating demand from existing and new
development, Milton-Freewater must adopt a system development charge for new
sewer system connections. This must be done in order to promote and protect the
public health, safety and welfare;
   B.   The Oregon legislature through the enactment of Oregon Revised Statutes
223.297 to 223.314 has authorized local governments in Oregon to utilize system
development charges on new development in order to provide funding for a
portion of the cost of needed capital improvements necessitated by new
development;
   C.   The Milton-Freewater development code provides in part through its
sewer service policies that developers should aid in improving the sewer system
by payment of sewer service connection charges;
   D.   The imposition of connection fees is one of the preferred methods of
ensuring that development bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital
facilities necessary to accommodate such development. This must be done in
order to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare;
   E.   The fees established by this chapter are derived from, and based upon,
and do not exceed the costs of providing the improvements called for in the
sewer system capital improvement plan necessitated by the new land developments
for which the fees are levied;
   F.   The report entitled "System Development Charge Methodology", and
prepared by the community development department of the city, sets forth a
reasonable methodology and analysis for the determination of the impact of new
development on the need for and costs for additional impact of new development
on the need for and costs for additional parks system capital improvements.
This report is adopted by reference and is contained in ordinance 753, adopted
May 28, 1991. (Ord. 757)
5-14-2: TITLE, AUTHORITY AND APPLICABILITY:
   A.   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the SEWER SYSTEM
DEVELOPMENT CHARGE ORDINANCE.
   B.   The city of Milton-Freewater has the authority to adopt this chapter
pursuant to the Oregon constitution article XI, section 2, Oregon Revised
Statutes 223.297 through 223.314. (Ord. 757)
5-14-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to impose a portion of the capital cost of sewer
system improvements upon those developments that create the need for or
increase the demands for such capital improvements. (Ord. 757)
5-14-4: SCOPE:
The charge imposed by this chapter is separate from and in addition to any
applicable taxes, assessments, charges, including, but not limited to, systems
development charges, or fees otherwise provided by or imposed as a condition of
development. (Ord. 757)
5-14-5: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning, the following mean:
CITY MANAGER: The person appointed by the city council as the city manager or
the city employee or employees whom the city manager may designate to carry out
the administration of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT: Conducting a building or mining operation, making a physical
change in the use or appearance of a structure or land, dividing land into two
(2) or more parcels (including partitions and subdivisions), and creating,
relocating, enlarging or terminating a right or location of access.
LAND AREA: The area of a parcel of land as measured by projection of the parcel
boundaries upon a horizontal plane to the edge of the existing right of way or
easement subject to a servitude for a public street or greenway, public
riverbed or streambed or other approved public scenic or preservation purpose.
Measurement of land area shall be figured on gross acreage prior to dedication
of property for right of way or easements which may be required or may occur in
connection with development.
OWNER: The owner or owners of record title or the purchaser or purchasers under
a recorded sales agreement, and other persons having an interest of record in
the described real property.
PARCEL OF LAND: A lot, parcel, block or other tract of land that is occupied or
may be occupied by a structure or structures or other legal use, and that
includes the yards and other open spaces required under the Milton-Freewater
development code, subdivision ordinance, or related city ordinances or
regulations. (Ord. 757)
5-14-6: ESTABLISHED:
A system development charge shall be established by council resolution and may
be revised by resolution of the council. (Ord. 757)
5-14-7: AUTHORIZED EXPENDITURES:
   A.   Improvement fees collected under this chapter shall be applied only to
capital improvements described in the sewer system capital improvement plan
including expenditures relating to repayment of indebtedness for those
improvements.
   B.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, improvement fees
collected under this chapter may be expended on the direct costs of complying
with the provisions of this chapter, including the costs of developing the
methodology used to develop this chapter or charges thereunder, the methodology
used to develop charges hereunder or the expenditure of revenues, and the costs
providing an annual accounting of revenues and expenditures.
   C.   System development charges shall not be expended for costs associated
with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an
incidental part of other capital improvements, referred to in this section, nor
for costs of the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements.
(Ord. 757)
5-14-8: COLLECTION OF CHARGE:
   A.   The system development charge is payable upon issuance of a building
permit or a public works permit for connection to or enlarging the distribution
of the city sewer system.
   B.   If construction commences or connection is made to the sewer system
without an appropriate permit, or without paying the applicable charges, the
system development charge is immediately payable upon the earliest date that a
permit was required.
   C.   The city staff shall collect the applicable charge from or on behalf of
the owner of the parcel when a permit that allows building or development of a
parcel is issued.
   D.   The city staff shall not issue such permit or allow such connection
until the charge has been paid in full. (Ord. 757)
5-14-9: DELINQUENT CHARGES:
When for any reason, the system development charge has not been paid, the
procedure described in section
5-11-10 of this title, shall be followed. (Ord. 757)
TITLE 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
6-1-1: Definitions
6-1-2: Powers Of Council
6-1-3: City Collection
6-1-4: Collection Service Required, Placement Of Receptacles
6-1-5: Rates And Charges
6-1-6: Payment Of Charges
6-1-7: Delinquent Payment
6-1-8: Garbage Containers Required, Specifications
6-1-9: Unlawful Disposal
6-1-10: Disposal Requirements
6-1-11: Exceptions
6-1-12: Open Burning
6-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning, shall mean:
ASHES: Includes the solid waste products of coal, wood, and other fuels used
for heating and cooking from all public and private establishments and from all
residences.
COLLECTOR: A person, firm, partnership or corporation hired or franchised by
the city for the purpose of collecting garbage within the city.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms designed for occupancy by one family, and not
having more than one cooking facility. For the purposes of this chapter, a
trailer house is a dwelling unit, and a residence is a dwelling or structure
built for dwelling purposes.
GARBAGE: Includes all putrescible wastes, except sewage and body wastes,
including vegetable wastes, animal offal and carcasses of dead animals and
every refuse accumulation of animal, fruit, or vegetable matter, liquid or
otherwise, that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of
meat, fish, fowl, fruits and vegetables, except coffee grounds, but not
including recognized industrial byproducts, and shall include all such
substances from all public and private establishments and residences.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, institution or
corporation. The term shall also mean the occupant or owner of the premises for
which service herein mentioned is rendered.
REFUSE: Includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, and all other putrescible and
nonputrescible wastes, except sewage, from all public and private
establishments and residences.
RUBBISH: Includes all nonputrescible wastes, except ashes, from all public and
private establishments and residences. (1956 Code § 4-001)
6-1-2: POWERS OF COUNCIL:
The city council may, from time to time by motion or resolution, prescribe
regulations for the removal and disposition of garbage pursuant to this
chapter, and shall have the right to fix rates for the removal and disposition
of waste from the construction or repair of buildings or otherwise, or other
extraordinary services rendered by the city but not specifically contemplated
by this act. (1956 Code § 4-008)
6-1-3: CITY COLLECTION:
The city shall have the exclusive right to collect for hire or fee all garbage,
refuse and rubbish within the city, except for canneries, packinghouses and
manufacturing establishments, and shall collect, remove and dispose of all
garbage and refuse in the residential section of the city at least once each
week, and from hotels, restaurants, boarding houses, eating places, apartment
houses, schools and hospitals and in the business sections of the city as
required. (1956 Code § 4-009)
6-1-4: COLLECTION SERVICE REQUIRED, PLACEMENT OF RECEPTACLES:
All persons in possession, in charge, or in control of any dwelling, trailer
camp, hospital, hotel, school, club, restaurant, or eating place, or in
possession, charge or control of any shop, place of business or manufacturing
establishment, where refuse is created or accumulated, shall have their garbage
or refuse collected by the city, and a fee shall be collected on all of the
above described places. No persons, other than the city, shall for hire,
dispose of any garbage or refuse except his or her own. (Ord. 785)
6-1-5: RATES AND CHARGES:
The rates to be charged all persons for the service of hauling garbage from
their premises to the city sanitary landfill may be established by the city
council by resolution, and may in like manner be amended or altered. The city
reserves the right to place a charge on all people using the sanitary landfill.
(1956 Code §§ 4-006, 4-012)
6-1-6: PAYMENT OF CHARGES:
The rates and charges herein provided for refuse collection and disposal may be
paid by the occupants or by the owner of property served, by agreement with the
city. Regulations for the manner, time and place of payment of all rates and
charges hereunder shall be provided by resolution of the city council. (1956
Code §§ 4-011, 4-013)
6-1-7: DELINQUENT PAYMENT:
All charges for the services to be rendered shall be payable to the city, and
if not paid on or before twenty (20) days from the date of the bill, such
charge will be delinquent, and the city reserves the right to discontinue said
service. (Ord. 785)
6-1-8: GARBAGE CONTAINERS REQUIRED, SPECIFICATIONS:
Garbage containers, except those for recycling, shall be owned and provided by
the city.
   A.   Containers shall be kept clean inside and out, so that no odor nuisance
shall exist.
   B.   Damage to containers other than everyday wear, such as fire, graffiti,
etc., shall be the responsibility of the customer, regardless of whether it is
located on a public street or on private property. (Ord. 785)
6-1-9: UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to burn, dump, collect, or in any
manner dispose of garbage, debris, or refuse upon any street, alley, public
place, trail, or stream or private property within the city. Recycling may be
carried on by nonprofit institutions or clubs under a permit from the city
manager, and under rules and regulations prescribed by the city council. No
charge for removal of such items shall be made against garbage customers by
such institutions or clubs, and no claim shall be made by the collector because
of such loss of business or salvage. (Ord. 785)
   B.   Wastepaper, boxes, brush, leaves, grass, prunings from trees (except in
commercial quantities), may be burned on private property, in furnaces, or upon
special permit from the city manager, they may be burned in private
incinerators, or in open fires, under safe conditions expressed in the permit.
(1956 Code § 4-003)
6-1-10: DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All persons in the city are hereby required to dispose of all
perishable garbage within one week of the time of its production; to dispose of
nonperishable and nonoffensive garbage and debris promptly, and shall not
permit the same to accumulate upon or about the premises, and shall dispose of
the same by hauling or causing the same to be hauled to the sanitary landfill
owned by the city. (Ord. 785)
   B.   The city reserves the right to require the separation of paper or
garbage or other component parts of refuse and may require the deposit thereof
in separate cans or receptacles, and may by resolution prescribe the method of
disposal thereof. (1956 Code § 4-010)
   C.   Burn barrels are prohibited inside the city limits. (Ord. 904)
6-1-11: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Canneries, packinghouses and manufacturing establishments of any and
every nature are expressly excepted from general operation of this chapter, but
the owners or operators of the same shall remove or cause to be removed, all
garbage produced by them in connection with such establishments, from the
limits of the city before the same shall become a nuisance or endanger the
public health, such removal to be in conformity with the regulations and
requirements imposed by the city council. (1956 Code § 4-007)
   B.   Trash or waste material resulting from destruction, demolition, or
repair of any building or structure, or tree limbs, and prunings over one inch
(1") in diameter, shall not constitute garbage and refuse, and the city shall
not be required to collect and transport the same outside of the limits of the
city; provided, that the city may, at its option, make independent contracts
with property owners or other such persons or parties for collection and
transportation of such matter.
   C.   Car bodies are prohibited from the dump area. (1956 Code § 4-016)
6-1-12: OPEN BURNING:
   A.   Permission:
      1.   Permission to burn leaves, prunings, grass clippings, paper and
cardboard boxes, in an open fire on private property may be obtained by calling
the city police department, and providing the name of the property owner,
address of the fire location, and material to be burned. Permission for
activities related to this section, will be dependent upon favorable conditions
for smoke dispersal as determined by the national weather service. (Ord. 785)
      2.   A written permit is required to burn off the weeds and/or debris on
vacant lots. Permits must be completed at the police department in city hall.
(1956 Code § 4-017)
   B.   Unlawful Burning: No construction debris, demolished sheds or
buildings, tar product paper or shingles, rubber products or oil products shall
be burned within the city. (1956 Code § 4-018)
CHAPTER 2
VEGETATION, RUBBISH AND DEBRIS
SECTION:
6-2-1: Nuisance
6-2-2: Abatement Of Nuisance
6-2-3: Rate Schedule; Method Of Abatement
6-2-4: Assessment Of Costs
6-2-5: Liability; Penalty
6-2-1: NUISANCE:
   A.   Definitions:
    ENFORCING AUTHORITY: The City Manager shall have full authority of law to
enforce the provisions of this chapter. The City Manager may delegate any
portion or all of this authority to his/her agents. Nothing herein shall limit
the responsibility, authority, or powers of enforcement given under the City
ordinances or other State law. The term "Manager" as used in this chapter,
shall mean the City Manager or his/her agent. The City Manager shall have the
authorization to enter into or upon subject property at reasonable times to
investigate or cause the removal of the subject nuisance.
   NOXIOUS VEGETATION: 1. Weeds more than twelve inches (12") high.
      2.   Grass more than twelve inches (12") high, and not within the
exception stated in subsection 1 of this definition.
      3.   Poison oak, poison ivy, yellow star thistle, and puncture vine.
      4.   Blackberry bushes that extend into a public thoroughfare or across a
property line.
      5.   All trees, plants, shrubs, grass, brush, weeds, or other vegetation
growing or which has grown and died or dried that are found upon any property
which are a fire hazard and/or otherwise a menace to public health, safety and
welfare.
"Noxious vegetation" does not include vegetation that constitutes an
agricultural crop, unless that vegetation is a health hazard, or a fire or
traffic hazard.
   NUISANCES: For the purposes of this chapter, nuisances mean rubbish, junk,
noxious vegetation, and stagnant water.
   PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBILITY: In addition to property owned, the property
owner is responsible under this chapter for all vegetation on that portion of
the public right-of-way abutting the property such person owns, except for the
roadway. The roadway is the paved, improved, or proper driving portion of the
highway designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. This section applies
to undeveloped public rights-of-way as well as to developed public rights-of-
way.
   RUBBISH, DEBRIS, AND JUNK: Any open visible storage of old appliances,
equipment or parts thereof, all old iron or other scrap metal, all inoperable
vehicles or parts thereof, including tires, all vehicle bodies, cardboard, all
lumber, old wood and mattresses, which are not being used for their intended
purpose, and any other material that is piled or discarded in a manner that is
unsightly, constitutes a fire hazard, or otherwise is a menace to public
health, safety and welfare. Junk does not include orderly stacked firewood.
   STAGNANT WATER: Accumulated and/or standing foul water, whether existing on
the ground, or otherwise contained and existing in an open cistern or other
container, that attracts or is likely to attract, accumulations of insects, or
creates foul or unpleasant odors, or otherwise creates an unhealthy
environmental condition. (Ord. 930, 9-26-2005; amd. Ord. 984, 2-13-2017)
   B.   Prohibition: No owner or person in charge of property may allow
nuisances to be on the property or in the right-of-way of a public thoroughfare
abutting on the property. It shall be the duty of an owner or person in charge
of the property to cut down or to destroy grass, shrubbery, brush, bushes,
weeds, or other noxious vegetation as often as needed to prevent them from
becoming unsightly, from becoming a fire hazard, or in the case of weeds or
other noxious vegetation, from maturing or from going to seed, and to remove
all rubbish and debris. (Ord. 930, 9-26-2005)
6-2-2: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE:
   A.   Notice: The City Manager shall cause a written notice via letter and/or
door hanger informing the owner or person in charge of property of the
existence of and need to abate any nuisance(s), giving notice to comply with
this Code within ten (10) calendar days. If the subject property has not been
properly abated within this time allowance, and no appeal requested by the
property owner, the City Manager may cause the abatement of the nuisance to be
completed. The property owner shall then be assessed all applicable costs as
per City resolution. (Ord. 984, 2-13-2017)
      1.   The notice to abate shall contain:
         a.   A description of the real property, by street address or
otherwise, on which the nuisance exists.
         b.   A direction that the nuisance be abated, and if the nuisance
consists of any of the weeds that are identified in subsection 1 of the
definition of "noxious vegetation" in subsection
6-2-1A of this chapter that they must be destroyed and/or prevented from
producing seed or spreading within ten (10) days from the date of the notice,
or that the owner appear before the City Manager at an appeal hearing to show
just cause why the nuisance should not be abated. Appeals must be made in
writing within ten (10) calendar days from the date of notice, addressed to the
City Manager, and listing the request for an extension in which to comply with
the order, or just cause as to why the abatement should be forgiven. Hearings
will then be scheduled as soon as possible following receipt of notice.
         c.   A description of the nuisance.
         d.   A statement that unless the nuisance is abated, as directed in
the notice, the City may abate the nuisance, and the cost of abatement will be
charged to the person responsible.
         e.   A statement that it will be the responsibility of the property
owner, or occupant, as the case may be, to notify the Public Works Department
of any chemical abatement efforts once they are completed.
      2.   Upon completion of the mailing, the persons responsible for mailing
and/or hand posting shall execute and file certificates stating the date and
place of mailing or posting.
      3.   An error in the name and/or address of the person responsible shall
not make the notice void. (Ord. 930, 9-26-2005)
   B.   Appeal Hearing: At the conclusion of an appeal hearing, the City
Manager may authorize the abatement of the identified nuisance at the cost of
the property owner responsible for the nuisance, or may forgive the violation.
(Ord. 984, 2-13-2017)
6-2-3: RATE SCHEDULE; METHOD OF ABATEMENT:
The City Council shall establish by resolution a rate schedule and method of
abatement policy. (Ord. 930, 9-26-2005)
6-2-4: ASSESSMENT OF COSTS:
   A.   The Manager shall keep an accurate record of the expenses incurred by
the City in physically abating the nuisance, and shall include therein a charge
of ten dollars ($10.00), or ten percent (10%) of those expenses, whichever is
greater, for administrative overhead as detailed on the cost resolution adopted
by Council.
   B.   The Manager by postage prepaid first class mail, shall forward to the
owner, and the person responsible, a notice stating:
      1.   The total cost of abatement, including the administrative overhead.
      2.   That the cost as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien
against the property unless paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the
notice.
      3.   That if the owner or the person responsible objects to the costs of
the abatement as indicated, he may file a notice of objection with the Manager
not more than ten (10) days from the date of the notice.
   C.   Upon the expiration of ten (10) days after the date of the notice, the
City Manager shall cause the assessments to be invoiced to the property owner
of record.
   D.   If the costs of the abatement are not paid within thirty (30) days from
the date of the notice, an assessment of the costs, as stated or as determined
by the Manager, shall thereupon be entered in the docket of City liens. Upon
the entry being made, it shall constitute a lien upon the property from which
the nuisance was removed or abated.
   E.   The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street
improvements are enforced and shall bear interest at the rate of seven percent
(7%) per annum. The interest shall begin to run from the date of the entry of
the lien in the lien docket. Unless paid within one (1) year after assessment,
the Manager shall foreclose the lien in accordance with Oregon Revised Statutes
223.505 through 223.650.
   F.   An error in the name of owner or the person responsible shall not void
the assessment, nor will a failure to receive the notice of the proposed
assessment render the assessment void; but it shall remain a valid lien against
the property. (Ord. 930, 9-26-2005)
6-2-5: LIABILITY; PENALTY:
   A.   Failure To Abate: Any person who fails to abate or remove any
vegetation required of that person to be abated or removed pursuant to this
chapter, shall be liable to any person who is injured or otherwise suffers
damage by reason of such vegetation or failure to abate or remove the same.
   B.   Expenses Incurred: Neither the City, or any of its officers, agents,
employees, or City Council members, shall be liable to any person who is
injured or otherwise suffers damage by reason of vegetation existing in
violation of this chapter. However, if this exemption from liability is
unenforceable, and in any event, the person responsible for abatement or
removal of the vegetation pursuant to this chapter shall be primarily liable to
the injured party and shall indemnify the City, its officers, agents, City
Council members, and employees, for any judgment against any of them, and shall
be liable to them for any expense paid or incurred, including attorney fees to
defend themselves or to settle the claim of any injured person.
   C.   Penalty: Violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be subject to a fine in any sum not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00). When violations are of a continuing nature, each day
the violation continues shall be a separate violation. (Ord. 930, 9-26-2005)
TITLE 7
RESERVED
TITLE 8
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
8-1-1: Definitions
8-1-2: Disorderly Conduct And Related Offenses
8-1-2-1:    Assault
8-1-2-2:    Menacing
8-1-2-3:    Recklessly Endangering Another Person
8-1-2-4:    Reserved
8-1-2-5:    Disorderly Conduct
8-1-2-6:    Reserved
8-1-2-7:    Harassment
8-1-2-8:    Abuse Of Venerated Objects
8-1-2-9:    Theft
8-1-2-10:    Begging
8-1-2-11:    Public Intoxication And Drinking
8-1-3: Weapons And Firearms
8-1-3-1:    Concealed Weapons
8-1-3-2:    Discharge Of Weapons
8-1-4: Sexual And Related Offenses
8-1-4-1:    Public Indecency
8-1-4-2:    Prohibited Touching
8-1-5: Possession Of Marijuana
8-1-6: Offenses Relating To Property
8-1-6-1:    Trespass
8-1-6-2:    Violating Privacy Of Another
8-1-6-3:    Mischief
8-1-7: Property Nuisances, Restrictions
8-1-7-1:    Offensive Substances, Deposit Of Prohibited
8-1-7-2:    Wastes, Deposit Of
8-1-7-3:    Deposit Of Fuel Wastes
8-1-7-4:    Billposting Regulated
8-1-7-5:    Posted Notices, Defacement Of
8-1-7-6:    Surface Water, Drainage Of
8-1-7-7:    Ice And Snow Removal
8-1-7-8:    Using A Motor Home, Recreational Vehicle, Bus, Travel Trailer,
Truck Camper, Or Other Vehicle As A Residence Prohibited
8-1-8: Minors
8-1-8-1:    Child Neglect
8-1-8-2:    Endangering The Welfare Of A Minor
8-1-8-3:    Places Of Amusement
8-1-8-4:    Misrepresentation Of Age By Minor
8-1-9: Obstructing And Falsifying Information
8-1-9-1:    Unsworn Falsification
8-1-9-2:    Obstructing Governmental Administration
8-1-9-3:    Tampering With Public Records
8-1-9-4:    Impersonation
8-1-9-5:    False Reports
8-1-9-6:    Resisting Or Refusing To Aid Officer
8-1-9-7:    Escape
8-1-9-8:    Police And Fire Communications
8-1-10: Theft Of Services
8-1-11: Reserved
8-1-12: Penalty
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions contained in the Oregon Revised Statutes 161, 162, 163, 164,
165, 166, and 167, as now constituted, are adopted by reference and made a part
of this chapter. Except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning, the general definitions, and the definitions appearing in the
definitional and other sections of particular articles of the Oregon Revised
Statutes shall be applicable throughout this chapter. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972;
amd. Ord. 822)
8-1-2: DISORDERLY CONDUCT AND RELATED OFFENSES:
8-1-2-1: ASSAULT:
No person shall:
   A.   Intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly cause physical injury to
another.
   B.   With criminal negligence, cause physical injury to another by means of
a deadly weapon. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
8-1-2-2: MENACING:
No person shall, by word or conduct, intentionally attempt to place another
person in fear of imminent physical injury. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
8-1-2-3: RECKLESSLY ENDANGERING ANOTHER PERSON:
No person shall recklessly engage in conduct which creates a substantial risk
of serious physical injury to another person. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
8-1-2-4: RESERVED:
8-1-2-5: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
   A.   No person shall, with intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance
or alarm, or by recklessly creating a risk thereof:
      1.   Engage in fighting or in violent, tumultuous or threatening
behavior.
      2.   Make unreasonable noise.
      3.   Disturb any lawful assembly of persons without lawful authority.
      4.   Obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic in or on a public way or
public place.
      5.   Congregate with other persons in a public place, and refuse to
comply with a lawful order of the police to disperse.
      6.   Initiate or circulate a report, knowing it to be false, concerning
an alleged or impending fire, explosion, crime, catastrophe, or other
emergency.
      7.   Create a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any act
which he is not licensed or privileged so to do. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
      8.   No person at or near a fire shall obstruct or impede the fighting of
the fire, interfere with fire department apparatus, behave in a disorderly
manner, or refuse to observe promptly an order of a member of the fire or
police department. For purposes of this provision, members of the fire
department are endowed with the same power of arrest as is conferred on police
officers for violations of the city ordinances. (Ord. 678, 3-11-1985)
8-1-2-6: RESERVED:
(Ord. 822, 8-14-1995)
8-1-2-7: HARASSMENT:
   A.   A person commits the crime of harassment if, with intent to harass,
annoy or alarm another person, the actor:
      1.   Subjects another to offensive physical contact.
      2.   Subjects another to alarm by conveying a false report, known by
conveyor to be false, concerning death or serious physical injury to a person,
which report reasonably would be expected to cause alarm.
      3.   Subjects another to alarm by conveying a telephonic or written
threat to inflict serious physical injury on that person or to commit a felony
involving the person or property of that person or any member of that person's
family, which threat reasonably would be expected to cause alarm. (Ord. 372, 6-
22-1972)
      4.   Reserved. (Ord. 822, 8-14-1995)
      5.   Causes the telephone of another to ring with no communicative
purpose.
   B.   A person is criminally liable for harassment if the person knowingly
permits any telephone under the person's control to be used in violation of
subsection A of this section. (Ord. 677; amd. Ord. 720)
8-1-2-8: ABUSE OF VENERATED OBJECTS:
   A.   No person shall intentionally abuse a public monument or structure, a
place of worship or burial, or the national or state flag.
   B.   As used in this section, "abuse" means to deface, defile or to
otherwise physically mistreat and in a manner likely to outrage public
sensibilities. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
8-1-2-9: THEFT:
   A.   Shoplifting:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from any mercantile
establishment, any merchandise displaced or offered for sale without the
consent of the owner, or to alter the price indicia of such merchandise with
the intention of purchasing the merchandise at a reduced price.
      2.   "Mercantile establishment" means any place where merchandise is
displayed, held, or offered for sale, either at retail or wholesale.
      3.   "Merchandise" means all things movable and capable of manual
delivery, the value of which does not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00).
      4.   Merchandise is "removed from any mercantile establishment" when it
is taken out of the door, or portal of the establishment, or if the
establishment does not have a door or portal, when the merchandise is taken
beyond the area where customers would normally be in possession of merchandise
without first having paid for same.
      5.   "Owner" means any person who owns or operates a mercantile
establishment, or the agent or employees of that person.
      6.   The offense of this subsection shall be a violation punishable by a
fine as otherwise provided for in this code. In addition to, or in lieu of, a
sentence to pay a fine, the municipal court shall require as part of sentencing
that a civil penalty be imposed payable to the owner of the mercantile
establishment in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus the value of the
subject merchandise. The retail price of the merchandise shall be conclusive
proof of the value thereof.
      7.   Nothing stated within this subsection shall prevent the prosecution
of the conduct proscribed herein under any other provision of this code
otherwise applicable.
   B.   Theft, Second Degree:
      1.   A person commits theft in the second degree when, with intent to
deprive another of property, the value of which is fifty dollars ($50.00) or
more but under two hundred dollars ($200.00), or to appropriate such property
to the person or to a third person, the person takes, appropriates, obtains, or
withholds such property from an owner thereof.
      2.   Except as otherwise provided for in subsection
1-4-3D of this code, the offense of this subsection shall be a misdemeanor
punishable by fine or jail term as provided for in this code.
   C.   Theft, Third Degree:
      1.   A person commits theft in the third degree, when with the intent to
deprive another of property, the value of which is under fifty dollars
($50.00), or to appropriate such property to the person or to a third person,
the person takes, appropriates, obtains, or withholds such property from an
owner thereof.
      2.   The offense of this subsection shall be a violation punishable by a
fine as provided for in this code. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972; amd. Ord. 627; Ord.
724)
8-1-2-10: BEGGING:
No person shall beg or solicit alms or other gratuities upon the streets, or in
any public place. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
8-1-2-11: PUBLIC INTOXICATION AND DRINKING:
   A.   No person shall drink or consume intoxicating liquor in a public place
or in a motor vehicle in a public place. Nothing in this subsection shall be
deemed to prohibit drinking of any intoxicating liquor in any establishment
wherein the same be sold for on premises consumption under the laws of the
state of Oregon. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
8-1-3: WEAPONS AND FIREARMS:
8-1-3-1: CONCEALED WEAPONS:
   A.   No person other than a peace officer or person licensed pursuant to
Oregon Revised Statutes 166.290 to 166.293 shall carry concealed on or about
his person, or within any vehicle which is under his control or direction, any
pistol, revolver, other firearm, knife other than an ordinary pocketknife with
a blade less than three and one-half inches (31/2") long, dirk, dagger,
stiletto, metal knuckles, or weapon the use of which could inflict injury upon
a person or property. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972; amd. Ord. 593)
   B.   Persons not affected by subsection A of this section:
      1.   Sheriffs, constables, marshals, police officers, whether active or
honorably retired, or other duly appointed peace officers.
      2.   Any person summoned by any such officer to assist in making arrests
or preserving the peace, while said person so summoned is actually engaged in
assisting the officer.
      3.   The possession or transportation by any merchant of unloaded
firearms as merchandise.
      4.   Members of the army, navy or marine corps of the United States or of
the national guard, when on duty.
      5.   Organizations which are by law authorized to purchase or receive
weapons described in Oregon Revised Statutes 166.250 from the United States, or
from this state.
      6.   Duly authorized military or civil organizations while parading or
the members thereof when going to and from the places of meeting of their
organizations.
      7.   Members of any club or organization, for the purpose of practicing
shooting at targets upon the established target ranges, whether public or
private, while such members are using any of the firearms referred to in Oregon
Revised Statutes 166.250 upon such target ranges, or while going to and from
such ranges.
      8.   Licensed hunters or fishermen while engaged in hunting or fishing,
or while going to or returning from a hunting or fishing expedition. (Ord. 372,
6-22-1972)
8-1-3-2: DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS:
Except as approved by the chief of police, no person other than a police
officer, shall fire or discharge a gun or bow, spring or air actuated pellet
gun, air gun or BB gun, or other weapon which propels a projectile by use of
gunpowder or other explosive, springs or compressed gas, jet or rocket
propulsion. For purposes of this section, a "bow" shall include any bow capable
of casting an arrow more than fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972; amd. Ord.
728, 9-26-1988)
8-1-4: SEXUAL AND RELATED OFFENSES:
8-1-4-1: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
No person shall, while in or in view of a public place, perform:
   A.   An act of sexual intercourse.
   B.   An act of deviate sexual intercourse.
   C.   An act of exposing his genitals with the intent of arousing the sexual
desire of himself or another person.
   D.   An act of urination or defecation, except in toilet provided for that
purpose. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
8-1-4-2: PROHIBITED TOUCHING:
   A.   No person shall pay a fee or receive a fee, directly or indirectly, for
touching or offering to touch the sexual part of another for the purpose of
arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of either party.
   B.   No person who manages or controls any place of business shall cause or
permit any agent, employee, or other person under his control or supervision to
participate in conduct prohibited in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 372,
6-22-1972)
8-1-5: POSSESSION OF MARIJUANA:
Possession of marijuana under one ounce shall be punishable upon conviction in
municipal court by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (1978 Code)
8-1-6: OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY:
8-1-6-1: TRESPASS:
No person shall enter or remain unlawfully in or upon premises, including any
building, and any other real property, whether privately or publicly owned.
(Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
8-1-6-2: VIOLATING PRIVACY OF ANOTHER:
No person, other than a peace officer performing a lawful duty, shall enter
upon land or into a building used in whole or in part as a dwelling not his
own, without permission of the owner or person entitled to possession thereof,
and while so trespassing look through or attempt to look through a window,
door, or transom of the dwelling or that part of the building used as a
dwelling with the intent to violate the privacy of any other person. (Ord. 372,
6-22-1972)
8-1-6-3: MISCHIEF:
   A.   No person shall with intent to cause substantial inconvenience to the
owner or to another person, and having no right to do so, nor reasonable ground
to believe that he has such right, tamper or interfere with property of
another.
   B.   No person shall, while having no right to do so nor reasonable ground
to believe that he has such right, intentionally damage property of another, or
recklessly damage property of another in an amount exceeding one hundred
dollars ($100.00). (1978 Code)
8-1-7: PROPERTY NUISANCES, RESTRICTIONS:
8-1-7-1: OFFENSIVE SUBSTANCES, DEPOSIT OF PROHIBITED:
No person shall put any animal carcass or part thereof, or any excrement, or
putrid, nauseous, decaying, deleterious or offensive substances in any stream,
well, spring, brook, ditch, pond, or other inland waters, within the city
limits; nor shall any person place any substances in such position that high
water or natural seepage will carry the same into any such waters. (Ord. 372,
6-22-1972)
8-1-7-2: WASTES, DEPOSIT OF:
No person shall deposit any vegetable waste, litter, garbage, filth, or refuse
of any nature, kind or description, which shall be detrimental to the public
health, in or upon any private alley, yard or area, or upon any public street
or alley, except where the same is temporarily deposited for removal. (Ord.
372, 6-22-1972)
8-1-7-3: DEPOSIT OF FUEL WASTES:
It shall be unlawful to wilfully place or deposit any deleterious substance,
including, but not limited to, oil, grease, gasoline, kerosene or diesel fuel,
upon any street, public parking, or other public way, which tends to mar the
appearance or detract from the cleanliness or safety of such street or public
property. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
8-1-7-4: BILLPOSTING REGULATED:
No person shall, in any manner, affix a placard, bill or poster, upon any
personal or real property, private or public, without first obtaining
permission of the owner or proper public authority. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
8-1-7-5: POSTED NOTICES, DEFACEMENT OF:
No person shall wilfully deface or tear down any official notice or bulletin
posted in conformity with law. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
8-1-7-6: SURFACE WATER, DRAINAGE OF:
It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee or occupant of any building or
structure to suffer or permit rainwater, ice or snow to fall from any such
building or structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any such
sidewalk, and every such owner, lessee or occupant shall at all times keep and
maintain in a proper state of repair, adequate drainpipes or a drainage system
sufficient to carry any overflow water accumulating on the roof or about such
building, to the street. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
8-1-7-7: ICE AND SNOW REMOVAL:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, occupant or person having
the control or custody of any premises or unimproved property to remove all
snow or ice which has fallen or has accumulated upon the sidewalks abutting
such premises or property within six (6) hours after such snow or ice has
ceased to be deposited thereon; provided, however, that if such snow is falling
or such ice accumulating after the hour of six o'clock (6:00) P.M., the same
shall be removed within six (6) hours after seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on the
next succeeding day.
   B.   Any person who fails to remove snow or ice required in this section to
be removed shall be liable to any person who is injured or otherwise suffers
damage by reason of the existence of such snow or ice, and/or the failure to
remove it as required herein. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
   C.   Neither the City, or any of its officers, agents, employees, or City
Council members, shall be liable to any person who is injured or otherwise
suffers damage by reason of the existence of snow or ice upon sidewalks.
However, if this exemption for liability is unenforceable, and in any event,
the person identified in subsection A of this section shall be primarily liable
to the injured party and shall indemnify the City, its officers, agents, City
Council members, and employees, for any judgment against any of them, and shall
be liable to them for any expense paid or incurred, including attorney fees, to
defend themselves or to settle the claim of any injured person. (Ord. 372, 6-
22-1972; amd. Ord. 750, 1-28-1991)
8-1-7-8: USING A MOTOR HOME, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE, BUS, TRAVEL TRAILER, TRUCK
CAMPER, OR OTHER VEHICLE AS A RESIDENCE PROHIBITED:
   A.   Definitions:
    RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: For the purposes of this section, means any motor
home, travel trailer, fifth wheel trailer, tent trailer, passenger van, or bus
that is being used as a temporary dwelling.
Unless located in an established and City approved recreational vehicle park,
motor homes, recreational vehicles, travel trailers, fifth wheels, passenger
vans and buses (hereafter referred to generically as "recreational vehicles")
shall not be used as permanent dwellings.
No private property owner/person in charge of private property inside City
limits may allow temporary use of recreational vehicles as dwellings in excess
of fourteen (14) days per calendar year. The property owner, person in charge
of private property, or the person(s) dwelling inside the vehicle shall be
liable for any use in excess of fourteen (14) days.
   TEMPORARY USE PROPERTY: Private property on which a recreational vehicle as
described herein is being used as a temporary dwelling. The maximum number of
days allowed for such use is fourteen (14) days per property per calendar year.
Only one (1) recreational vehicle may be used as a temporary dwelling on any
given private property at any given time.
The fourteen (14) day use limit may include one (1) recreational vehicle used
for fourteen (14) days in a calendar year, or multiple recreational vehicles
used separately which in aggregate would total fourteen (14) days in a calendar
year.
For the purposes of this Code, temporary property use includes allowing the use
of a recreational vehicle as a break room, a social lounge, a lunch room, a
food preparation area, and a daytime slumber room.
   B.   Prohibited: No person shall use a motor home, recreational vehicle,
travel trailer, bus, truck camper, or other vehicle parked on public property
as a residence, or reside therein.
      1.   Evidence Of Dwelling: The following are indications that a
recreational vehicle is being used as a dwelling (not an exhaustive list):
         a.   Cooking inside the vehicle.
         b.   Sleeping inside the vehicle.
         c.   Showering/bathing inside the vehicle.
         d.   Using the toilet facilities located in the vehicle.
         e.   The property owner's statement that the vehicle is being used as
a dwelling.
         f.   The vehicle owner's admission that the vehicle is being used as a
dwelling.
         g.   Statements by neighbors in the immediate vicinity that the
vehicle is being used as a dwelling.
   C.   Excessive Odors Prohibited: No property owner/person in charge of
property shall allow the temporary use of a recreational vehicle that
propagates objectionable smells which emanate from any recreational vehicle
being used, to include holding tank odors and refuse odors.
   D.   Generator Use/Noise: The use of generators with itinerate recreational
vehicles shall be governed and controlled by the established City Code
regarding production of sound and noise.
   E.   Construction Project/Worker Exception: Upon application and with
approval and appropriate permitting by the City, contractors, construction
companies and their workers while on the job may be granted exception from the
fourteen (14) day limit on use of recreational vehicles as temporary dwellings.
   F.   Permit Required: A property owner/person in charge of private property
shall acquire from the City, through an established application process, a
temporary property use permit, designating the type of vehicle being used, the
private property on which it will be allowed, the number of occupants, and the
length of stay of said occupants to include a beginning date and an ending date
of stay. The application and permit shall be of City design, and the approved
permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the vehicle which is
visible from a public right-of-way. The permit fee shall be thirty dollars
($30.00), and shall be non- refundable, regardless of whether or not the
temporary use occurs as specified on the permit.
The permit fee under the construction project exception shall be set at a rate
to be determined by the City Council, and may be set at a monthly rate if
deemed appropriate.
   G.   Inspection By City Officials: If it is suspected or known that the
temporary use of a recreational vehicle is occurring on private property, and
no permit is clearly visible, it is prima facie evidence of unpermitted use of
private property regarding the use of a recreational vehicle as a temporary
dwelling. When a City official observes the lack of a visible permit, the
official may inquire of the private property owner/person in charge of private
property, and the occupants of the vehicle, to include an internal inspection
of the vehicle to determine if it is being used as a dwelling.
   H.   Violation: If it is determined by the City that a private property has
on it a recreational vehicle being used as a dwelling without the required
permit, or an issued permit has expired, a citation to appear in court may be
issued to the private property owner/person in charge of property, or the
person using the vehicle as a dwelling, whoever is deemed most appropriate.
In lieu of immediately issuing a citation, a City official may allow the
offending party the opportunity to immediately acquire the necessary permit
from City Hall, or if the recreational vehicle is present under an expired
permit, the recreational vehicle owner may be given opportunity to immediately
remove the vehicle from the property.
Each day a property is being used without a current valid permit constitutes a
separate and ongoing violation of this section.
   I.   Penalty: Upon conviction, the private property owner/person in charge
of property, or the person using the vehicle as a dwelling without a permit may
be ordered to pay a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   J.   Abatement For Ongoing Offense/Non-Payment Of Fines: In the event a
person is found guilty of violating this section, but continues to allow non-
permitted use, the City may abate the violation by causing the recreational
vehicle being used to be towed from the property after giving the property
owner/person in charge of property seventy two (72) hour written notice of
intent to tow.
   K.   Pre-Tow Hearing: Prior to the removal of a recreational vehicle, the
property owner/person in charge of property, or the owner/responsible party of
the vehicle may request an administrative hearing before the City Manager. A
request must be in writing, and must be submitted to the City Manager within
the seventy two (72) hours of the written notice given to the property owner/
person in charge of property.
The purpose of the hearing, if requested, is to allow facts to be presented to
the City Manager (or his/her designee) in order for a determination to be made
as to the validity of the tow.
If a hearing is requested, the recreational vehicle will not be removed from
the property until the final outcome and disposition of the hearing.
If facts are presented at the hearing which gives reasonable cause to believe
the ordinance is continuing to be violated, the City Manager will order the
removal of the recreational vehicle. If reasonable cause does not exist, the
recreational vehicle will not be removed from the property. The burden of proof
necessary is a preponderance of the evidence. (Ord. 983, 2-13-2017)
8-1-8: MINORS:
8-1-8-1: CHILD NEGLECT:
No person having custody or control of a child under ten (10) years of age
shall lock or confine, or leave the child unattended, or permit the child to be
locked or confined, or left unattended in a vehicle for a period of time longer
than fifteen (15) consecutive minutes.
It shall be lawful for a policeman or other peace officer, finding a child
confined in violation of the terms of this section to enter the vehicle and
remove the child, using such as is reasonably necessary to effect an entrance
to the vehicle where the child may be confined in order to remove the child.
(Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
8-1-8-2: ENDANGERING THE WELFARE OF A MINOR:
   A.   No person shall:
      1.   Knowingly sell, or cause to be sold, tobacco in any form to a person
under eighteen (18) years of age.
      2.   Employ a person under eighteen (18) years of age in or about a
cardroom, poolroom, or billiard parlor.
   B.   No person shall solicit, aid, abet or cause a person under eighteen
(18) years of age to:
      1.   Violate a law of the United States, or a state, or to violate a City
or County ordinance.
      2.   Run away or conceal himself from a person or institution having
lawful custody of the minor. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
8-1-8-3: PLACES OF AMUSEMENT:
   A.   No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall enter, visit, or
loiter in or about a public cardroom, poolroom, or billiard parlor.
   B.   No person operating or assisting in the operation of a public cardroom,
poolroom, billiard parlor, or public place of amusement shall permit a person
under eighteen (18) years of age to engage therein in any game of cards, pool,
billiards, dice, darts, pinball, games of like character, or games of chance,
either for amusement or otherwise.
   C.   This section shall not apply to the playing of billiards or pool in a
recreational facility. As used in this section, a "recreational facility" means
an area, enclosure, or room in which facilities are offered to the public to
play billiards or pool for amusement only, and:
      1.   Which is clean, adequately lighted and ventilated;
      2.   In which no alcoholic liquor is sold or consumed; and
      3.   Access to which does not require passing through a room where
alcoholic liquor is sold or consumed. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
8-1-8-4: MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE BY MINOR:
   A.   No person shall, being less than a certain specified age, knowingly
represent himself to be any age other than his true age with the intent of
securing a right, benefit or privilege which by law is denied to persons under
that certain, specified age. (See also section
8-2-9 of this title.)
   B.   Being unmarried, knowingly represent that he is married with the intent
of securing a right, benefit, or privilege which by law is denied to unmarried
persons. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
8-1-9: OBSTRUCTING AND FALSIFYING INFORMATION:
8-1-9-1: UNSWORN FALSIFICATION:
No person shall knowingly make any false written statement to a public servant
in connection with an application for any benefit. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
8-1-9-2: OBSTRUCTING GOVERNMENTAL ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   No person shall intentionally obstruct, impair or hinder the
administration of law or other governmental function by means of intimidation,
force or physical interference or obstacle.
   B.   This section shall not apply to the obstruction of unlawful
governmental action or interference with the making of an arrest. (Ord. 372, 6-
22-1972)
8-1-9-3: TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC RECORDS:
No person shall, without lawful authority, knowingly destroy, mutilate,
conceal, remove, make a false entry in or falsely alter any public records.
(Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
8-1-9-4: IMPERSONATION:
No person shall, with intent to obtain a benefit or to injure or defraud
another, falsely impersonate a public servant and do an act as such assumed
character. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
8-1-9-5: FALSE REPORTS:
   A.   No person shall knowingly initiate a false alarm or report which is
transmitted to a fire department or law enforcement agency or other
organization that deals with emergencies involving danger to life or property.
   B.   No person shall knowingly make or file with the police department or
with the city attorney, or police officer engaged in his official duties a
false, misleading, or unfounded statement or report concerning the violation or
alleged violation of a city ordinance or the commission, or alleged commission
of a crime. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
8-1-9-6: RESISTING OR REFUSING TO AID OFFICER:
   A.   No person shall resist any person, known by him to be a peace officer,
acting in the performance of his duties; or, when requested to do so, refuse to
assist any such officer in the discharge of his duties; or by any means
whatsoever, hinder, delay or obstruct any such officer acting in the
performance of his duties. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
   B.   As used in this section, "resist" means the use of violence, physical
force, or any other means that creates a substantial risk of physical injury to
any person and includes behavior clearly intended to prevent being taken into
custody by overcoming the actions of the arresting officer. The behavior does
not have to result in actual physical injury to the arresting officer. Passive
resistance does not constitute behavior intended to prevent being taken into
custody. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972; amd. 1978 Code; Ord. 746, 1-22-1990)
   C.   It is no defense to a prosecution under this section that the peace
officer lacked legal authority to make an arrest, provided he was acting under
color of his official authority. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
8-1-9-7: ESCAPE:
   A.   No person shall:
      1.   Knowingly escape or attempt to escape from official detention.
      2.   Knowingly cause, aid, assist, abet or facilitate an escape from
official detention.
   B.   As used in this section:
    ESCAPE: An unlawful departure.
   OFFICIAL DETENTION:
      1.   Arrest by a peace officer.
      2.   Detention in a vehicle or facility for the transportation or custody
of persons under arrest, charge or conviction of an offense.
      3.   Detention for extradition or deportation.
      4.   Other detention because the person detained is charged with or
convicted of an offense. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
8-1-9-8: POLICE AND FIRE COMMUNICATIONS:
No person shall operate any generator or electromagnetic wave or cause a
disturbance in such a way as to interfere with the proper functioning of any
police or fire department radio communication system. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972)
8-1-10: THEFT OF SERVICES:
   A.   No person shall:
      1.   With intent to avoid payment therefor, obtain services that are
available only for compensation, by force, threat, deception or other means to
avoid payment for the services; or
      2.   Having control over the disposition of labor or of business,
commercial, or industrial equipment or facilities of another, use or divert to
the use of himself or a third person such labor, equipment, or facilities with
the intent to derive a commercial benefit for himself or a third person not
entitled thereto.
   B.   As used in this section, "services" include, but are not limited to,
labor, professional services, toll communication services, entertainment, the
supplying of food, lodging, or other accommodations in hotels, restaurants or
elsewhere, the supplying of commodities of a public utility nature such as gas,
electricity, steam, or water.
   C.   Absconding without payment or without offering to pay for hotel,
restaurant, or other services for which compensation is customarily paid
immediately upon receipt of them is prima facie evidence that the services were
obtained by deception. (1978 Code)
   D.   Upon determination by city of Milton-Freewater officials that meter
system tampering or utility service diversion has occurred, including, but not
limited to, removal or disturbance of city meter seal(s), the party responsible
for utility services shall be cited to the most severe degree possible with
theft of city services, and/or meter tampering by city police department
officers. The party responsible for utility services at the subject address
shall be held responsible for this offense should it occur after the date of
notice from the city of disconnection of utility services. The party or parties
responsible for the services at any given address shall be determined by
whomever is named on the city's official record of utilities for that address.
(Ord. 920, 1-10-2005)
8-1-11: RESERVED:
8-1-12: PENALTY:
   A.   Each violation of a separate provision of this chapter shall constitute
a separate offense, and each day that a violation of this chapter is committed
or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   The maximum penalty for a violation of this chapter shall not exceed
the maximum penalty prescribed for violation of a substantially similar offense
prescribed by the Oregon criminal code of 1971. (Ord. 372, 6-22-1972; amd. Ord.
720)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Definitions
8-2-2: Providing Liquor To Certain Persons Prohibited
8-2-3: Persons Not Allowed To Drink Alcoholic Liquor On Licensed Premises
8-2-4: Purchase Or Possession Of Liquor By Minor
8-2-5: Lawful Consumption Of Liquor By Minor
8-2-6: Loitering On Licensed Premises By Minors
8-2-7: Minors Not Permitted To Drink Or Loiter On Licensed Premises
8-2-8: Permitting Minors On Licensed Premises
8-2-9: Delivering Or Selling Liquor By Minor
8-2-10: Sales By Unlicensed Persons Prohibited
8-2-11: Intoxicated Persons On Licensed Premises
8-2-12: Bringing Alcoholic Liquor Upon Licensed Premises
8-2-13: Disposal Of Liquor Containers
8-2-14: Lawful Hours Of Sale
8-2-15: Defense Of Written Age Statement
8-2-16: Reserved
8-2-17: Nuisances
8-2-18: Possession Of Open Container
8-2-19: Drinking In Public Places
8-2-20: Responsibility Of Licensee For Employees
8-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
mean:
    ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Any alcoholic beverage containing more than one-half of
one percent (0.5%) alcohol by volume, and every liquid or solid, patented or
not, containing alcohol and capable of being consumed by human beings.
   COMMISSION: The Oregon liquor control commission.
   DISTILLED SPIRITS OR DISTILLED LIQUOR: Any alcoholic beverage containing
more than fourteen percent (14%) of alcohol by volume, including sweet wines
and all spirituous liquor.
   LICENSE PREMISES: The room or enclosure at the address within the corporate
limits of the city for which a license has been issued by the commission for
the serving, mixing, handling or selling of alcoholic liquor.
   LICENSEE: A person who has an alcoholic liquor license from the commission,
authorizing such person to sell or dispense alcoholic liquor.
   LIQUOR CONTROL ACT: The state law so designated by Oregon Revised Statutes
471.027 as now or hereafter amended and supplemented, and including the Oregon
distilled liquor control act as defined by Oregon Revised Statutes 472.020 as
now or hereafter amended and supplemented.
   MINOR: Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
   OTHER RESPONSIBLE RELATIVE:
      1.   An adult who is the spouse of a minor.
      2.   An adult, related to the minor, who has taken over the parental
duties of governing the minor's actions.
      3.   A duly appointed, qualified, and acting guardian who has taken over
the parental duties of governing the minor's actions.
   PERSON: An individual, partnership, corporation, association, or club.
   SELL: To solicit or receive an order; to keep or expose for sale; to deliver
for value in any way other than purely gratuitously; to peddle; to keep with
intent to sell; to traffic in; or for any consideration, promised or obtained,
directly or indirectly, or under any pretext or by any means, to procure or
allow to be procured for any other person.
   B.   As used in this chapter, the singular includes the plural and the
masculine includes the feminine. (1978 Code)
8-2-2: PROVIDING LIQUOR TO CERTAIN PERSONS PROHIBITED:
No person shall sell, give, furnish, serve or otherwise make available any
alcoholic liquor to:
   A.   Any minor except as provided in section
8-2-5 of this chapter.
   B.   Any person visibly intoxicated. (1978 Code)
8-2-3: PERSONS NOT ALLOWED TO DRINK ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR ON LICENSED PREMISES:
   A.   No person shall allow or permit any person, who is visibly intoxicated,
to drink or consume any alcoholic liquor upon any licensed premises.
   B.   No bartender shall drink or consume any alcoholic liquor, or be under
the influence of alcoholic liquor while on duty in a licensed premises. (1978
Code)
8-2-4: PURCHASE OR POSSESSION OF LIQUOR BY MINOR:
   A.   Except as provided in section
8-2-5 of this chapter, no minor shall attempt to purchase or acquire, or have
in his possession, any alcoholic liquor.
   B.   For the purposes of this section, possession of alcoholic liquor
includes the acceptance or consumption of a bottle of such liquor, or any
portion thereof, or a drink of such liquor. However, this section does not
prohibit the acceptance or consumption by any person of sacramental wine as
part of a religious rite or service. (1978 Code)
8-2-5: LAWFUL CONSUMPTION OF LIQUOR BY MINOR:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting a parent or
other responsible relative of a minor from giving such minor alcoholic liquor
and permitting him to consume the same within the home of such parent or other
responsible relative of the minor, or at such other private place not in view
of the public where the parent or other responsible relative is present. (1978
Code)
8-2-6: LOITERING ON LICENSED PREMISES BY MINORS:
Except as provided in section
8-2-8 of this chapter, no minor, whether or not he is accompanied by a parent
or other responsible relative, shall enter, loiter or remain on any licensed
premises, or any portion thereof, which has been posted by the commission to
prohibit the use thereof by minors. (1978 Code)
8-2-7: MINORS NOT PERMITTED TO DRINK OR LOITER ON LICENSED PREMISES:
   A.   No licensee or his employee or agent shall permit any minor to:
      1.   Consume any alcoholic liquor upon any licensed premises, whether or
not such alcoholic liquor is given to the minor by a parent or other
responsible relative.
      2.   Loiter on such licensed premises which have been posted by the
commission to prohibit the use thereof by minors, except as provided in this
chapter.
      3.   Remain upon such premises or any portion thereof, except as provided
in this chapter.
   B.   The fact that a parent or other responsible relative has accompanied a
minor upon any licensed premises shall not constitute a defense to any charge
brought for violation of this section, except as provided in section
8-2-8 of this chapter. (1978 Code)
8-2-8: PERMITTING MINORS ON LICENSED PREMISES:
   A.   The provisions of sections
8-2-6 and
8-2-7 of this chapter shall not be construed to prohibit:
      1.   Any minor from entering any licensed premises, or portion thereof,
for the transaction of any business pursuant to his duties in the regular
course of his lawful employment.
      2.   A minor spouse from entering and remaining on licensed premises, or
any portion thereof, when he is in the immediate company of his spouse who is
twenty one (21) years of age or older.
   B.   This section shall not be construed to authorize a minor spouse to
consume alcoholic liquor on any licensed premises. (1978 Code)
8-2-9: DELIVERING OR SELLING LIQUOR BY MINOR:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection C of this section, no minor, either
for himself or as agent or employee of another, shall sell, offer for sale, or
deliver any alcoholic liquor.
   B.   Except as provided in subsection C of this section, no person shall
employ, hire or engage any minor to sell, offer for sale or deliver any
alcoholic liquor.
   C.   Any employee eighteen (18) years of age or older, or a person who holds
any package store license from the commission, may sell any alcoholic liquor
authorized by such license on the licensed premises. (1978 Code)
8-2-10: SALES BY UNLICENSED PERSONS PROHIBITED:
No person shall sell alcoholic liquor unless he has a license from the
commission to sell alcoholic liquor. Sales by a licensee or his employee shall
be only such sales as are authorized by the license issued for the premises.
(1978 Code)
8-2-11: INTOXICATED PERSONS ON LICENSED PREMISES:
No licensee or his employee or agent shall permit a visibly intoxicated person
to enter upon the licensed premises which the licensee controls. (1978 Code)
8-2-12: BRINGING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR UPON LICENSED PREMISES:
No licensee of the commission, nor any agent or employee of such licensee,
shall keep or knowingly permit to be kept, brought or consumed upon the
licensed premises any alcoholic liquor not allowed to be sold or served upon
said premises. (1978 Code)
8-2-13: DISPOSAL OF LIQUOR CONTAINERS:
   A.   No licensee or his employee or agent shall permit any empty or
discarded containers of alcoholic liquor to be in the public view on the
exterior of his licensed premises or in the parking areas maintained in
connection with such premises.
   B.   No person shall discard, throw away, or dispose of any container of
alcoholic liquor, whether broken or not, upon any street, alley, public grounds
or public place. (1978 Code)
8-2-14: LAWFUL HOURS OF SALE:
   A.   No package store licensee shall sell, dispense, deliver or permit the
removal of any alcoholic liquor from the licensed premises between the hours of
one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
   B.   No retail malt beverage restaurant or dispenser shall sell, dispense,
deliver, or allow the consumption of any alcoholic liquor from any licensed
premises or permit the removal of any alcoholic liquor from any licensed
premises between the hours of two thirty o'clock (2:30) A.M. and seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. (1978 Code)
8-2-15: DEFENSE OF WRITTEN AGE STATEMENT:
If a licensee or his employee or his agent is prosecuted in the municipal court
under this chapter for selling alcoholic liquor to a minor, or permitting a
minor to consume alcoholic liquor or to enter or loiter upon the licensed
premises, the licensee or his employee or agent may offer in his defense any
written statement made by or for such minor prior to the violation, which
statement was made and taken pursuant to the laws of Oregon and the rules and
regulations of the commission, and such statement shall constitute a prima
facie defense. (1978 Code)
8-2-16: RESERVED:
(Ord. 824, 9-11-1995)
8-2-17: NUISANCES:
Any room, house, building, boat, structure or place of any land where alcoholic
liquor is sold, manufactured, bartered or given away in violation of the law,
or where persons are permitted to resort for the purpose of drinking alcoholic
liquors in violation of the law, or any place where alcoholic liquors are kept
for sale, barter, or gift in violation of the law, and all alcoholic liquor,
whether purchased from or through the commission, or purchased or acquired from
any source, and all property, including bars, glasses, mixers, lockers, chairs,
tables, cash registers, music devices and all furniture, furnishings and
equipment; and all facilities for the mixing, storing, serving, or drinking of
alcoholic liquor kept and used in such place, hereby are declared to be a
common nuisance; and any person who maintains or assists in maintaining such
common nuisance is guilty of a violation of this chapter. (1978 Code)
8-2-18: POSSESSION OF OPEN CONTAINER:
No person shall have in possession on his person any bottle, can or other
receptacle containing alcoholic liquor, which has been opened, or a seal
broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, while in or upon
any of the following places:
   A.   Public street, sidewalk or parking lot.
   B.   Schools and school grounds.
   C.   Private parking areas that are open to public travel. (1978 Code)
8-2-19: DRINKING IN PUBLIC PLACES:
No person shall drink or consume alcoholic liquor in or upon a street, alley,
mall, parking lot or structure, motor vehicle, public grounds or other public
place unless such place has been licensed for that purpose by the Oregon liquor
control commission. Provided, however, consumption of alcoholic liquor in the
park shall be permitted when a permit therefor has been received from the
council. (1978 Code)
8-2-20: RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE FOR EMPLOYEES:
Each licensee is responsible and liable to prosecution for any violation of any
provisions of this chapter pertaining to his licensed premises and for any act
or omission of any servant, agent or employee of such licensee in violation of
any provision of this chapter. (1978 Code)
CHAPTER 3
CURFEW
SECTION:
8-3-1: Definitions
8-3-2: Hours, Exceptions
8-3-3: Daytime Curfew Hours, Exceptions
8-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning, shall mean:
HIGHWAY: Includes any road, lane or other terminal or continuance of any
roadway, open to the public.
HOURS OF TIME: The hours of time specified in this chapter shall refer to the
standard time prevailing in the city from period to period, whether it be what
is commonly accepted as Pacific Standard Time or Pacific Daylight Time.
PARENT OR GUARDIAN: The actual parent or legal guardian that has the care,
custody and control of such minor.
PUBLIC PLACE: Includes, but is not limited to, places of amusement and
entertainment, public buildings, parks, playgrounds, dance halls, vacant lots
or other unsupervised places.
STREET: Any alley, thoroughfare, pathway, sidewalk or other place of travel
open to the public.
The masculine gender as used in this chapter shall include the feminine gender,
and the singular shall include the plural. (Ord. 957, 4-25-2011)
8-3-2: HOURS, EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for persons under the age of eighteen (18) years to be
upon any street, highway, park, alley or other public place between twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the following morning,
except when accompanied by his parent or legal guardian, or in proceeding
directly to or from his work in the regular course of employment, where such
employment has been approved by competent authorities under the procedure
outlined by statute. If questioned by law enforcement officers, the burden of
proving the right to be upon any street, highway, park, alley or other public
place, during the times above specified shall be upon the minor. (Ord. 957, 4-
25-2011)
8-3-3: DAYTIME CURFEW HOURS, EXCEPTIONS:
Every juvenile between the ages of seven (7) and eighteen (18) in this city
will be required to either be in school or be at home during school hours
during the traditional school year late August through early June. They will
not be allowed in public except when a juvenile is emancipated; if a juvenile
is in the company of his/her legal parent(s) or guardian; if they are home
schooled, attend an alternative school, if they are pursuing a GED through
BMCC; or if they work part time or full time. (Ord. 957, 4-25-2011)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMALS AND FOWL
SECTION:
8-4-1: Definitions
8-4-2: Authority Of Animal Control Officers
8-4-3: Inspection By Animal Control Officer
8-4-4: Animal Bites; Quarantine, Violation And Examinations
8-4-5: Diseased Animals
8-4-6: Potentially Dangerous Or Vicious Animals
8-4-7: Abandoned Animals
8-4-8: Animals In City Buildings
8-4-9: Poisoning Animals
8-4-10: Seizure And Impoundment
8-4-11: Fees For Impounding And Keeping
8-4-12: Redemption Of Impounded Animals
8-4-13: Notification Of Impoundment
8-4-14: Disposition Of Impounded Animals
8-4-15: Care Of Impounded Animals
8-4-16: Cruelty To Animals
8-4-17: Removal Of Animal Carcass
8-4-18: Limitations On Animals; Area Requirements
8-4-19: Permits Required; Procedures
8-4-20: Unsanitary Premises, Diseased Animals Prohibited
8-4-21: Herding On Streets
8-4-22: Exotic, Wild, Or Dangerous Animals Prohibited; Nuisance Declared;
Abatement Procedures
8-4-23: Exceptions To Provisions
8-4-24: Penalties For Violation
8-4-25: Liability Of Parents For Damages Caused By An Animal Owned By A Minor
8-4-26: Hindering Enforcement
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The words and terms used in this chapter shall have the meaning indicated below
unless the context indicates otherwise:
ANIMAL: Any live vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, except fish.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: The chief of police, any police officer, the city code
enforcement officer, or any other person so designated by the chief of police.
ANIMAL MENAGERIE: Any place where dangerous animals are kept or maintained for
any purpose, including places where dangerous animals are boarded, exhibited,
trained or kept for hire.
ANIMAL SHELTER: A facility operated for the purpose of impounding, harboring,
selling, placing, or destroying seized, stray, distressed, homeless, abandoned
or unwanted animals.
CAT: A domestic cat (Felis catus).
DOG: A domestic dog (Canis familiaris).
EXOTIC, WILD OR DANGEROUS ANIMAL: Any animal which is not commonly
domesticated, or which is not native to North America, or a domesticated or
wild animal which because of its size, disposition, or its vicious, venomous,
wild or predatory nature, or its other characteristics, could constitute an
unreasonable danger to human life or property. This includes wild and wild
hybrid dogs.
KENNEL: Any person engaged in the breeding of or possessing and/or owning more
than three (3) adult dogs on their property with the intent to sell the puppies
individually or in litter lots; or in the boarding, training, sale or hire of
dogs, except that animal hospitals maintained by a veterinarian licensed by the
state of Oregon as part of the practice of veterinary medicine, shall not be
considered kennels.
MINIMUM HOUSING REQUIREMENTS: A. Animal housing standards shall meet or exceed
the Oregon Revised Statutes definition of minimum care requirements.
   B.   Tethering a dog is not considered to be adequate space for exercise
necessary for the health of the animal unless:
  1. The tether is at least six feet (6') in length or is a cable runner that
the dog can run at least six feet (6') from side to side.
  2. The animal is allowed off the tether for at least thirty (30) minutes a
day for specific activities and social interaction (i.e., fetch).
  3. The animal is able to eat, drink and sleep away from its own excrement to
protect its health.
OWNER: Any person who acknowledges ownership of an animal or who harbors or
keeps an animal for five (5) or more consecutive days. Also, the parent or
guardian of any minor who owns, keeps or harbors any animal for five (5) or
more consecutive days.
PERSON: Any individual, establishment, firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, corporation or company.
PHYSICAL INJURY: Impairment of physical condition or substantial pain.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG: A. Any dog that exhibits any behavior without
reasonable provocation that constitutes a physical threat of bodily harm to a
person in a place where such person is conducting himself peaceably and
lawfully.
   B.   Any dog that approaches any person, when unprovoked, in a vicious or
terrorizing manner or with an apparent attitude of attack upon the streets,
sidewalks, or any public grounds or places.
   C.   Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, to cause injury not classified as a serious injury or to otherwise
endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals.
See also definition of Vicious Animal.
For the purposes of this definition, a person is peaceably and lawfully upon
the private property of an owner of the animal when he is on such property in
the performance of any duty imposed upon him by the laws of this state or any
city or county, or by the laws or postal regulations of the United States, or
when he is on such property upon invitation, express or implied.
SERIOUS PHYSICAL INJURY: Physical injury which creates a substantial risk of
death or which causes serious and protracted disfigurement, protracted
impairment of health or protracted loss of the function of any bodily organ.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal, except a dog assisting a peace officer engaged in
law enforcement duties, which demonstrates any or all of the following
behaviors is rebuttably presumed vicious:
   A.   An attack, without reasonable provocation, which requires a defensive
action by any person to prevent a serious physical injury and/or property
damage in a place where such person is conducting himself peaceably and
lawfully.
   B.   An attack, without reasonable provocation, on another animal or
livestock which occurs off the property of the owner of the attacking animal.
   C.   An attack, without reasonable provocation, that results in a serious
physical injury to a person in a place where such person is conducting himself
peaceably and lawfully.
   D.   Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog
fighting or any dog trained for dog fighting. Owning such a dog is a felony per
the Oregon Revised Statutes.
See also definition of Potentially Dangerous Dog.
For the purposes of this definition, a person is peaceably and lawfully upon
the private property of an owner of the animal when he is on such property in
the performance of any duty imposed upon him by the laws of this state or any
city or county, or by the laws or postal regulations of the United States, or
when he is on such property upon invitation, express or implied. (Ord. 946, 2-
25-2008)
8-4-2: AUTHORITY OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICERS:
The chief of police, his sworn officers, and the code enforcement officer shall
have the following power and authority:
   A.   To enforce the provisions of this chapter and state laws relating to
the care, treatment, impounding and destruction of animals.
   B.   The code enforcement officer may issue a citation for any offense
pursuant to this chapter, or state law, for any offense that is designated a
violation. If the offense being investigated is defined by state law as a
felony against an animal, an actual custody arrest may be made by a police
officer. (Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-4-3: INSPECTION BY ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
   A.   An animal control officer shall have the power to enter upon and
inspect any premises where any animal is kept or harbored when such entry is
necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter. A search warrant shall be
obtained whenever required by law.
   B.   Such entry and inspection shall be made only after the occupant of the
premises has been given written or oral notice of the inspection by the police
chief and/or an animal control officer, except when the purpose of the entry is
to secure or control a stray animal. If the land is unoccupied, the police
chief and/or animal control officer shall make a reasonable effort to give such
notice to the owner or other person having control of the property before
making entry.
   C.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the police chief and/or an animal
control officer has reasonable cause to believe the keeping or maintaining of
any animal is so hazardous as to require an immediate inspection to save the
animal or protect public health or safety, he or she shall have the power to
immediately enter and inspect the property without the use of unreasonable
force. If the property is occupied, the police chief and/or an animal control
officer shall first attempt to notify the occupant and demand entry. Failure or
refusal to permit such an inspection constitutes a misdemeanor. (Ord. 946, 2-
25-2008)
8-4-4: ANIMAL BITES; QUARANTINE, VIOLATION AND EXAMINATIONS:
   A.   Any person having knowledge that any animal is known to have or is
suspected of having bitten any person shall immediately report that fact to the
police department with full information in regard to the incident.
   B.   Upon the receipt of a report where an animal has bitten a person and
broken the skin, an animal control officer or police officer shall quarantine
such animal for a period of ten (10) days. The officer may order the owner to
quarantine the animal on his premises, if the owner is capable of meeting the
requirements of and signing a home confinement agreement.
Any person who fails, refuses, or neglects to quarantine any animal as ordered
by the officer, or who refuses to allow the officer to inspect any private
premises where the animal is kept is guilty of a misdemeanor. No animal shall
be removed or released during the quarantine period without written permission
of the police chief and the Umatilla County health department. Any animals
quarantined by order of the officer in a kennel, shelter, or veterinary
hospital shall be quarantined at the owner's expense.
   C.   The head of any animal which dies or is destroyed while under
quarantine shall be submitted to the laboratory of the county health department
for rabies examination. (Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-4-5: DISEASED ANIMALS:
   A.   No person owning or having charge of any animal which he knows to be
infected with any disease transmittable to man shall permit such animal to be
or remain within the county other than at an approved veterinary hospital
unless the health officer approves an alternative means of confinement.
   B.   The animal control officer shall seize any animal he reasonably
believes to be infected with disease transmittable to man. He shall keep such
animal in a safe place for a period sufficient to observe, examine, and
determine whether it is diseased so as to be a menace to public health or
safety.
   C.   Diseased animals which are a danger to public health or safety shall be
impounded and may be destroyed in accordance with the provisions of section
8-4-14 of this chapter. (Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-4-6: POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS:
   A.   Prohibition: No person shall harbor or maintain any vicious animal
within the city limits of Milton-Freewater.
   B.   Determination Of A Potentially Dangerous Or Vicious Animal:
      1.   In the event that the code enforcement officer or law enforcement
officer has probable cause to believe that an animal is potentially dangerous
or vicious, the code enforcement officer or his or her immediate supervisor or
the chief of police, or his designee, shall be empowered to convene a hearing
for the purpose of determining whether or not the animal in question should be
declared potentially dangerous or vicious. The chief of police shall conduct or
cause to be conducted an investigation and shall notify the owner or keeper of
the animal that a hearing will be held, at which time he or she may have the
opportunity to present evidence why the animal should not be declared
potentially dangerous or vicious. The hearing shall be held promptly within no
less than five (5) nor more than ten (10) days after service of notice upon the
owner or keeper of the animal. The hearing shall be informal and shall be open
to the public.
      2.   After the hearing, the owner or keeper of the animal shall be
notified in writing of the determination. If a determination is made that the
animal is vicious, the owner or keeper shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter in accordance with a time schedule established by the officer or chief
of police, but in no case more than thirty (30) days subsequent to the date of
the determination. If the owner or keeper of the animal contests the
determination, he or she may, within five (5) days of such determination, bring
a petition in the municipal court, praying that the court conduct its own
hearing on whether or not the animal should be declared potentially dangerous
or vicious. After service of notice upon the code enforcement officer the court
shall conduct a hearing de novo and make its own determination as to
viciousness. Said hearing shall be conducted within seven (7) days of the
service of the notice upon the code enforcement officer or law enforcement
officer involved. The issue shall be decided upon the preponderance of the
evidence. If the court rules the animal to be potentially dangerous or vicious,
the court may establish a time schedule to ensure compliance with this chapter,
but in no case more than thirty (30) days subsequent to the date of the court's
determination.
      3.   The court may decide all issues for or against the owner or keeper
of the animal regardless of the fact that said owner or keeper fails to appear
at said hearing.
      4.   The determination of the municipal court shall be final and
conclusive upon all parties thereto. However, the code enforcement officer or
any law enforcement officer shall have the right to declare an animal to be
vicious, subject to a new hearing, for any subsequent actions of the animal.
      5.   If a dog is declared potentially dangerous the dog must be
registered as a potentially dangerous dog with the city and meet the following
requirements within thirty (30) days:
         a.   A completed potentially dangerous dog packet.
         b.   Payment of required registration fees.
         c.   The dog is to be microchipped.
         d.   Mandatory spay/neuter (if the dog is not already altered).
         e.   Photo ID of the dog with its owner (2 views).
         f.   A secure enclosure which includes a top and bottom with signage
warning of a dangerous dog.
         g.   Proof of liability insurance for personal injury in an amount not
less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
Failure to comply with any part of the requirements will result in the dog
being seized and humanely euthanized at the owner's expense.
      6.   In the event that the code enforcement officer or law enforcement
officer has probable cause to believe that the animal in question is vicious
and may pose a threat of serious harm to human beings or other domestic
animals, the code enforcement officer or law enforcement officer may seize and
impound the animal pending the aforesaid hearings. The owner or keeper of the
animal shall be liable to the city for the costs and expenses of keeping such
animal. The city council may establish by resolution a schedule of such costs
and expenses. (Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-4-7: ABANDONED ANIMALS:
Abandoning an animal within the city of Milton-Freewater is punishable under
the Oregon Revised Statutes. (Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-4-8: ANIMALS IN CITY BUILDINGS:
No person having the control or care of any animal or animals shall suffer or
permit such animal to enter or remain in city owned or managed buildings other
than a building used for the purpose of care, detention, control or treatment
of animals or a building used for training classes, shows or exhibitions,
except persons who are blind or deaf and who use dogs for guidance, or persons
authorized by the city manager. (Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-4-9: POISONING ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully administer poison to any dog,
cat or other domestic animal or to wilfully place, expose or leave poisonous or
harmful substances of any kind in any place with intent to injure or kill any
dog, cat or other domestic animal.
Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously kill, maim, wound,
mutilate, torment, torture or physically abuse any animal. (Ord. 946, 2-25-
2008)
8-4-10: SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   An animal control officer may seize and impound an animal for violation
of any provision of this title or state law in any of the following situations
where the owner is not present and where the officer reasonably believes that
such seizure is necessary:
      1.   To protect public health, safety and property; or
      2.   To protect an animal which is injured, sick, or starving and must be
cared for; or
      3.   To protect an animal from injury which has strayed onto public
property or public right of way. (Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-4-11: FEES FOR IMPOUNDING AND KEEPING:
An impoundment fee shall be charged to the owner of each animal impounded in an
amount fixed by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-4-12: REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
The police chief or animal control officer may permit an owner or other person
entitled to custody of an impounded animal to redeem such animal. No animal may
be redeemed without payment of fees for impounding and keeping the animal, and
without the compliance with the licensing provision of chapter 5 of this title.
In cases where the owner is not able to pay the incurred impound fees, reducing
the fees will be at the discretion of the city manager and/or police chief and
handled on a case by case basis. (Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-4-13: NOTIFICATION OF IMPOUNDMENT:
The animal control officer shall give notice of impoundment to the owner of
every animal impounded, if the owner is known. (Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-4-14: DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
   A.   No animal may be disposed of until seventy two (72) hours have elapsed
from the time of impoundment, or, if the owner is known, until seventy two (72)
hours have elapsed from the time notice was given, exclusive of the day of
impoundment and the days that the impounding facility is closed to the public.
   B.   Any impounded animal which has been determined to be vicious in
accordance with the provisions of section
8-4-6 of this chapter may be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner
after the expiration of a five (5) day waiting period exclusive of days the
impound facility is not open to the public.
   C.   Any impounded animal which has been determined to be potentially
dangerous in accordance with the provisions of section
8-4-6 of this chapter may be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner
after the expiration of a five (5) day waiting period exclusive of days the
impound facility is not open to the public if the owner does not wish to comply
with the terms of the potentially dangerous dog registration. With consent of
the chief of police, the owner may satisfy this chapter by signing a contract
arranging for the potentially dangerous dog to be permanently transferred to an
owner residing outside of the city limits. If the terms of the contract are not
met the dog will be humanely euthanized at the owner's expense.
   D.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, an animal which has been
determined by a veterinarian licensed by the state of Oregon or by other
authorized personnel to be diseased or injured to the extent that emergency
veterinary care will not alleviate intense suffering, shall be destroyed in
accordance with all state and county humane laws as soon as possible. (Ord.
946, 2-25-2008)
8-4-15: CARE OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
The police chief or his designee shall assure that all impounded animals
receive suitable and adequate food, water and shelter. (Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-4-16: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
   A.   Except as otherwise authorized by law, no person shall intentionally or
recklessly:
      1.   Subject any animal under human custody or control to cruel
mistreatment.
      2.   Subject any animal under his custody or control to cruel neglect.
      3.   Kill without legal privilege any animal under the custody or control
of another.
   B.   Cruelty to animals is punishable under the Oregon Revised Statutes.
(Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-4-17: REMOVAL OF ANIMAL CARCASS:
No person being the owner of any animal shall, if such animal shall die, permit
the carcass of the same to remain upon the public streets or ways, and no
person who is the owner or occupant of any property shall permit the carcass of
any animal to remain thereon. It shall be the duty of any such owner or
occupant to forthwith cause such carcass to be buried or other disposition made
of the same. (Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-4-18: LIMITATIONS ON ANIMALS; AREA REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The total number of animals allowed on a parcel shall be limited to the
following numbers. In no event shall horses, cows, mules, burros, goats, or
sheep be kept on a parcel of less than one acre.
 
Animal                     Limit
Cows                      1 per acre
Geese, ducks, chickens    4 per residential lot
Goats and sheep           5 per acre
Horses, burros, or mules  1 per acre
Pigs                      5 per acre
Rabbits                   4 per residential lot
 
   B.   No person shall keep or maintain billy goats, bulls, stallions,
jackasses, or roosters within the city.
   C.   Any property upon which animals covered by this section are kept shall
have one of the following:
      1.   A permanent perimeter fence fully enclosing the property and
constructed in a fashion which will prevent the animal from leaving the
premises or in any way damaging or endangering the property or safety of
surrounding residents.
      2.   A temporary fence which may be moved to allow the animal(s) to graze
on different portions of the property at different times. A temporary fence
must be constructed to standards which prevent the animal from leaving the
enclosed area.
Escape of animals from enclosures more than twice from a property within a six
(6) month period shall disqualify the property for further livestock activity
for a period of twelve (12) months. After the twelve (12) month period, return
of the animals to the property is at the discretion of the city manager.
Animals listed in this section shall not be tied or staked out as a permanent
means of restraint on the property.
   D.   All runs, barns, pens, or other enclosures designed to house animals
listed in this section (except rabbits and fowl) shall conform to this section,
except that they shall be no closer than one hundred feet (100') from any
property line of the subject parcel.
   E.   There shall be no noise, odors, attraction of rodents or flies, or
aggressive behavior which interferes with the right of surrounding property
owners to peacefully and safely enjoy their premises as a result of keeping
animals as described in this section.
   F.   Violations of subsection E of this section shall be considered a public
nuisance. (Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-4-19: PERMITS REQUIRED; PROCEDURES:
   A.   No person shall keep an animal listed in section
8-4-18 of this chapter without a permit.
   B.   An application to keep animals shall be processed according to level II
procedures prescribed in section
10-3-8 of this code. Surrounding property owner notification shall be as
prescribed by section
10-3-15 of this code. There shall also be a site inspection of the property to
verify that the standards of section
8-4-18 of this chapter will be met.
   C.   Written responses to the level II notice from surrounding property
owners shall be grounds for denial of a permit if reasonable objections
relating to section
8-4-18 of this chapter are presented.
   D.   Appeal of administrative decisions made pursuant to section
10-3-8 of this code shall be made to the city planning commission as provided
in section
10-3-12 of this code.
   E.   Animals kept without permits shall be subject to impoundment as
provided in section
8-4-10 of this chapter.
   F.   Animals kept under conditions which violate permit standards of section
8-4-18 of this chapter shall be subject to impoundment provided in section
8-4-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-4-20: UNSANITARY PREMISES, DISEASED ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
Animals shall be maintained according to the following minimum standards:
   A.   All animal food shall be stored in metal or other rodentproof
containers, except hay and similar bulky materials.
   B.   Sanitary conditions shall be maintained at all times. It shall be
unlawful to keep any animal on any property that is in an unsanitary condition,
contributes to the breeding of flies, or fosters or perpetrates disease.
"Unsanitary condition" is defined to mean conditions where offensive,
unwholesome or obnoxious odors exist, or where animal excrement is allowed to
accumulate on the property.
   C.   It shall be unlawful to keep any chronically diseased animals, or
animals which create a nuisance or threat to public safety whether through
noise, aggressive behavior, or other means.
   D.   Minimum care standards as set forth by the Oregon Revised Statutes
shall also be met at all times.
   E.   Failure to comply and meet the minimum standards of care as per this
code and/or the Oregon Revised Statutes is punishable as animal cruelty under
the Oregon Revised Statutes. (Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-4-21: HERDING ON STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to herd any animals upon any street, alley or public
grounds, or to tie animals so that they shall have a liberty of more than four
feet (4') in or upon any street, alley or public ground, without written
permission by the city manager. (Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-4-22: EXOTIC, WILD, OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED; NUISANCE DECLARED;
ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a wild, exotic, or
dangerous animal within the city limits of Milton-Freewater, and such
possession shall be a violation of this section.
   B.   The keeping or the presence of exotic, wild or dangerous animals is
declared to be a public nuisance regardless of the manner in which they are
housed, confined, controlled or caged.
      1.   Such public nuisance shall be abated through seizure, impoundment,
and disposition of the animal as directed by the chief of police, for the
protection of the public and the humane treatment of the animal.
      2.   If the chief of police discovers an animal which is determined to be
in violation of this section, he shall investigate to determine the name of the
owner or owners, and give written notice to them by personal service or
registered mail that the animal is in violation of this section; that within
fifteen (15) days of the day of sending or serving the notice, the animal must
be removed from the city; that the owner is entitled to a hearing under the
provisions of section
8-4-6 of this chapter; and that failure to comply authorizes the city to remove
the animal and to proceed with impoundment, sale or destruction of the animal.
(Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-4-23: EXCEPTIONS TO PROVISIONS:
   A.   The provisions of section
8-4-22 of this chapter shall not apply to the keeping of exotic, wild or
dangerous animals in the following cases:
      1.   The keeping of such animals in zoos, bona fide educational or
medical institutions, museums, or any other place where they are kept as live
specimens for the public to view or for the purposes of instructing or study.
      2.   The keeping of such animals for exhibition to the public of such
animals by a circus, carnival, or other exhibit or show.
      3.   The keeping of such animals in a bona fide, licensed veterinary
hospital for treatment.
      4.   Tropical aquarium fish.
      5.   A nonpoisonous reptile or amphibian of a species whose average adult
weight is under ten (10) pounds.
      6.   Primates of a species whose average adult weight is less than twenty
(20) pounds.
      7.   Nonpredatory birds kept inside residence of the owner or predator
birds intended for use in the sport of falconry.
      8.   A cat not of the species Felis catus (domestic cat) but of another
species whose average adult weight is less than twenty (20) pounds.
      9.   Any animal specifically trained and currently used to assist a
handicapped person. (Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-4-24: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
Any violations of sections
8-4-1 through
8-4-23 of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine schedule that is set forth
by city council resolution and/or the Oregon Revised Statutes minimum,
whichever is greater. (Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-4-25: LIABILITY OF PARENTS FOR DAMAGES CAUSED BY AN ANIMAL OWNED BY A MINOR:
In the event that the owner or keeper of an animal is a minor, the parent or
guardian of such minor shall be liable for all injuries and property damage
sustained by any person or domestic animal caused by an unprovoked attack by
said animal. The parent or guardian shall also be considered the owner of the
animal for the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-4-26: HINDERING ENFORCEMENT:
No person shall hinder or molest any person who may be engaged in seizing or
killing any animal or removing any carcass in conformity with this chapter.
(Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
CHAPTER 5
DOGS
SECTION:
8-5-1: Licensing Dogs; Fees
8-5-2: Records
8-5-3: Restraint Of Dogs
8-5-4: Unlicensed Dogs
8-5-5: Public Nuisance
8-5-6: Exceptions
8-5-7: Kennels Prohibited
8-5-8: Number Of Adult Dogs Limited
8-5-9: Penalties
8-5-1: LICENSING DOGS; FEES:
   A.   No person shall keep dogs or puppies over six (6) months of age unless
the owner or keeper of such dogs or puppies shall procure from the city a
license for each dog.
   B.   The owner of, or the person having charge of, any dog kept or owned,
within the city, except puppies under six (6) months of age, shall, on or
before January 1 of each year or within thirty (30) days after he becomes the
owner or keeper of such dog, obtain certification of a current rabies
vaccination from a licensed veterinarian and pay a sum for each and every dog
so owned or kept by him. It shall entitle him to a receipt designating the
owner's name, the sex of the dog, breed(s), age, description, rabies expiration
date, the amount paid, and the number of the license. Upon payment, the police
chief shall issue a license tag for the dog bearing the same number as the
receipt.
   C.   The annual time for issuing a license as herein provided, and the time
when each and all licenses shall expire shall be on December 31 of each year.
Renewal of dog licenses can start sixty (60) days before the expiration of the
current year's license.
   D.   Dogs found to be of wild descent or wild hybrids shall not be deemed
licensable within the city of Milton-Freewater. This is in accordance with the
National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians Standards that rabies
vaccines are not licensed for use in wild and wild hybrid dogs.
   E.   Dog license fees are to be set by city council resolution. (Ord. 946,
2-25-2008)
8-5-2: RECORDS:
The police chief or his designee shall keep a record of the receipts given by
him as well as a complete record of all licenses and tags issued by him, so
that the number of the license shall appear in a book opposite the name and
address of the owner of the dog for which the license was issued. (Ord. 946, 2-
25-2008)
8-5-3: RESTRAINT OF DOGS:
   A.   The owner or person with the right to control of any dog(s) shall keep
such dog(s) confined to his own premises or shall keep such dog(s) under
physical restraint by means of a leash not to exceed six feet (6') in length
except: 1) guide dogs for the blind or deaf while performing their duties; 2)
dogs participating in field or obedience trials or exhibitions; 3) dogs
assisting their owner/handler in legal hunting or in the herding of livestock;
4) dogs assisting a security guard or assisting a peace officer engaged in law
enforcement activities; 5) dogs being trained for any of the above purposes on
private land with permission of the landowner, so long as such dogs are under
direct control of such individuals to assure that they do not violate any other
provision of law.
   B.   The chief of police or his officers or any person appointed for such
purpose is hereby authorized and empowered to seize any dogs found upon the
streets, alleys, sidewalks or parks of the city in violation of the provisions
of this section and to impound and dispose of such dogs. Such persons are
further authorized to shoot any dog that cannot be seized when found upon the
streets, alleys, sidewalks or parks of the city in violation of the provisions
of this section when the dog poses a serious threat to the safety of humans
and/or other domestic animals. All dogs running at large upon the streets,
alleys, sidewalks, public rights of way, private or public property (except
property of the owner or keeper of such dog) are hereby declared to be public
nuisances.
   C.   Any owner of a dog, or the person in lawful care, custody and control
of a dog in violation of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a
fine to be set by the court. (Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-5-4: UNLICENSED DOGS:
   A.   All dogs over the age of six (6) months found within the city limits
without a license tag thereon are hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
   B.   It shall be prima facie evidence that any person who obtains the
release of a dog, as provided in section
8-4-12 of this title, is the owner of said dog. (Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-5-5: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
   A.   No person owning or having control of any dog shall permit such dog to
do any of the following:
      1.   Defecate or urinate on private properties in the neighborhood or
community (other than that of the owner or the person having control of the
animal);
      2.   Defecate or urinate on public property without immediately cleaning
or removing the excrement to a proper receptacle;
      3.   Permit an animal to obstruct the reasonable and comfortable use of
property in any neighborhood or community by chasing vehicles, molesting
passersby, barking, howling, baying, or making any other noise;
      4.   Permit unsanitary conditions to exist on the premises where said
animal is kept which would cause odors, attract flies, or vermin or otherwise
is injurious to public health and safety, or indecent, or offensive to the
senses or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with
the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by the neighborhood, community,
or persons.
   B.   The animal control officer may seize and impound any animal causing a
public nuisance.
   C.   A violation of this section is hereby declared a public nuisance. (Ord.
946, 2-25-2008)
8-5-6: EXCEPTIONS:
The licensing provisions of section
8-5-1 of this chapter shall not apply to dogs owned by dealers, breeders or
exhibitors, while such dogs are being transported by said dealers, breeders or
exhibitors to and from a dog show or fair. (Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-5-7: KENNELS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Definition: As used in this section, except where the context indicates
otherwise, the following shall mean "kennel": A kennel shall be construed to
include any establishment possessing and/or owning more than three (3) adult
dogs for the raising, training, boarding or selling of dogs, for hire or
profit.
   B.   Prohibition: Kennels shall not be allowed within the city. It shall be
unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a "kennel" as defined herein.
   C.   Exception: Animal hospitals/clinics maintained by a veterinarian
licensed by the state of Oregon as part of the practice of veterinary medicine,
shall not be considered kennels. Animal rescue organizations may also be exempt
only upon the prior approval of the city manager.
   D.   Penalty: A violation of this section shall be punishable under the
terms of section
8-5-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-5-8: NUMBER OF ADULT DOGS LIMITED:
No person(s) shall keep or maintain more than three (3) adult dogs on any
parcel of land and/or lot within the city. Any "adult dog" is any dog more than
six (6) months of age. (Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
8-5-9: PENALTIES:
Any violation of sections
8-5-1 through
8-5-8 of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine schedule that is set forth
by city council resolution and/or the Oregon Revised Statutes minimum,
whichever is greater. (Ord. 946, 2-25-2008)
CHAPTER 6
ABANDONED PROPERTY
SECTION:
8-6-1: Procedure On Abandonment
8-6-2: Redemption By Owner
8-6-3: Sale Of Abandoned Property
8-6-4: Claim To Proceeds Of Sale
8-6-5: Conversion To City Use
8-6-6: Disposition Of Unwanted Abandoned Property
8-6-7: Goods Or Money Valued At One Hundred Dollars Or More
8-6-1: PROCEDURE ON ABANDONMENT:
Any property found and turned in to the police department or other city
employee, or property abandoned or left unclaimed upon the streets, alleys,
avenues or other public ways of the city for a period exceeding seventy two
(72) hours may be taken up by any police officer of the city or any employee of
the city and held in a place as may be designated by the police chief. The
police department shall make a diligent inquiry as to the name and address of
the owner of the property. Any person turning property over to any officer or
employee of the city thereby surrenders and waives any claim of right, title,
or interest therein which might otherwise be asserted.
An accurate record of any property received by any police officer of the city,
or by any employee of the city shall be prepared. It shall contain date, time,
place of finding, where property is stored and a description of said property.
A copy of the report shall be maintained by the police department. (1978 Code)
8-6-2: REDEMPTION BY OWNER:
Any person who shall satisfactorily establish that he is the owner of property
may reclaim any such article of property from the chief of police. This can be
done at any time after the city took possession and before the sale of said
property, upon payment to the administrative services department of any
necessary expense of taking and storing of said property. (1978 Code)
8-6-3: SALE OF ABANDONED PROPERTY:
   A.   Each item of such unclaimed, abandoned property valued at less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00), which has been held by the chief of police for more
than sixty (60) days may be sold at a public auction or converted to city use
as provided in this chapter.
   B.   Each item of such unclaimed, abandoned property valued at one hundred
dollars ($100.00) or more may be sold at public auction, or converted to city
use as provided in this chapter after compliance with Oregon Revised Statutes
98.005.
   C.   Notice of the time and place of such sale and a brief description of
the articles to be sold shall be published once a week for two (2) successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation, the last publication to be at
least five (5) days prior to the date of sale.
   D.   The purchaser of abandoned property shall receive a bill of sale from
the city executed by the chief of police.
   E.   The chief of police shall keep accurate records of each such sale
showing the price for which each article was sold. This record shall then,
together with the proceeds from the sale, be turned over to the administrative
services department. The sale proceeds shall be credited to the general fund.
(1978 Code)
8-6-4: CLAIM TO PROCEEDS OF SALE:
At any time within six (6) months after the sale an owner of property sold at
auction, upon written application and proof of ownership, shall be entitled to
receive the proceeds of the sale from the city, less the necessary expense of
taking, storing and selling the property. (1978 Code)
8-6-5: CONVERSION TO CITY USE:
In lieu of a sale of the property the chief of police, with the approval of the
city manager, may transfer any portion of abandoned property for use by the
city. The chief shall prepare a bill of sale in the same manner as for a sale
to a private party. (1978 Code)
8-6-6: DISPOSITION OF UNWANTED ABANDONED PROPERTY:
In the event there are no willing buyers for any property sold as herein
provided the same shall be disposed of as determined by the chief of police.
Provided, however, that the chief of police shall first determine that the
property is without substantial value. (Ord. 821, 8-14-1995)
8-6-7: GOODS OR MONEY VALUED AT ONE HUNDRED DOLLARS OR MORE:
Any money or goods valued at one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more shall be
disposed of at auction or by conversion to city use only after compliance with
the provisions of Oregon Revised Statutes 98.005. The chief of police shall be
responsible for compliance with Oregon Revised Statutes 98.005. (1978 Code)
CHAPTER 7
IMPOUND AND DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES
SECTION:
8-7-1: Definitions
8-7-2: Abandoned Vehicles Prohibited
8-7-3: Storage Of Vehicles Prohibited
8-7-4: Impounding Hazardous Vehicles
8-7-5: Towing And Storage Liens
8-7-6: Charges
8-7-7: Pretowing Investigation And Notice
8-7-8: Contents Of Notice
8-7-9: Posttowing Notice
8-7-10: Hearing
8-7-11: Decision
8-7-12: Failure To Appear
8-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the following
mean:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: A vehicle left unoccupied and unclaimed, or in a damaged,
disabled, dismantled or inoperable condition.
HAZARDOUS VEHICLE: A vehicle left in a location or condition that constitutes
an immediate and continuous hazard to the safety of persons using the street or
alleys of the city. For example, and not for limitation, the following are
hazardous vehicles:
   A.   Vehicles blocking public or private rights of way.
   B.   Vehicles with leaks in gas tanks.
   C.   Vehicles blocking fire hydrants.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: An authorized law enforcement officer of the city.
OWNER: A person with a claim, either individually or joint, or ownership of any
interest, legal or equitable, in a vehicle.
PRIVATE GARAGE: A private storage yard, garage, or other storage place selected
by a law enforcement officer.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which a person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved exclusively by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. For example,
and not for limitation, the following are vehicles: boat, camper, house
trailer, implement of husbandry, motor vehicle, motor home, utility trailer,
vacation trailer, article of machinery, pickup truck canopy or any part
thereof. (1978 Code)
8-7-2: ABANDONED VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
   A.   No vehicle that a law enforcement officer has reason to believe is
disabled or abandoned shall be parked or left standing on the right of way of a
city street or alley or on city property, for a period in excess of seventy two
(72) hours.
   B.   A vehicle so parked or left standing may be taken into custody by a law
enforcement officer after notice as hereinafter provided and shall be held at
the expense of the owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle. A law
enforcement officer may remove the vehicle by use of city personnel, equipment
and facilities or may hire an authorized independent contractor. (1978 Code)
8-7-3: STORAGE OF VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
   A.   No vehicle shall be parked for storage on the right of way of a city
street or alley or on any city property for a period in excess of seventy two
(72) hours. A vehicle shall be conclusively determined to have been "parked for
storage" if it is parked in the same position, or within fifty feet (50')
thereof for a continuous period in excess of seventy two (72) hours.
   B.   It shall not be a defense to prosecution for violation of this section
that no signs or markings are posted giving notice of said prohibition, if a
written warning has been previously posted on the vehicle by a law enforcement
officer.
   C.   Nothing contained in this chapter shall limit the authority otherwise
provided by law of any law enforcement officer to move or require to be moved a
vehicle that is stopped, parked or left standing in violation of any ordinance
of the city or any provision of the state vehicle code.
   D.   A vehicle parked in violation of this section shall be subject to
towing and disposition under the procedures set forth in this chapter. (1978
Code)
8-7-4: IMPOUNDING HAZARDOUS VEHICLES:
   A.   On discovering a hazardous vehicle, a law enforcement officer may
immediately cause the vehicle to be towed or impounded.
   B.   The owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for costs of towing and
storing the vehicle. (1978 Code)
8-7-5: TOWING AND STORAGE LIENS:
   A.   A person who, at the request of a law enforcement officer, takes a
vehicle into custody under the provisions of this chapter shall have a lien on
the vehicle and its contents for reasonable towing and storage charges in
accordance with Oregon Revised Statutes 87.152, and the attachment and
perfection of said liens shall be governed by the provisions of Oregon Revised
Statutes 87.152 through 87.212. The person claiming a lien under this section
and said state statutes may retain possession of the vehicle until the charges
are paid, and may have the vehicle sold to satisfy the lien in accordance with
said state laws. If the appraised value of the vehicle is within the range of
the values set forth in Oregon Revised Statutes 819.215, the vehicle may be
disposed of in the manner provided for therein.
   B.   Upon sale as provided for in this section and said state statutes, the
proceeds of the sale shall be used first to satisfy the towing and storage
lien, next to the costs of sale, next to the payment of all charges and
penalties imposed by this chapter, then shall be distributed as provided for in
Oregon Revised Statutes 87.206. (1978 Code)
8-7-6: CHARGES:
In the enforcement and execution of the provisions of this chapter, the city
shall be entitled to charge and collect from each owner of each abandoned
vehicle an administrative fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) plus an additional two
dollars ($2.00) per day for each day the vehicle is held in custody. (1978
Code)
8-7-7: PRETOWING INVESTIGATION AND NOTICE:
   A.   A law enforcement officer who investigates a vehicle found in violation
of section
8-7-2 or
8-7-3 of this chapter shall make a routine investigation to discover the owner
and request the removal of the vehicle. If the officer fails to discover the
owner by such a process, he/she shall make diligent inquiry as to the name and
address of the owner of the vehicle by examining information that will aid in
identification of the owner. When such vehicle is required by law to be
registered with the motor vehicles division, the officer shall transmit all
available information to that office with an inquiry for the name and address
of the owners.
   B.   Notice shall be given by affixing a citation to the vehicle with the
required information, and, if the owner is discovered, by mailing notice by
regular first class and by certified mail requiring a return receipt, at least
three (3) days before taking the vehicle into custody, with the required
information to the owners and to any lessors or security interest holders at
the address of each as shown by the records of the motor vehicles division. The
three (3) day period does not include holidays, Saturdays or Sundays.
   C.   This section does not apply to a hazardous vehicle. (1978 Code)
8-7-8: CONTENTS OF NOTICE:
   A.   Notices sent or placed under section
8-7-7 of this chapter shall contain the following information:
      1.   The name of the officer or other city employee issuing the notice.
      2.   That if the vehicle is not removed within the legal time limit, the
vehicle will be towed and taken into custody as an abandoned vehicle.
      3.   That any person who, at the request of a law enforcement officer,
tows an abandoned vehicle shall have a lien on the vehicle and its contents for
reasonable towing and storage charges, may retain possession of the vehicle and
its contents until the charges are paid, and may have the vehicle and its
contents sold to satisfy the lien.
      4.   That the owner of the vehicle may request a hearing on the validity
of the proposed tow and the creation and amount of the lien.
   B.   If the owner of the vehicle requests a hearing before the vehicle is
taken into custody, the vehicle shall not be taken until a hearing is set and
held in accordance with sections
8-7-10 to
8-7-12 of this chapter. (1978 Code)
8-7-9: POSTTOWING NOTICE:
   A.   After an abandoned vehicle, hazardous vehicle, or vehicle parked for
storage, has been taken into custody, notice shall be provided to the owner by
the city of Milton-Freewater within forty eight (48) hours as provided in
subsection B of this section indicating:
      1.   The location of the vehicle;
      2.   That a lien has arisen on the vehicle in favor of the person who
towed the vehicle;
      3.   That the vehicle may be sold to satisfy the lien; and
      4.   That a hearing on the validity of the tow and on the creation and
amount of the lien may be held, if requested. The notice shall include the
language of subsection D of this section.
   B.   Notice is considered given three (3) days after the date when a letter
addressed to the registered owner of the vehicle and a similar letter addressed
to the lessor or security interest holder, if any, is mailed by regular first
class mail and by certified mail requiring a return receipt after the vehicle
is taken into possession by or at the direction of a law enforcement officer.
   C.   If the vehicle is registered in the office of the motor vehicles
division, notice may be addressed to either the registered owner or the lessor
or security interest holder, if any at the latest respective address of each
shown by motor vehicle division records. If the vehicle is not registered,
reasonable efforts shall be made to ascertain the names and addresses of the
legal owner and persons entitled to possession of the vehicle so that notice
may be mailed, if reasonably possible, within the time period outlined in this
section.
   D.   If a hearing is desired, the owner must request a hearing within eight
(8) days after the notice is mailed as provided in subsections A and B of this
section. The request may be made in person or in writing, and failure to appear
in person or to mail a letter within eight (8) days after the notice is given
shall act as a waiver of the right to a hearing. (1978 Code)
8-7-10: HEARING:
   A.   On request of the owner, lessor, security interest holder, or the
person entitled to possession of the vehicle, a hearing shall be held before
the municipal judge.
   B.   The hearing shall be set and conducted within seventy two (72) hours of
receipt of the request, holidays, Saturdays and Sundays not to be included.
   C.   Notice of the hearing shall be provided to the person requesting the
hearing and to the owners of the vehicle and any lessors or security interest
holders in the records of the motor vehicles division.
   D.   A person who fails to appear at the hearing under this section is not
entitled to another hearing unless the person provided reasons satisfactory to
the municipal judge for the person's failure to appear.
   E.   Only one hearing is required to be provided under this section for each
time the law enforcement officer takes a vehicle into custody and has it
removed or proposed to do so.
   F.   At the hearing, the owner or other party may contest:
      1.   The validity of the law enforcement officer's taking, or proposed
taking of the vehicle into custody; and
      2.   The creation and amount of the lien attached, or which will attach,
to the vehicle.
   G.   The owner or other party may present evidence showing good cause why
such vehicle should not be removed by the owner or removed and impounded by the
city. The city shall have the burden of showing the validity of taking or
proposing to take the vehicle into custody.
   H.   Hearings held under this section may be informal in nature, but the
presentation of evidence shall be consistent with the presentation of evidence
required for contested cases under Oregon Revised Statutes 183.450. (1978 Code)
8-7-11: DECISION:
   A.   If the municipal judge finds, after hearing and by substantial evidence
on the record, that the custody and removal of a vehicle was valid, the judge
shall order the vehicle to be held in custody until all costs, liens and
charges, as well as all penalties for violation of city ordinances, are paid by
the party claiming the vehicle. The order shall include a statement that if
said sums are not paid within thirty (30) days, the vehicle may be sold
pursuant to section
8-7-5 of this chapter. If the vehicle has not been removed, the judge shall
order its removal.
   B.   If the municipal judge finds, after hearing and by substantial evidence
on the record, that the custody and removal of a vehicle was invalid, the judge
shall order the immediate release of the vehicle to the owner or person with
right of possession. The owner shall not be liable for towing or administrative
or storage charges occasioned by the taking and the city shall satisfy the
towing and storage lien.
   C.   A written statement of the results of a hearing held under this chapter
shall be provided to the person requesting the hearing.
   D.   The action of the municipal judge is final and not subject to appeal.
(1978 Code)
8-7-12: FAILURE TO APPEAR:
If the person requesting the hearing does not appear at the scheduled hearing,
the judge may enter an order supporting the removal and assessment of towing
and storage cost and apply any security posted against such costs. (1978 Code)
CHAPTER 8
ALARM SYSTEMS
SECTION:
8-8-1: Definitions
8-8-2: Classification Of Alarm Systems
8-8-3: Class I Alarm Systems
8-8-4: Class II Alarm Systems
8-8-5: Class III Alarm Systems
8-8-6: Class IV Alarm Systems
8-8-7: Class V Alarm Systems
8-8-8: Alarm System Requirements, Generally
8-8-9: Permits Required
8-8-10: Permit Application
8-8-11: Issuance Of Permit
8-8-12: Permit Fees
8-8-13: Term Of Permit And Renewal
8-8-14: Inspection Of Alarm Systems
8-8-15: Current Information Required
8-8-16: False Alarm Fees
8-8-17: Suspension Of Permits
8-8-18: Appeals Of Suspension Orders
8-8-19: Reinstatement After Suspension
8-8-20: Notices
8-8-21: Fire Alarms
8-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
AGENT: A natural person, who is designated the principal to be responsible for
premises protected by an alarm system during the principal's absence or
unavailability. The term "agent" does not include any person who receives any
salary, fee, bonus or other valuable consideration for performing the duties of
an agent unless such person is a bona fide employee of the principal having
substantial duties paramount and not directly related to his capacity as agent.
ALARM SYSTEM: A device or system of interconnected devices, including hardware
and related appurtenances, designed to give warning of activities indicative of
felony or criminal conduct.
ANNUNCIATOR: That part of an alarm system, other than an automatic dialer,
which communicates the fact that the system has been triggered.
AUDIBLE ANNUNCIATOR: An annunciator which gives alarm by means of a bell,
siren, buzzer or similar sound producing device mounted at some location other
than wholly within a building; or which, when activated, is clearly audible at
a distance of fifty feet (50') or more outside of any building in which it is
mounted.
AUTOMATIC DIALER: A device which is programmed to select a telephone number and
deliver a warning message or signal over a standard telephone number and
deliver a warning message or signal over standard telephone lines using
telephone voice communication equipment.
CHIEF: The chief of police of the city of Milton-Freewater, or a police officer
under his jurisdiction designated by him to exercise any power or duty
conferred under this chapter.
CITY OF MILTON-FREEWATER TELEPHONE LINE: A telephone line which rings or
terminates on the premises of the city of Milton-Freewater.
DEPARTMENT: The city of Milton-Freewater police department.
FALSE ALARM: An activation of an alarm system upon or following which
communication is made to the department that an alarm has been triggered except
alarms resulting from one of the following causes:
   A.   Criminal activity or unauthorized entry,
   B.   Earthquake causing structural damage to the protected premises,
   C.   Hurricane winds causing structural damage to the protected premises,
   D.   Flooding of the protected premises due to overflow of natural drainage,
   E.   Fire causing structural damage to the protected premises,
   F.   Telephone line malfunction verified in writing to the department by at
least a first line telephone company supervisor within seven (7) days of the
occurrence, or
   G.   Electrical service interruption.
If the alarm, when communicated to the department before an officer is
dispatched to investigate is clearly identified to the department as resulting
from authorized system test, or other noncriminal cause, it shall not be
considered as a false alarm. If police units, responding to an alarm and
checking the protected premises according to standard department operating
procedure, do not discover any evidence of unauthorized entry or criminal
activity, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the alarm is false.
Entries in the police department log shall be prima facie evidence of the facts
stated therein with regard to alarms and responses.
FISCAL YEAR: July 1 through June 30.
ON PREMISES ANNUNCIATOR: An annunciator which is designed to give warning only
to a person or persons on the protected premises, and which is neither an
"audible" or "remote" annunciator as those terms are defined in this section.
PRINCIPAL: The person, firm or corporation whose premises are protected by an
alarm system. In the event that a building having more than one tenant is
protected by a single alarm system, the term "principal" means the building
owner.
PROTECTED PREMISES: All of that contiguous area, including buildings, protected
by a single alarm system and under common ownership and use.
REMOTE ANNUNCIATOR: An annunciator located at a terminal on the premises of a
burglar alarm company, or other location not a part of the protected premises.
SENSOR: That part of an alarm system which is designed to detect the happenings
of some event or existence of some condition indicative of criminal activity or
unauthorized entry.
VISUAL ANNUNCIATOR: An annunciator installed entirely on the protected premises
and which gives inaudible warning by means of a flashing light or other visible
signal. (Ord. 693, 1-13-1986)
8-8-2: CLASSIFICATION OF ALARM SYSTEMS:
Alarm systems shall be classified as follows:
   A.   A class I alarm system is one which incorporates a remote annunciator
installed on the premises of the department or the communications center.
   B.   A class II alarm system is one which incorporates an automatic dialer
programmed to select a city of Milton-Freewater telephone line.
   C.   A class III alarm system is one which incorporates a remote annunciator
installed at a place other than on the premises of the city, and which does not
incorporate an automatic dialer.
   D.   A class IV alarm system is one which incorporates an automatic dialer
not programmed to select a city of Milton-Freewater telephone line.
   E.   A class V alarm system is one in which the only annunciator is an
audible annunciator located at the protected premises, and which does not
incorporate an automatic dialer.
   F.   Exempt alarm systems are: 1) those which incorporate only an on
premises annunciator, a visual annunciator, or any combination thereof, 2)
alarm systems owned, maintained and monitored by any government law enforcement
agency to protect their premises, and 3) alarm systems protecting property of
the city of Milton-Freewater. (Ord. 693, 1-13-1986)
8-8-3: CLASS I ALARM SYSTEMS:
The chief may limit the issuance of class I alarm permits to a number that does
not exceed the capacity of the department to monitor them. (Ord. 693, 1-13-
1986)
8-8-4: CLASS II ALARM SYSTEMS:
Class II alarm systems may not be programmed to select 911, but shall select a
separate line to be determined by the chief. (Ord. 693, 1-13-1986)
8-8-5: CLASS III ALARM SYSTEMS:
   A.   If the class III alarm system incorporates an audible annunciator, it
shall be subject to the requirements specified in section
8-8-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 693, 1-13-1986)
8-8-6: CLASS IV ALARM SYSTEMS:
   A.   No class IV alarm system shall be programmed to select any telephone
line the user of which has not previously given consent to such programming.
   B.   If the class IV alarm system incorporates an audible annunciator, it
shall be subject to the requirements specified in section
8-8-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 693, 1-13-1986)
8-8-7: CLASS V ALARM SYSTEMS:
   A.   Each class V alarm system shall be so programmed that each audible
annunciator will automatically silence within fifteen (15) minutes after being
activated, and will not sound again unless a new act or circumstance triggers a
sensor.
   B.   No test of a class V alarm system shall be conducted between the hours
of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of the following
day.
   C.   The application for a class V alarm system permit shall list the name
and phone number of at least one responsible person (other than the principal
or a member of his household) having access to the premises who may be notified
and assist the police in the event the alarm is activated. The principal shall
immediately notify the chief of any changes in this information.
   D.   The chief may, by written notice, require the posting of the
information required by subsection C of this section on the protected premises.
(Ord. 693, 1-13-1986)
8-8-8: ALARM SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS, GENERALLY:
   A.   No alarm system shall be installed, used or maintained in violation of
any of the requirements of this code.
   B.   The holder of an alarm system permit shall be responsible for training
and retraining all employees, family members and other persons who may make
regular use of the protected premises and who may, in the normal course of
their activities, be in a position to accidentally trigger a sensor. Such
training shall include procedures and practices to avoid accidental alarms,
steps to follow in the event the system is accidentally triggered.
   C.   The holder of an alarm system permit shall, at all times, be
responsible for the proper maintenance and repair of the system, and for the
repair or replacement of any component, method of installation, design feature
or like condition which may give rise to a false alarm. (Ord. 693, 1-13-1986)
8-8-9: PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or maintain any alarm system
without a current valid permit therefor.
   B.   City police may refuse to respond to an alarm from a system without a
permit.
   C.   No permit shall be required for an exempt alarm system as defined in
section
8-8-2 of this chapter, and the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to
such systems.
   D.   Violation of this provision shall be an infraction. Each day during
which the violation is maintained or continued shall be deemed a separate
infraction. (Ord. 693, 1-13-1986)
8-8-10: PERMIT APPLICATION:
Each application for an alarm permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the
chief, and shall contain the following information:
   A.   The name, address and telephone number of the principal of the
protected premises.
   B.   The type of premises (home, office, variety store, etc.) and any
business name by which the premises is known.
   C.   The address of the protected premises, including, if it is in a
residential, commercial or industrial complex (office building, apartment
house, shopping center, etc.), any name by which the complex is commonly known.
   D.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers, including home phone
numbers, of all agents.
   E.   The number and type of annunciators and automatic dialers which the
alarm system incorporates, the location of all remote annunciators, and the
names and phone numbers of all persons or businesses which are or may be
preselected for automatic dialer contact.
   F.   The application shall be accompanied by the fee prescribed under
section
8-8-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 693, 1-13-1986)
8-8-11: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
Upon receipt by the finance director of the permit application and fee, the
chief shall undertake whatever investigation he deems necessary. If it appears
to the chief that the proposed system will comply with the provisions of this
chapter, he shall so notify the finance director who shall issue to the
applicant a permit bearing an identifying number, specifying the class of alarm
system for which it is issued, and setting forth the expiration date of the
permit. The city shall not, by the issuance of any alarm system permit, be
obligated to respond or accord any priority to an alarm from such system. (Ord.
693, 1-13-1986)
8-8-12: PERMIT FEES:
The fees for alarm system permits and renewals shall be as follows:
   Class I   $25.00
   Class II    10.00
   Class III   10.00
   Class IV   10.00
   Class V   No charge
(Ord. 693, 1-13-1986)
8-8-13: TERM OF PERMIT AND RENEWAL:
   A.   Alarm system permits, except class V permits, shall expire on June 30
of the fifth calendar year following the year of issue.
   B.   Class V alarm system permits have no expiration date and shall be valid
until terminated or suspended.
   C.   An alarm system permit of any class shall automatically terminate upon
any change of principal, class of system or protected premises. No permit may
be transferred to another principal, different class of system or protected
premises. No refunds will be given on termination or suspension of any permit
for any reason.
   D.   Renewal permits shall be dated July 1. The renewal permit will not be
issued until the fee is paid and a late charge of five dollars ($5.00) per
month will be assessed on all permit holders who do not pay the renewal fee
prior to expiration of their existing permits. The renewal application shall
contain the principal's signed statement that there have been no changes in
principal, protected premises or class of alarm system. A suspended permit may
be renewed only as provided in section
8-8-17 of this chapter. (Ord. 693, 1-13-1986)
8-8-14: INSPECTION OF ALARM SYSTEMS:
Prior to issuing an alarm system permit, and at any time thereafter during the
term thereof, the chief may inspect any alarm system for which a permit is
required. Such inspection shall be for the purpose of ascertaining that
information furnished by the applicant or permittee is correct, and that the
system is maintained in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
693, 1-13-1986)
8-8-15: CURRENT INFORMATION REQUIRED:
Within ten (10) days following any change of circumstances which renders
obsolete any of the information submitted pursuant to section
8-8-10 of this chapter, the permittee shall file an amendment to his
application setting forth the currently accurate information. No additional fee
shall be required unless the change has terminated the permit as provided in
section
8-8-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 693, 1-13-1986)
8-8-16: FALSE ALARM FEES:
   A.   As a condition of any alarm system permit issued under the provisions
of this chapter, the permittee shall pay to the city of Milton-Freewater within
thirty (30) days of invoice, for false alarms generated by the permittee's
alarm system a fee according to the following schedule. The finance department
shall notify the chief monthly of any permittees who do not pay promptly.
 
First 9 false alarms during the calendar year No charge
For each false alarm thereafter,              $10.00 per false alarm
to and including the 12th
For each false alarm thereafter,              20.00 per false alarm
to and including the 16th
For each false alarm thereafter,              30.00 per false alarm
to and including the 18th
For each false alarm beyond the 18th          40.00 per false alarm
 
   B.   Any person who has been assessed a false alarm fee may appeal such
charge to the chief by giving written notice to the chief within thirty (30)
days of invoice assessing such charge. Upon receipt of the appeal notice, the
chief shall investigate the circumstances of the alarms upon which the appeal
is based. If the chief determines the charge to have been made in error he
shall order the invoice canceled and notify the appellant and the finance
director of such determination, which shall be final. If the chief determines
the charge to be proper, he shall make a full report of his findings and mail
notice thereof to the appellant within sixty (60) days after the filing of the
appeal. If the chief determines that any of the disputed charges are valid, the
permit holder shall pay such charges within thirty (30) days after notice of
the final decision of the chief is mailed to him. (Ord. 693, 1-13-1986)
8-8-17: SUSPENSION OF PERMITS:
   A.   The following shall be grounds for suspension by the chief of any
permit issued pursuant to this chapter:
      1.   Any false or incomplete statement made on the permit application.
      2.   Programming of an automatic dialer to select any unapproved city of
Milton-Freewater telephone line.
      3.   Failure to pay a false alarm fee within the time required by section
8-8-16 of this chapter.
      4.   Maintenance, installation or use of the alarm system in violation of
any applicable law, ordinance or regulation, including the requirements of this
chapter.
      5.   Failure to provide current information as required in sections
8-8-5,
8-8-6,
8-8-7, and
8-8-15 of this title.
      6.   Testing or deliberate activation of a class II alarm system other
than as authorized in section
8-8-4 of this chapter.
      7.   More than five (5) false alarms in any calendar month, or more than
eighteen (18) false alarms in any calendar year.
   B.   If the chief determines that there is cause for the suspension of a
permit, he shall mail a notice of suspension to the principal stating that the
suspension will be effective thirty (30) days after the date of mailing, unless
a notice of appeal is filed with the city recorder on or before the effective
date. (Ord. 693, 1-13-1986)
8-8-18: APPEALS OF SUSPENSION ORDERS:
   A.   Any person who is sent a notice of suspension under section
8-8-17 of this chapter may appeal the suspension action to the city council by
giving written notice to the city recorder within thirty (30) days after
mailing of the notice of suspension. The filing of a notice of appeal shall
stay the suspension until disposition of the appeal by the council.
   B.   The city manager shall place the appeal on the city council agenda to
be heard within thirty (30) days of the date of filing. At the hearing, the
appellant and the chief shall be given an opportunity to present whatever facts
or arguments they deem relevant to the suspension of the permit. (Ord. 693, 1-
13-1986)
8-8-19: REINSTATEMENT AFTER SUSPENSION:
Except as otherwise provided herein, a principal whose alarm system permit has
been suspended may have his permit reinstated upon payment of a reinstatement
fees as follows:
   First suspension within last 3 years   $ 50.00
   Second suspension within last 3 years   100.00
   Third suspension within last 3 years   200.00
After the fourth suspension within a three (3) year period, the principal shall
not be eligible for reinstatement or renewal for a period of five (5) years
from the date of the last suspension, whereupon he may apply for a new permit
at the regular fee. (Ord. 693, 1-13-1986)
8-8-20: NOTICES:
   A.   Notice or billing from the city to any permit holder shall be deemed to
have been given or rendered on the date such notice or billing is deposited in
the U.S. mail, first class postage, prepaid, addressed to the permit holder at
the address shown in the city's permit records. A certificate signed by the
person who mailed the notice shall be prima facie evidence of the facts stated
therein with respect to such notice.
Notice to the city or payment under this chapter shall be effective when
received at the appropriate city office. (Ord. 693, 1-13-1986)
8-8-21: FIRE ALARMS:
No person shall install, activate, maintain, or use a fire or smoke alarm which
incorporates or activates an automatic dialer programmed to select an emergency
telephone line (911) which rings or terminates on the premises of the city of
Milton-Freewater. Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not
to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 693, 1-13-1986)
CHAPTER 9
TOW AND IMPOUND OF VEHICLES
SECTION:
8-9-1: Vehicle Towed
8-9-2: Notice After Vehicle Tow
8-9-3: Unidentifiable Vehicle
8-9-4: Redeem A Vehicle
8-9-5: Tow Hearing Procedure
8-9-6: Selling Abandoned Vehicles
8-9-7: Effect On Other Ordinances
8-9-1: VEHICLE TOWED:
A vehicle may be towed and held at the expense of the owner or person entitled
to possession thereof whenever:
   A.   A police officer reasonably believes that the operator is driving
uninsured in violation of current applicable Oregon Revised Statutes; or (Ord.
922, 2-14-2005)
   B.   The vehicle is being operated by a person whose operator's license or
driving privilege is suspended, canceled, or revoked, or the person is
unlicensed to drive the vehicle, and a traffic citation/infraction is issued or
a physical arrest is made for any violation of the Oregon vehicle code or
Milton-Freewater city ordinance; or
   C.   A police officer arrests the operator of the vehicle based upon
probable cause to believe that such a person was driving while under the
influence of intoxicants, in violation of Oregon Revised Statutes 813.010.
(1978 Code)
8-9-2: NOTICE AFTER VEHICLE TOW:
When a vehicle has been towed pursuant to this chapter, notice will be provided
to the registered owner(s) and any other person(s) who reasonably appears to
have an interest in the vehicle. Notice will be mailed to such persons within
forty eight (48) hours after the tow of the vehicle, Saturdays, Sundays, and
holidays excluded, and will state:
   A.   That the vehicle has been towed;
   B.   The location of the vehicle and that it may be reclaimed only upon
evidence that the claimant is the owner or person entitled to possession; that
the vehicle carries liability insurance, and that the person who will be
driving the vehicle from the storage location is properly licensed to drive;
satisfactory evidence of ownership and liability insurance must be presented to
the Milton-Freewater police department to obtain a release of the city's hold,
if any, on the vehicle; proof that the driver from the storage site is properly
licensed must be displayed to the operator of the storage facility before the
operator is authorized to release the vehicle;
   C.   The address and telephone number of the person or facility that may be
contacted for information on the charges that must be paid before the vehicle
will be released, and the procedures for obtaining the release of the vehicle;
   D.   That the vehicle and its contents are subject to a lien for the towing
and storage charges accruing daily; that if the vehicle is not claimed within
fifteen (15) calendar days after the mailing date of the notice, the vehicle
and its contents will be subject to sale by the towing and storage facility
where the vehicle is located and that failure to reclaim the vehicle within
such time will constitute a waiver of all interest in the vehicle; and
   E.   That a hearing may be requested to contest the validity of the tow and
will set forth the time in which a hearing must be requested and the method of
requesting a hearing. (1978 Code)
8-9-3: UNIDENTIFIABLE VEHICLE:
No notice need be mailed pursuant to section
8-9-2 of this chapter, when:
   A.   A vehicle does not display license plates or other identifying markings
by which the registration or ownership of the vehicle can be determined; or
   B.   When the identity of the owner of the vehicle is not available from the
appropriate motor vehicle licensing and registration authority and when the
identity and address of the owner and/or other persons with an interest in the
vehicle cannot otherwise be reasonably determined. (1978 Code)
8-9-4: REDEEM A VEHICLE:
Written notice of the opportunity to contest the validity of the tow of a
vehicle, together with a statement of the time in which a hearing may be
requested and the method of requesting a hearing, must be given to each person
who seeks to redeem a vehicle which has been towed pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 922, 2-14-2005)
8-9-5: TOW HEARING PROCEDURE:
   A.   Request For Hearing:
      1.   After a vehicle has been towed pursuant to section
8-9-1 of this chapter, the owner(s) and any other persons who reasonably appear
to have an interest in the vehicle are, upon timely application filed with the
Milton-Freewater municipal court, entitled to request a hearing to contest the
validity of the tow of the vehicle. Such application must be filed with, and
received by the Milton-Freewater municipal court not later than ten (10)
calendar days after the vehicle was towed.
      2.   The municipal judge may, for the good cause shown, grant a request
for hearing filed after the foregoing time requirements have expired.
      3.   The request for hearing must be in writing and will state the
grounds upon which the person requesting the hearing believes the tow or
proposed tow invalid, or, for any other reason, unjustified.
      4.   The municipal judge will set and conduct an administrative hearing
on the matter within five (5) days, not including Saturdays, Sundays, or
holidays, on receipt of the request.
   B.   Hearing Procedure:
      1.   The hearing shall afford a reasonable opportunity for the person(s)
requesting it to demonstrate by the statements of witnesses and other evidence,
that the tow and/or storage of the vehicle was or would be invalid, or for any
other reason not justified.
      2.   The municipal judge will make any necessary rules regarding the
conduct of such hearings, consistent with this section, deemed necessary by the
judge.
   C.   When Tow Found Invalid: If the municipal judge finds the tow and/or
storage was invalid or not justified, the municipal judge will order the
vehicle to be immediately released, providing that the person claiming the
vehicle provides proof of ownership, or right to possession, and proof of
liability insurance. The owner(s) or any other person(s) who has an interest in
the vehicle is not liable for the tow and/or storage charges and any money paid
for tow and/or storage charges will be returned, as appropriate.
   D.   When Tow Found Valid:
      1.   If the municipal judge finds the towing and/or storage was valid,
the municipal judge will order the vehicle, if still held, to be continued to
be held until all tow and storage charges are paid, and proof of ownership and
liability insurance is provided.
      2.   The city will be responsible in all cases in which a hearing has
been requested and held, and the tow and/or storage found to be valid, for
those storage charges that have accrued from the date that the hearing was
requested through the first available hearing date.
   E.   Hearing Administration:
      1.   The decision of the municipal judge is not a quasi-judicial decision
and is final, and is not appealable to the city council.
      2.   Any person who has a hearing scheduled pursuant to this section and
fails to appear at such hearing without good cause shown, as determined by the
municipal judge, will not be entitled to have such hearing rescheduled.
      3.   The owner(s) and any other person(s) who has an interest in the
vehicle is only entitled to one hearing for each tow of that vehicle.
   F.   Fee Payments And Vehicle Release Procedure:
      1.   Towing And Storage Rates: The towing and storage charges, for which
a lien is provided pursuant to this chapter and that are to be paid before
release of a vehicle towed by authority of this chapter, will be the charge
ordinarily set and charged by the towing and storage facility for the general
public.
      2.   Charges And Release Of Vehicle:
         a.   Any private company that tows and stores any vehicle pursuant to
this chapter, shall have a lien on the vehicle, in accordance with Oregon
Revised Statutes 87.152, for the just and reasonable charges for the tow and
storage services performed. The company may retain possession of that vehicle,
consistent with this chapter, until towing and storage charges have been paid.
         b.   If the required towing and storage charges have been paid, and
proof of ownership or right to possession, and proof of liability insurance has
been provided to the city police department to obtain a release of the city's
hold on the vehicle, the vehicle must be immediately released to the person(s)
entitled to lawful possession, providing that the person driving the vehicle
from the storage facility displays to the facility operator a valid driver's
license, the vehicle must be immediately released to the person(s) entitled to
lawful possession. An administrative fee, set by city council resolution, shall
be charged by the city of Milton-Freewater police department for the issuance
of a release of the city's hold on the vehicle.
         c.   A vehicle towed pursuant to this chapter may only be released to
the owner, or to the person who was lawfully in possession or control of the
vehicle at the time it was towed, or to a person who purchased the vehicle from
the owner and who produces written proof of ownership. In all cases, adequate
evidence of the right to possession of the vehicle, must be presented prior to
release of the vehicle.
   G.   Charges When Tow Found Invalid:
      1.   The accrued towing and storage charges assessed under this chapter,
will be waived by the municipal judge if the tow is found to be invalid or any
other reason not justified, after a hearing.
      2.   A person's inability to pay the towing and storage charges, in and
of itself, is not a sufficient basis for the waiving of such charges.
      3.   If the charges are owed to a private company, the city will pay them
if after a hearing, the tow is found to be invalid or for any other reason not
justified and the charges have not previously been paid.
   H.   Charges When Tow Found Valid: If the municipal judge finds the tow and/
or storage was valid, the person entitled to possession of the vehicle will be
responsible for all towing and storage charges except as provided for in
subsection D of this section.
   I.   Storage Charges At Completion Of Hearing: After the municipal judge
makes a public determination of a vehicle tow hearing, the vehicle must be
picked up by the person(s) entitled to possession within twenty four (24) hours
to avoid further storage charges. If the vehicle is not claimed within this
time period, it will not be released until the additionally accrued storage
charges, if any, are paid by the person(s) entitled to possession. (1978 Code)
8-9-6: SELLING ABANDONED VEHICLES:
   A.   When A Vehicle May Be Sold:
      1.   Whenever any vehicle is taken into custody pursuant to this chapter,
the vehicle will be held at the expense and risk of the owner or person
lawfully entitled to possession.
      2.   At any time within fifteen (15) calendar days after any such notice
has been sent, as required in section
8-9-2 of this chapter, the owner or person lawfully entitled to possession of
any such vehicle may claim the vehicle by:
         a.   Presenting satisfactory proof of ownership or right to
possession, and proof of liability insurance; and
         b.   Paying the charges and expenses, if any, incurred in the
preservation and custody of the vehicle; and
         c.   After obtaining a release of the city's hold on the vehicle,
presenting it to the towing and storage facility together with a valid driver's
license for the person driving the vehicle therefrom.
   B.   Sale Of Vehicles:
      1.   Any towing company who takes a vehicle into custody under the
provisions of this chapter shall have a lien on the vehicle for the just and
reasonable towing and storage charges, and may retain possession of the vehicle
until the charges are paid, and may have the vehicle sold at public auction to
satisfy the lien. The lien that attaches to the vehicle shall be a possessory
chattel lien in accordance with Oregon Revised Statutes 87.152 and shall be
foreclosed in the manner provided for by the laws of the state of Oregon
concerning foreclosure of such possessory chattel liens. If the appraised value
of the vehicle is seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) or less, the vehicle
may be disposed of in the manner provided for by Oregon Revised Statutes
819.220.260.
      2.   The vehicle may not be sold at any time prior to the disposition of
the hearings procedure set forth in this chapter, or, if no hearing is
requested, until after the times set within this chapter. (1978 Code)
8-9-7: EFFECT ON OTHER ORDINANCES:
The provisions of this chapter are not intended to amend, repeal, or otherwise
affect any other ordinance presently existing governing the towing and storage
of vehicles within the city of Milton-Freewater. This chapter is intended to be
cumulative of any such other existing ordinances. (1978 Code)
CHAPTER 10
GRAFFITI CONTROL
SECTION:
8-10-1: Intent And Purpose
8-10-2: Definitions
8-10-3: Prohibition Of Graffiti
8-10-4: Possession By Minors
8-10-5: Sale, Gift Of Aerosol Paint And Indelible Markers
8-10-6: Signs And Displays Of Aerosol Paint And Indelible Markers
8-10-7: Removal Of Graffiti
8-10-8: Reward
8-10-9: Penalty
8-10-10: Administrative Fee
8-10-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
   A.   The city of Milton-Freewater can provide for the removal of graffiti
and other inscribed material from public and privately owned permanent
structures located on public or privately owned real property within the city.
The city of Milton-Freewater finds that graffiti on public and privately owned
property is obnoxious in that it furthers blight, encourages acts of vandalism,
depreciates the value of surrounding properties, and is inconsistent with the
city's property maintenance goals and aesthetic standards.
   B.   The city further finds and determines that unless graffiti is quickly
removed, other properties soon become the target of graffiti. The existence of
graffiti tends to begin community discontent and contempt for the law. (1978
Code)
8-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
this section:
GRAFFITI OR OTHER INSCRIPTION: Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure or
design that is indelibly marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted on any
building, structure or other facility, regardless of the nature of the material
of that component, structure, or facility.
INDELIBLE MARKER: Any marker, pen or similar implement containing anything
other than a solution which can be removed with water after it dries and having
a flat, pointed or angled writing surface of a width of four millimeters (4 mm)
or greater.
PRESSURIZED CONTAINER: Any can, bottle, spray device or other mechanism
designed to propel which contains ink, paint, dye or other similar substance
which is expelled under pressure, either through the use of aerosol devices,
pumps, or similar propulsion devices.
RESPONSIBLE ADULT: The parent or legal guardian of a minor under the age of
eighteen (18) years. (1978 Code)
8-10-3: PROHIBITION OF GRAFFITI:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti or other
inscription upon any wall, street, sidewalk, bridge, building, fence, gate,
structure, signs, or other facility within the city of Milton-Freewater.
   B.   Persons convicted of violating this section, in addition to any other
penalties imposed by this code, shall pay restitution to the property owner. If
the violator is a minor, the parent or guardian shall be responsible for the
payment of restitution within the limits of liability set forth in Oregon
Revised Statutes 30.765. (1978 Code)
8-10-4: POSSESSION BY MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years, not
accompanied by a responsible adult, to possess an aerosol or pressurized
container of paint or an indelible marker. (1978 Code)
8-10-5: SALE, GIFT OF AEROSOL PAINT AND INDELIBLE MARKERS:
No person shall sell, offer to sell, cause to be sold, give or lend any aerosol
or pressurized container of paint or any indelible marker to any minor under
the age of eighteen (18) years. (1978 Code)
8-10-6: SIGNS AND DISPLAYS OF AEROSOL PAINT AND INDELIBLE MARKERS:
   A.   Any person offering for sale pressurized containers shall restrict
access to those items from the public either: 1) by placing them behind a
locked counter, cabinet or other storage facility so that access to them cannot
be gained without their being unlocked by an authorized employee, agent or
other authorized representative of said person, or 2) by placing them in a
location where they shall be in constant view of an authorized employee, agent
or other authorized representative of said person.
   B.   All persons offering for sale indelible markers shall keep such markers
in a location where they can be in constant view of the employee, agent or
other authorized representatives of the person selling the markers.
   C.   Persons engaged in the retail sale of aerosol or pressurized containers
of paint and/or indelible markers shall display, at the location of retail
sale, a sign clearly visible and legible to employees and customers reading:
It is unlawful for any person to sell, lend or give to any minor under the age
of eighteen (18) years, any aerosol or pressurized container of paint or an
indelible marker.
(1978 Code)
8-10-7: REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI:
   A.   Graffiti on property owned by the city of Milton-Freewater shall be
removed as soon as practicable, but in no event shall the graffiti be left
longer than two (2) business days after notification of the incident.
   B.   Whenever graffiti exists upon the property owned by another public
agency, or a private property owner, the city of Milton-Freewater may remove it
with the consent of the public entity or private property owner owning said
property.
   C.   Private property owners shall remove the graffiti from their property
within two (2) business days after notification to the property owners by the
city to remove such graffiti. Failure to remove the graffiti within the time
allowed shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
      1.   Notice to private property owners by the city shall be addressed as
it appears on the last tax assessment roll or in other records maintained by
public agencies, by depositing a copy of the notice in the United States mail,
certified with full postage affixed, or personally delivering a copy of the
notice to the owner of the property. The service is complete at the time of
deposit in the mail or when personal service is effectuated. The failure of any
person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any legal
proceedings regarding removal of the graffiti. Notification to property owners
shall be under the direction of the police department.
      2.   In the event that the owner fails to remove the graffiti after
notice has been sent, the city may, at its option, abate the graffiti as a
nuisance. (See section
10-7-17, "Abatement Of Signs", of this code.) (1978 Code)
8-10-8: REWARD:
The city may pay a reward to any person who provides information which leads to
the arrest and conviction of any person who applies any drawing, inscription,
figure, or mark, commonly known as graffiti, to a surface of real or personal
property. (1978 Code)
8-10-9: PENALTY:
   A.   The violation of any provision of this chapter may be prosecuted as
either a violation or a misdemeanor at the direction of the city attorney and
upon conviction, the court shall impose a minimum fine of one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) and/or thirty five (35) hours of community service.
   B.   Community service in the city of Milton-Freewater may be imposed in
lieu of any penalties and punishments where there has been a conviction or
guilty or nolo contendere plea to a violation or misdemeanor.
   C.   If a minor is personally unable to pay any fine or restitution levied
for violating any provision of this chapter, the parent or legal guardian shall
be liable for the payment of this fine or restitution for any intentional acts
by the minor.
   D.   Funds received by the city for fines levied by the court shall be
assigned a project number to allow identification of funds available for
abatement assistance under section
8-10-7 of this chapter.
   E.   No parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of a minor
person under the age of eighteen (18) years may allow or permit the minor to be
in violation of section
8-10-4 of this chapter. Upon a violation by a minor, the parent, guardian or
person having legal custody shall be served with a subpoena to appear before
the court with the minor and show cause why section
8-10-4 of this chapter has been violated. Violating parental responsibility
under this subsection is a violation and upon conviction shall be punishable by
a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). (1978 Code)
8-10-10: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
As a part of any abatement, a ten percent (10%) administrative fee will be
charged against the party responsible for violation of any provision of this
chapter. (1978 Code)
CHAPTER 11
IMPOUND AND DISPOSITION OF DISCARDED VEHICLES
SECTION:
8-11-1: Definitions
8-11-2: Declaration Of Public Nuisance
8-11-3: Prohibited Actions
8-11-4: Investigation
8-11-5: Contents Of Notice
8-11-6: Entry On Private Property
8-11-7: Hearing Before Municipal Judge
8-11-8: Abatement By The City And Appraisal
8-11-9: Rights And Liabilities Of Owner
8-11-10: Assessment Of Costs
8-11-11: Contents Of Abated Vehicle
8-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following shall mean:
COSTS: The expense of moving, storing, or selling a discarded vehicle.
DISCARDED VEHICLE: A vehicle that is inoperative, wrecked, junked, dismantled,
partially dismantled, abandoned, or apparently abandoned. However, vehicles
covered by the provisions of chapter 7 of this title, concerning vehicles on a
public way, shall not be considered discarded for the purpose of this chapter.
The term discarded vehicle includes major parts thereof, including, but not
limited to, bodies, engines, chassis, transmissions, and axles.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Includes any authorized law enforcement officer of the
city.
PERSON IN CHARGE OF PROPERTY: An agent, occupant, lessee, contract purchaser,
owner, or person having possession, control, or title to the property where a
vehicle is located.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which a person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved by human power
or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. For example, and not for
limitation, the following are vehicles:
   A. Motor vehicle,
   B. Motor home,
   C. Utility trailer,
   D. House or vacation trailer,
   E. Implement of husbandry,
   F. Article of machinery,
   G. Boat,
   H. Camper, or
   I. Pickup truck canopy or any part thereof.
VEHICLE OWNER: An individual, firm, corporation, or unincorporated association
with a claim, either individually or jointly, of ownership or an interest,
legal or equitable, in a vehicle. (1978 Code)
8-11-2: DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE:
   A.   The accumulation and storage of a discarded vehicle, or vehicles, is
hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private
property, to promote blight, deterioration and unsightliness, to invite
plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance
creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for
rodents and insects, and to be injurious to the health, safety and general
welfare of the inhabitants of the city. Therefore, the presence of a discarded
vehicle, or vehicles, on private property is hereby declared to constitute a
public nuisance which may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. (1978 Code)
8-11-3: PROHIBITED ACTIONS:
   A.   No person shall keep or permit the storage of a discarded vehicle upon
private property within the city for more than seven (7) days unless the
vehicle is completely enclosed within a building secured against unauthorized
entry, or is completely enclosed within a six foot (6') sight obscuring fence
which is permitted according to all applicable ordinances of this city. Any
fence erected or used for compliance with this chapter shall be made of solid
panels, chainlink wire with slats, or similar sight obscuring materials, and
shall be capable of being secured from unauthorized entry. If a fence is used
for compliance with this chapter, no more than five (5) vehicles may be stored
on a single parcel of property.
   B.   Nothing stated within this section shall be construed to allow the
storage of any vehicle otherwise prohibited by any ordinance or regulation of
the city or by any land use regulations or any other applicable laws, or to
declare any noncommercial automotive activity as commercial, or to override
provisions of any ordinance of this city regarding home occupations, or to
authorize automobile wrecking, repair or activity not in conformance with other
provisions of this code. (1978 Code)
8-11-4: INVESTIGATION:
When a city official investigates a discarded vehicle on private property and
determines that a nuisance exists which should be abated, the official shall:
   A.   Attempt to discover the owner of the vehicle and all persons who may be
a person in charge of the real property on which the vehicle is located, and
   B.   Give written notice to the persons described in subsection A1 of this
section by regular first class mail and registered or certified mail requiring
a return receipt that the vehicle is in violation of this chapter. If the owner
of the vehicle is not found, the city official shall place a notice on the
windshield or some other part of the vehicle where it can be easily seen. (1978
Code)
8-11-5: CONTENTS OF NOTICE:
A notice issued under section
8-11-4 of this chapter shall state that a certain discarded vehicle or vehicles
is in violation of this chapter and that within fifteen (15) days after sending
or posting the notice:
   A.   The vehicle must be removed from the city or to the storage yard of a
lawfully conducted business dealing in junked vehicles; or
   B.   The vehicle must be completely enclosed within a building or a six foot
(6') sight obscuring fence as provided for in this chapter; and
   C.   That the alternative to compliance with this section is to make a
written request within ten (10) days of the date of the notice for a hearing
before the municipal judge to show why the vehicle should not be immediately
abated; and
   D.   That failure to comply with this chapter authorizes the city to remove
the vehicle, charge the cost as a lien against the real property from which it
was removed, and to sell the vehicle to satisfy the cost of moving, storing and
selling the vehicle or to authorize a towing company to remove the vehicle and
to sell it in compliance with state law to satisfy the costs of removal and
storage; and
   E.   That the recipient of the notice may be personally charged with the
costs of abatement as is more specifically provided for in this chapter. (1978
Code)
8-11-6: ENTRY ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   A city official is authorized to enter onto private property at all
reasonable times and examine a vehicle to determine whether it is in a
discarded condition. Except when an emergency exists, before entering onto
private property, the city official shall obtain the consent of an occupant of
the property or obtain a warrant of the municipal court authorizing entry for
inspection.
   B.   No search warrant shall be issued under the terms of this chapter until
an affidavit has been filed with the municipal court showing probable cause for
the inspection by stating the purpose and extent of the proposed inspection,
citing this chapter as the basis for the inspection, stating whether it is an
inspection instituted by complaint, and giving other specific or general
information concerning the vehicle in question or the property on which it is
located.
   C.   No person shall interfere with or attempt to prevent a city official
from entering onto private premises and inspecting a vehicle when an emergency
exists, or when the official exhibits a warrant authorizing entry. (1978 Code)
8-11-7: HEARING BEFORE MUNICIPAL JUDGE:
   A.   Following a request for a hearing, the municipal judge shall provide a
hearing for the petitioner to show cause why a vehicle should not be abated
immediately and to receive evidence and the testimony of the city official and
other interested persons concerning the existence, location, and condition of
the vehicle. After the hearing, the judge may order the vehicle a nuisance in
violation of this chapter to be removed by the city in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The order may require the removal of more than one vehicle and may
consolidate the hearings and orders relating to more than one vehicle on a
single parcel of property. Persons receiving the notice specified in section
8-11-5 of this chapter shall be sent copies of the order.
   C.   The judge may impose conditions and take other actions she or he
considers appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purposes of this
chapter. The judge may delay the time for removal of the vehicle when, in her
or his opinion, circumstances justify such action. The judge shall refuse to
order removal of the vehicle when the vehicle, in the opinion of the judge, is
not subject to the provisions of this chapter. The judge shall not be bound by
technical rules of evidence in conducting the hearing. (1978 Code)
8-11-8: ABATEMENT BY THE CITY AND APPRAISAL:
   A.   Fifteen (15) days after giving the notice required in section
8-11-4 of this chapter or, if the hearing is held, fifteen (15) days after
issuance of the order referred to in section
8-11-7 of this chapter or upon the passage of any lesser or greater period of
time stated in the order, the city will have jurisdiction to abate the nuisance
and may remove the vehicle by use of city employees or authorized independent
contractors without further notice. No person shall interfere with, hinder or
refuse to allow authorized persons to enter onto private property for the
purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The city shall have the option of removing the vehicle and taking it
into the city's possession for purposes of disposition and sale or to allow the
vehicle to be taken into the possession of an authorized independent towing
contractor. A person who, at the request of a law enforcement officer, takes a
vehicle into possession under the provisions of this chapter shall have a lien
on the vehicle and its contents for reasonable towing and storage charges in
accordance with Oregon Revised Statutes 87.152, and the attachment and
perfection of said liens shall be governed by the provisions of Oregon Revised
Statutes 87.152 through 87.212. The person claiming a lien under this section
and said state statutes may retain possession of the vehicle until the charges
are paid, and may have the vehicle sold to satisfy the lien in accordance with
said state laws. If the appraised value of the vehicle is within the range of
the values set forth in Oregon Revised Statutes 819.215, the vehicle may be
disposed of in the manner provided for therein.
   C.   If after removing the vehicle the city retains possession of it for
purposes of discard or sale, the city may sell the vehicle and its contents at
public auction in the manner provided for in Oregon Revised Statutes 87.192
through 87.206, or may have the vehicle and its contents appraised and disposed
of pursuant to the terms of Oregon Revised Statutes 819.210 through 819.260.
   D.   Upon sale as provided for in this section and said state statutes, the
proceeds of the sale shall be used first to satisfy the towing and storage
lien, next to the cost of sale, next to the payment of all charges and
penalties imposed by this chapter, and then shall be distributed as provided
for in Oregon Revised Statutes 87.206. (1978 Code)
8-11-9: RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES OF OWNER:
   A.   The owner, a person entitled to possession and any person with an
interest recorded on the title of a vehicle taken into custody under this
chapter, and any owner of the property where a vehicle taken into custody under
this chapter was located:
      1.   Is liable for all costs and expenses incurred in the removal,
preservation, custody and sale of the vehicle and its contents except that in
no case shall a person be required to pay storage charges for a storage period
in excess of sixty (60) days, and a security interest holder is not liable
under this chapter unless the security interest holder reclaims the vehicle,
and
      2.   May reclaim the vehicle at any time after it is taken into custody
and before the vehicle is sold or disposed of upon presentation to the
authority holding the vehicle of satisfactory proof of ownership or right to
possession and upon payment of costs, expenses, and penalties for which the
person is liable under this chapter, and
      3.   Has a right to request and have a hearing under the procedures
established by this chapter.
   B.   If the vehicle is sold or disposed of under the terms of this chapter,
has no further right, title, or claim to or interest in the vehicle or the
contents of the vehicle. (1978 Code)
8-11-10: ASSESSMENT OF COSTS:
   A.   If after disposition and/or sale by the city of a vehicle abated
pursuant to the terms of this chapter there remains unpaid any costs associated
therewith, the city manager shall forward to the owner of the vehicle and/or
the person or persons in charge of the property, by registered or certified
mail, a notice stating:
      1.   The total cost of the abatement and the total proceeds obtained in
the sale or disposition of the vehicle and/or contents, and
      2.   That the cost as indicated, less the proceeds of sale, will be
assessed to and become a lien against the property upon which the vehicle was
found prior to abatement unless the sum is paid within thirty (30) days from
the date of the notice, and
      3.   That if the owner of the vehicle or of the real property upon which
it was found objects to the costs of the abatement, as indicated, a notice of
objection may be filed with the city manager not more than ten (10) days from
the date of the notice.
   B.   No sooner than thirty (30) days after the date of the notice, the
council, in the regular course of business, shall hear and make any decision on
the objections to the costs assessed.
   C.   If the costs of the abatement are not paid within thirty (30) days from
the date of the notice, an assessment of the costs, as stated or as decided by
the council, shall be made by resolution and shall be entered into the docket
of city liens. When the entry is made, it shall constitute a lien on the
property from which the discarded vehicle was removed or abated.
   D.   The lien may be enforced in the same manner as liens for street
improvements are enforced and shall bear interest at the statutory rate.
Interest shall accrue from the date of entry of the lien into the lien docket.
   E.   An error in the name of the owner of the vehicle or of the property
upon which it was found, or a failure to receive any notice required by this
chapter will not void the assessment, and it shall remain a valid lien against
the property.
   F.   If disposition and sale is conducted by an independent towing
contractor, this section shall not apply. (1978 Code)
8-11-11: CONTENTS OF ABATED VEHICLE:
The authority given the city under the provisions of this chapter with regard
to the authority to abate, dispose of, and sell discarded vehicles, shall
include the authority to abate, dispose of and sell, the contents of any abated
vehicle, in accordance with the terms of this chapter. (1978 Code)
CHAPTER 12
PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
SECTION:
8-12-1: Failing To Supervise A Minor
8-12-2: Affirmative Defenses
8-12-3: Restitution
8-12-4: Penalty
8-12-1: FAILING TO SUPERVISE A MINOR:
   A.   A person commits the offense of failing to supervise a child if the
person is the parent, lawful guardian or other person lawfully charged with the
care or custody of a child under fifteen (15) years of age and the child:
      1.   Commits an act that brings the child within the jurisdiction of the
juvenile court; or
      2.   Violates any provision of this code; or
      3.   Fails to attend school as required under Oregon Revised Statutes
339.010.
   B.   Nothing in this section applies to a childcare agency as defined in
Oregon Revised Statutes 418.205 or to foster parents. (1978 Code)
8-12-2: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES:
In a prosecution of a person for failing to supervise a child under subsection
8-12-1A1 of this chapter, it is an affirmative defense that the person:
   A.   Is the victim of the act that brings the child within the jurisdiction
of the juvenile court; or
   B.   Reported the act to the appropriate authorities.
   C.   Took reasonable steps to control the conduct of the child at the time
the person is alleged to have failed to supervise the child. (1978 Code)
8-12-3: RESTITUTION:
   A.   In a prosecution of a person for failing to supervise a child under
subsection
8-12-1A1 of this chapter, the municipal court may order the person to pay
restitution to a victim for pecuniary damages arising from the act of the child
that brings the child within the jurisdiction of the juvenile court. The amount
of restitution ordered under this subsection may not exceed two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   B.   If a person pleads guilty or is found guilty of failing to supervise a
child under this section and if the person has not previously been convicted of
failing to supervise a child the municipal court may not order the person to
pay restitution under the authority of this chapter. (1978 Code)
8-12-4: PENALTY:
   A.   Failing to supervise a child is a violation punishable by a fine of not
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   B.   If a person pleads guilty or is found guilty of failing to supervise a
child under this section and if the person has not previously been convicted of
failing to supervise a child the municipal court shall warn the person of the
penalty for future convictions of failing to supervise a child and shall
suspend imposition of sentence.
   C.   If a person pleads guilty of failing to supervise a child under this
section and if the person has only one prior conviction for failing to
supervise a child, the court, with the consent of the person, may suspend
imposition of sentence and order the person to complete a parent effectiveness
program approved by the municipal court. Upon the person's completion of the
parent effectiveness program to the satisfaction of the court, the municipal
court may discharge the person. If the person fails to complete the parent
effectiveness program to the satisfaction of the court, the municipal court may
impose a sentence authorized by this chapter.
There may be only one suspension of sentence under this subsection with respect
to a person. (1978 Code)
CHAPTER 13
REGULATION OF PUBLIC DANCES
SECTION:
8-13-1: Definition
8-13-2: Exclusions
8-13-3: Minors
8-13-4: Necessity For License
8-13-5: Application For Issuance Of License
8-13-6: License Nontransferable
8-13-7: Hold Harmless Provision
8-13-8: License Denial, Cancellation And Revocation
8-13-9: Readmittance To Dance
8-13-10: Hours
8-13-11: Alcoholic Beverages
8-13-12: Authority To Terminate Dance
8-13-13: Licensee And Employed Security Personnel
8-13-14: Penalties
8-13-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, the following shall mean:
PUBLIC DANCE: Any dance not held in a private home or residence which is open
to the general public. (1978 Code)
8-13-2: EXCLUSIONS:
Provisions of this chapter shall not apply to dances conducted as follows:
   A.   Dances on premises regularly licensed by the Oregon liquor control
commission when such licenses are in effect.
   B.   Dances or dancing instruction conducted by private dancing schools
conducted exclusively for the purpose of giving instructions in dancing.
   C.   Dances sponsored by public schools or church organizations on their
property.
   D.   Dances conducted by nonprofit clubs or fraternal, charitable, or
religious organizations to which admission is limited to member and to guests
of a member. (1978 Code)
8-13-3: MINORS:
   A.   No person shall permit or suffer any minor person under sixteen (16)
years of age to attend or take part in a public dance or remain in a dance hall
unless such minor person is in company of at least one of his/her parents or
legal guardian.
   B.   No minor person under sixteen (16) years of age shall make any
misrepresentation or false statement as to the age of himself or the age of any
other person for the purpose of obtaining the admission of the person as to
whose age such statement or representation is made to any dance hall, or the
permission for that person to remain therein in violation of this chapter.
   C.   No person shall represent himself/herself to be a parent or legal
guardian of any other person in order that the other person may obtain
admission to a public dance hall, or be permitted to remain therein in
violation of this chapter. (1978 Code)
8-13-4: NECESSITY FOR LICENSE:
No public dance shall be held until a license is obtained under this chapter.
(1978 Code)
8-13-5: APPLICATION FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
   A.   Application for a license to hold a public dance shall be made in
writing to the police chief at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of
the proposed dance.
      1.   An application for an annual public dance license shall be
accompanied by a fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); two hundred
dollars ($200.00) of which shall be refunded in the event such license is
denied.
      2.   An application for a license for a single public dance shall be
accompanied by a license application fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00); no
part of which shall be refundable in the event such license is denied.
      3.   An annual public dance license shall be effective for one year from
the date of issue. However, an individual application for each public dance to
be held shall be required as provided above.
   B.   The application shall be signed by the applicant and by not less than
two (2) residents of the city of Milton-Freewater. The residents shall certify
that the applicant is of good moral character and shall request that such a
license be issued to the applicant.
   C.   The application shall contain the names of persons employed by the
applicant to be in charge of providing security and control of said public
dance.
      1.   There shall be a minimum of three (3) such persons employed by the
applicant for each dance and shall be over the age of twenty one (21) years.
      2.   The persons so employed shall control the ingress and egress of
patrons, patrol both inside and outside the licensed premises, and patrol
parking lots and surrounding areas to assure compliance with all applicable
laws.
      3.   The licensee and all employed security personnel will cooperate
fully and assist the police department at all times without hesitation before,
during, and after the dance.
      4.   Any public dance at all times shall be subject to police inspection
and supervision.
   D.   The application shall contain all such information as may be relevant
to the character and background of the applicant, his security personnel
required by subsection C of this section, and his associates and partners, if
any.
   E.   The police chief shall cause an investigation and either approve or
deny the application. Upon approval, the police chief shall issue the dance
license. (1978 Code)
8-13-6: LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:
Public dance licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be
transferable. (1978 Code)
8-13-7: HOLD HARMLESS PROVISION:
By applying for and accepting a public dance license, the applicant shall be
deemed to have agreed to indemnify and hold harmless, the city of Milton-
Freewater, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees against and
from any and all claims, demands, causes of actions of any kind or nature
whatsoever which arise as a result of the issuance of the public dance license.
(1978 Code)
8-13-8: LICENSE DENIAL, CANCELLATION AND REVOCATION:
   A.   Approval of a dance license shall be denied if the required application
is incomplete, false or fraudulent or if the applicant, his security personnel,
or partners or associates have, in the previous two (2) years, violated the
terms of a public dance license or of this chapter. Prior conviction of the
applicant of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude may be grounds
for denial of a license when considered in the light of an applicant's entire
background. Denial of a dance license may be based upon previous disruptive
behavior having occurred at a public dance promoted, sponsored or held by the
applicant, within the previous two (2) years. Disruptive behavior may also be
grounds for revocation or suspension of a license by the police chief.
   B.   The police chief may cancel or revoke any dance license after it has
been issued, if it is learned that the same was procured by fraud or false
representation of fact.
   C.   The applicant may appeal to the city council from the decision of the
police chief in refusing to issue a public dance license, or revoking or
canceling a license previously issued.
   D.   All appeals to the city council shall be in writing and filed with the
city manager within three (3) days from the date of notice of the police
chief's denial. All appeals shall be heard by the city council at its next
regular meeting.
   E.   The decision of the police chief shall not be stayed during the
pendency of the appeal to the city council. The city council shall review the
denial, suspension or revocation appealed from, and the action of the city
council shall be final. (1978 Code)
8-13-9: READMITTANCE TO DANCE:
   A.   No person shall give to any person leaving a dance hall, a return check
or other token whereby readmission to such dance hall can be obtained without
the payment of a fee, the same as on original admission.
   B.   No person leaving a dance hall shall receive any such ticket or token
or gain readmission without paying the same fee as upon original admission.
   C.   The provisions of this section shall not affect in any way readmittance
during or after a regularly scheduled intermission. (1978 Code)
8-13-10: HOURS:
   A.   All public dances shall be discontinued and all dance halls shall be
closed on or before one o'clock (1:00) A.M. Each licensee and all employed
security personnel shall cause all persons to leave the dance hall premises,
including parking and outside areas, within thirty (30) minutes of the close of
the dance, and in no event no later than one thirty o'clock (1:30) A.M.
   B.   1. No persons under eighteen (18) years of age may attend any public
dance that is scheduled to close later than twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight
therefore, all public dances to which persons under eighteen (18) years of age
are invited or allowed to attend shall be discontinued, and the dance hall
closed, on or before twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight. Under such circumstances,
each licensee and all employed security personnel shall cause all persons to
leave the dance hall premises, including the parking lot and outside areas,
within thirty (30) minutes of the close of the dance, and in no event later
than twelve thirty o'clock (12:30) A.M.
      2.   Nothing stated within this subsection shall be construed as
extending the curfew hours for persons under the age of eighteen (18) years as
set forth in section
8-3-2 of this title.
   C.   At no public dance shall the operators or licensees be allowed to give
away alcoholic liquor, or to include the cost of alcoholic liquor in admission
charges. All patrons at such dances who are otherwise legally authorized to
consume alcoholic beverages shall be required to pay for all drinks on a per
drink basis as the drinks are purchased, and at a price no less than the actual
cost to the licensee of acquiring, serving and dispensing such beverages.
   D.   1. All public dances scheduled to occur at the community building owned
by the city of Milton-Freewater shall be discontinued, and the building closed,
on or before twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight. Each licensee or user, and all
employed security personnel, shall cause all persons to leave the community
building premises, including the parking in outside areas, within thirty (30)
minutes of the close of the dance, and in no event later than twelve thirty
o'clock (12:30) A.M.
      2.   Nothing stated within this subsection shall be construed as
extending the curfew hours for persons under the age of eighteen (18) years as
set forth in section
8-3-2 of this title. (1978 Code)
8-13-11: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
   A.   No person shall possess, keep, sell, give away or otherwise dispose of
or consume alcoholic liquor in any public dance hall, or in any room or
building used for public dancing, that is not licensed by the Oregon liquor
control commission (OLCC).
   B.   A person granted an OLCC license may serve and dispense alcoholic
beverages for use on the premises of the public dance.
   C.   The necessity of obtaining a license under this chapter in no way
relieves a person from complying with the rules and regulations of the Oregon
liquor control commission and any other applicable law. (1978 Code)
8-13-12: AUTHORITY TO TERMINATE DANCE:
The chief of police shall have the authority to terminate a public dance
without notice for noncompliance with this chapter or other applicable law.
(1978 Code)
8-13-13: LICENSEE AND EMPLOYED SECURITY PERSONNEL:
   A.   Each licensee and all employed security personnel shall be physically
present on the dance premises at all times during the period of time referred
to in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Each licensee and each employed security personnel shall not knowingly
or negligently allow patrons, or other person on the dance premises, to violate
this chapter, nor to negligently allow violations of this chapter, nor to
negligently allow violations of this chapter to occur on the dance premises
within a one hour period prior to the scheduled dance time, and at any time
thereafter until they have caused all patrons and other visitors to leave the
dance premises after the dance has terminated.
   C.   For purposes of this section, references to "dance premises" shall
include the dance hall, and all other inside and outside portions of the
premises and any areas used by dance patrons for parking. (1978 Code)
8-13-14: PENALTIES:
Violation of any section of this chapter shall constitute a violation under
title 1, chapter 4, "General Penalty", of this code. (1978 Code)
CHAPTER 14
CRIMINAL HISTORY CHECKS FOR
EMPLOYEES/VOLUNTEERS/BUSINESS APPLICANTS
SECTION:
8-14-1: Policy
8-14-2: Authority
8-14-3: Applicant Authorization
8-14-4: Criminal History Form
8-14-5: Responsibility
8-14-6: Record Retention
8-14-7: Selection Criteria
8-14-8: Hiring/Appointment
8-14-1: POLICY:
In order for the City of Milton-Freewater to operate effectively, persons
selected for employment or as a public service volunteer with the City of
Milton-Freewater must have the highest degree of citizen and public trust and
confidence.
All City of Milton-Freewater employees and public service volunteers represent
the City to its citizens. Many City employees and volunteers have
responsibilities to regulate and maintain public health and safety. Some City
employees have the ability to bind the City contractually, have access to
public funds and property, and possess access to privileged and proprietary
information submitted to the City in confidence which is not properly disclosed
under applicable laws. Liquor license applicants are required to apply to the
City for recommendations to the Oregon Liquor Control Commission (OLCC) in
their licensing process. Business owners or their employees and agents who
operate within the City have direct interaction with citizens during business
transactions involving monetary exchange. Therefore it is necessary that such
business owners and agents be vetted as to any criminal background which may be
relevant to their business.
There is a need to protect youth from harmful or dangerous encounters and to
that end, a review of the criminal history records of those who volunteer with
youth in the City is necessary and appropriate. Non-profit organizations
serving or working with youth in the community, including but not limited to
youth baseball, youth basketball, youth soccer and youth football organizations
may request that the Police Department perform criminal history checks. Subject
to workload, priorities, and staff availability, the Police Department may
perform such criminal history checks on prospective youth volunteers. In such
cases, the Police Department shall only confirm if a criminal record exists,
without detail contained in such record. The youth volunteer organization may
request detailed criminal history directly from the Oregon State Police
pursuant to State Statute and Administrative Rule.
Therefore, the City Council of the City of Milton-Freewater finds that for the
reasons cited above, it is in the public interest to access the Oregon State
Police (OSP) criminal offender information through the law enforcement data
system (LEDS) system, for all applicants for employment and public service
volunteers, liquor license applicants, business license applicants, and certain
other non-profit volunteers with the City of Milton-Freewater. (Ord. 988, 2-12-
2018)
8-14-2: AUTHORITY:
Oregon Revised Statutes 181A.230 to 181A.245 and Oregon Administrative Rule
257-010-0025 establish procedures for access to criminal record information
possessed by the OSP through LEDS.
Oregon Revised Statutes 181A.230(1) provides access to criminal offender
information by criminal justice agencies and by other State and local agencies.
Oregon Administrative Rule 257-010-0025(1)(a) permits a criminal justice agency
access to OSP criminal offender information required to implement a local
ordinance.
Oregon Administrative Rule 166-200-0305(3)(b) provides for retention of
employment selection information for a period of ninety (90) days. (Ord. 988,
2-12-2018)
8-14-3: APPLICANT AUTHORIZATION:
All applicants with the City of Milton-Freewater will be required to authorize
the City to conduct a criminal offender information check through the OSP LEDS
system. (Ord. 988, 2-12-2018)
8-14-4: CRIMINAL HISTORY FORM:
All applicants will be required to complete and sign a criminal history
authorization form which will be maintained by the department staff. The
department staff will request that the criminal history check be conducted by
the Police Department. (Ord. 988, 2-12-2018)
8-14-5: RESPONSIBILITY:
A member of the Police Department trained and authorized to perform criminal
history checks through the LEDS system will conduct the check on the
prospective applicant and orally report to the appropriate department that the
applicant's record indicates "no criminal record" or "criminal record". The
appropriate department may, under Oregon Revised Statutes 181A.230(1), request
a written criminal history report from the OSP identification services section
and pay the applicable fee for this service. The appropriate department may
make the written criminal history record available to the employment or
volunteer selecting official for his or her consideration in making the
selection. (Ord. 988, 2-12-2018)
8-14-6: RECORD RETENTION:
The written criminal history record on persons that are not hired or appointed
as a volunteer will be retained in accordance with the requirements of Oregon
Administrative Rule 166-200-0305(3)(b) for a period of ninety (90) days and
thereafter will be destroyed by shredding. The criminal history record of
applicants and volunteers with a criminal history that are hired or appointed,
will become a part of the confidential personnel files of that employee or
volunteer. Access to confidential personnel files is limited to certain persons
to whom access is allowed and controlled by City, State or Federal laws. (Ord.
988, 2-12-2018)
8-14-7: SELECTION CRITERIA:
Applicants that have a felony criminal history, or a history of conviction of a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or theft, will be closely examined by the
selecting officials to determine if the applicant possesses the required degree
of citizen and public trust and confidence. Each applicant selection will,
however, be made on an individual, case by case basis, taking into account the
applicant's qualifications, the requirements of the particular job, the
volunteer post applied for or business applied for, and the results of the
criminal history check. Factors such as the age of an offender at the time of
the offense, the type of offense and subsequent rehabilitation, and the public
sensitivity of the position under consideration, must be taken into account in
evaluating a criminal history report. (Ord. 988, 2-12-2018)
8-14-8: HIRING/APPOINTMENT:
Hiring or appointing an applicant with a criminal history record will require a
positive recommendation by the selecting official and the approval of the City
Manager after full disclosure and consideration of the criminal history and the
applicant's qualification. (Ord. 988, 2-12-2018)
CHAPTER 15
NOISE
SECTION:
8-15-1: Policy
8-15-2: Definitions
8-15-3: Sound Measurement
8-15-4: Prohibitions
8-15-5: Exceptions
8-15-6: Variances
8-15-7: Administration And Enforcement
8-15-8: Penalties
8-15-9: Separate Violation
8-15-1: POLICY:
Certain activities essential to the economic, social, political, educational,
and technical advancement of the citizens of the city necessarily require the
production of sounds that may offend, disrupt, intrude, or otherwise create
hardship among the citizenry. The time or manner of sound may constitute a
hazard to the health, safety, welfare, and quality of residents of the city.
It is the policy of the city to limit and regulate sound deemed to be harmful
to the health, safety, welfare, and quality of life of the citizens of the
city, and this code shall be liberally construed to effectuate that purpose.
However, it is not the intent of this chapter to restrict reasonable levels of
noise that results from routine industry, commerce or activity of the
community. It is the intent of this chapter to: a) provide an objective
standard, while allowing for extenuating circumstances, for determining when
noise or sounds are beyond what would be considered normal and reasonable, and
b) to establish procedures for dealing with such situations. (1978 Code)
8-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following shall mean:
A-SCALE (dBA): The sound level in decibels measured using the A-weighted
network as specified in American national standard specification for sound
level meters (ANSI 51.4-1971).
ANIMAL: Any live vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, except fish.
C-SCALE (dBC): The sound level in decibels measured using the C-weighted
network as specified in American standard specification for sound level meters
(ANSI 51.4-1971).
IDLING SPEED: That speed at which an engine will run when no pressure is
applied to the accelerator or accelerator linkage.
NOISE SENSITIVE UNIT: Any building or portion thereof, vehicle, boat or other
structure used as a church, daycare center, hospital, school or adapted or used
for the overnight accommodation of persons, including, but not limited to,
individual residential units, individual apartments, trailers, and nursing
homes.
PERSON: Includes, in addition to any individual, any public or private
corporation, association, partnership, or other legally recognized public or
private entity.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE SOUND: Any sound for which the information content of that
sound is unambiguously communicated to the listener, such as, but not limited
to, understandable spoken speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised or
normal, animal sounds, or comprehensible musical rhythms.
SOUND PRODUCING DEVICE: Anything that is capable of making sounds that can be
measured by a sound level meter as provided for in subsection
8-15-3A of this chapter. "Sound producing source" includes, but is not limited
to, the following:
   A.   Loudspeakers, public address systems,
   B.   Radios, tape recorders and/or tape players, phonographs, television
sets, stereo systems, including those installed in a vehicle,
   C.   Musical instruments, amplified or unamplified,
   D.   Sirens, bells,
   E.   Vehicle engines or exhausts, when the vehicle is not on a public right
of way, particularly when the engine is operated above idling speed,
   F.   Vehicle tires, when caused to squeal by excessive speed or
acceleration,
   G.   Domestic tools, including electric drills, chain saws, lawn mowers,
electric saws, hammers, and similar tools, but only between ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of the following day,
   H.   Heat pumps, air conditioning units, and refrigeration units, including
those mounted on vehicles.
VEHICLE: Includes automobiles, motorcycles, motorbikes, trucks, buses,
snowmobiles, and boats. (1978 Code)
8-15-3: SOUND MEASUREMENT:
   A.   If measurements are made, they shall be made with a sound level meter.
The sound level meter shall be an instrument in good operating condition,
meeting the requirements of a type I or type II meter, as specified in ANSI
standard 1.4-1971. For purposes of this chapter, a sound level meter shall
contain at least an A-weighted scale and a C-weighted scale, and both fast and
slow meter response capability.
   B.   Measurements may be made at or within the boundary of the property on
which a noise sensitive unit which is not the source of the sound is located,
or within a noise sensitive unit which is not the source of the sound.
   C.   All measurements made pursuant to this chapter shall comply with the
provisions of this section. (1978 Code)
8-15-4: PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to produce or permit to be
produced, with a sound producing device, sound which:
      1.   When measured at or within the boundary of the property on which a
noise sensitive unit which is not the source of the sound is located, or,
within a noise sensitive unit which is not the source of the sound, exceeds:
         a.   Fifty (50) dBA at any time between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. of the following day, and
         b.   Sixty (60) dBA at any time between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. the same day, or
      2.   Is plainly audible at any time between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. the following day:
         a.   Within a noise sensitive unit which is not the source of the
sound, or
         b.   On a public right of way at a distance of fifty feet (50') or
more from the source of the sound.
      3.   If a measurement of the sound is made, subsection A1 of this section
shall supersede subsection A2 of this section and shall be used to determine if
a violation exists.
   B.   It shall also be unlawful for the keeping of any animal which by
frequent or loud continued noise shall disturb the comfort and repose of any
person in the vicinity. (1978 Code)
8-15-5: EXCEPTIONS:
Notwithstanding section
8-15-4 of this chapter, the following exceptions from this chapter are
permitted when conditions therefor are met:
   A.   Sounds caused by organized athletic or other group activities, when
such activities are conducted out of doors on property generally used for such
purposes, fields, provided, however, that said exception shall not impair the
chief of police's power to declare such event or activities otherwise to
violate other laws, ordinances or regulations.
   B.   Sound caused by emergency work, or by the ordinary and accepted use of
emergency equipment, vehicles and apparatus, whether or not such work is
performed by a public or private agency, upon public or private property.
   C.   Sounds caused by sources regulated as to sound production by state or
federal law (industrial produced sounds), including, but not limited to, sounds
caused by railroad, aircraft, commercially licensed watercraft operations or
truck mounted refrigeration units when the truck is parked in an industrial
manufacturing zone.
   D.   Sound caused by bona fide use of emergency warning devices and alarm
systems.
   E.   Sound caused by blasting activities when performed under a permit
issued by appropriate governmental authorities and only between the hours of
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M., excluding weekends,
unless such permit expressly authorizes otherwise. (1978 Code)
8-15-6: VARIANCES:
Any person who is planning the use of a sound producing device which may
violate any provision of this chapter may apply to the chief of police for a
variance from such provision.
   A.   The variance application shall state the provision from which a
variance is being sought, the period of time the variance is to apply, the
reason for which the variance is sought and any other supporting information
which the chief of police may reasonably require.
   B.   The chief of police shall consider:
      1.   The nature and duration of the sound emitted, and
      2.   Whether the public health, safety or welfare is endangered, and
      3.   Whether compliance with the provision would produce no benefit to
the public, and
      4.   Whether previous permits have been issued and the applicant's record
of compliance.
   C.   A variance may be granted for a specific time interval only.
   D.   Variances granted under this section shall not exceed ninety five (95)
dBA one hundred feet (100') in front of the sound producing device or sixty
five (65) dBC at the property line of the event taking place. Depending on
factors such as terrain and location of the event, these decibel limitations
may be lowered at the discretion of the chief of police.
   E.   The chief of police, shall, within ten (10) days, deny the application,
approve it, or approve it subject to conditions.
   F.   The chief of police's decision may be appealed to the city council.
Notice of appeal should be delivered to the city manager. The council shall
review the application de novo, at the next regularly scheduled meeting, deny
the application, approve it, or approve it subject to conditions.
   G.   The chief of police may, at any time before or during the operation of
a variance granted by the chief of police revoke the variance for good cause.
The council may at any time before or during the operation of any variance,
revoke the variance for good cause. (1978 Code)
8-15-7: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The chief of police shall administer, supervise and perform all acts
necessary to enforce this chapter.
   B.   Persons appointed or assigned by the chief of police, as he deems
necessary to accomplish effective enforcement of this chapter, may be peace
officers or not.
   C.   Upon citation to a person for a violation of this chapter, the person
issuing the citation may seize the sound producing device, which was the source
of the sound, as evidence only if the violation is determined by use of a sound
level meter.
   D.   The sound producing device, if seized, shall be impounded subject to
disposition of the issued citation and determination by the court whether the
sound producing device shall be returned to the cited person or deemed
contraband, subject to subsection
8-15-8B of this chapter. It is the intent of this chapter to avoid such
seizures except where the person being cited has received two (2) previous
citations within the previous six (6) months for the use of the same or similar
sound producing device. The previous citations may, but need not, occur on the
same date as the citation which prompts the seizure. (1978 Code)
8-15-8: PENALTIES:
   A.   Violation of any section of this chapter shall constitute a violation
under title 1, chapter 4, "General Penalty", of this code.
   B.   In addition to the penalty prescribed herein, the court may order any
sound producing device found to have been used to violate this chapter seized,
confiscated, and destroyed as contraband, or sold with the proceeds of sale to
be deposited in the city general fund. (1978 Code)
8-15-9: SEPARATE VIOLATION:
Each day's violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate
offense. (1978 Code)
CHAPTER 16
CHRONIC CRIME PROPERTY
SECTION:
8-16-1: Purpose
8-16-2: Definitions
8-16-3: Nuisance Declared
8-16-4: Notice
8-16-5: Abatement Proceedings
8-16-6: Emergency Closures
8-16-7: Closure Order, Civil Penalties And Costs
8-16-8: Relief From Closure Order
8-16-1: PURPOSE:
The city council of the city of Milton-Freewater has determined that any real
property employed as the site of repeated criminal activity or nuisance
activity is a nuisance and detrimental to the civil peace of the city, and
detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the people of Milton-
Freewater.
The city council of the city of Milton-Freewater has also determined that this
chapter is necessary to preserve and protect the habitability of, and the
peaceable, safe, sanitary, and secure occupancy and use of, real property in
Milton-Freewater. (Ord. 950, 2-9-2009)
8-16-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, except as the context otherwise requires:
CHRONIC CRIME PROPERTY: Any kind of real property upon which three (3) or more
separate factual incidents occur during any ninety (90) day period that involve
any of the below listed behaviors and that have been independently investigated
by any law enforcement agency:
   A.   Crimes involving controlled substances as defined in Oregon Revised
Statutes chapter 475;
   B.   Gambling or lottery as defined by Oregon Revised Statutes 167.117;
   C.   Prostitution as defined by Oregon Revised Statutes 167.007;
   D.   Harassment as defined by Oregon Revised Statutes 166.065, excluding
provision (1)(b);
   E.   Intimidation as defined by Oregon Revised Statutes 166.155, excluding
provision (1)(a);
   F.   Disorderly conduct as defined by Oregon Revised Statutes 166.025;
   G.   Unlawful use of a weapon as defined by Oregon Revised Statutes 166.220;
   H.   Prohibited noise as defined in section
8-15-4 of this title;
   I.   Minor in possession of alcohol as defined by Oregon Revised Statutes
471.430;
   J.   Assault as described by Oregon Revised Statutes 163.160 through
163.185;
   K.   Sexual abuse as defined by Oregon Revised Statutes 163.415 to 163.427;
   L.   Public indecency as defined by Oregon Revised Statutes 163.465;
   M.   Trespass as defined by Oregon Revised Statutes 164.245 to 164.265;
   N.   Criminal mischief as defined by Oregon Revised Statutes 164.345 to
164.365;
   O.   Theft by receiving stolen property as defined by Oregon Revised
Statutes 164.095; or
   P.   Unauthorized use of a motor vehicle as defined by Oregon Revised
Statutes 164.135.
COSTS: Those costs actually incurred by the city for the physical securing of
real property, court costs, and all other expenses incurred in enforcing this
chapter.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The chief of police of Milton-Freewater or his or her
designee.
OWNER: Any person holding or claiming to hold any legal or equitable title or
interest in real property, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee in
possession, a vendee under a land sale contract, or a beneficiary under a deed
of trust; any person having or claiming to have lawful care, custody, or
control of real property; or, any lien holder or holder of any security
interest in the real property.
PERSON: Any natural person, association, partnership, corporation, or entity
capable of owning or using property.
REAL PROPERTY: Any real property, including, but not limited to, lots, parcels,
buildings, houses, rooms, structures, or any separate part or portion thereof,
whether permanent or not, whether the ground itself, or any conveyance or any
part or portion thereof. (Ord. 950, 2-9-2009)
8-16-3: NUISANCE DECLARED:
   A.   Any real property used, maintained, or existing as chronic crime
property within the city of Milton-Freewater, Oregon, is declared to be a
nuisance and may be abated.
   B.   No owner or occupant shall use or maintain or allow the use or
maintenance of real property as chronic crime property.
   C.   No owner or occupant shall use or occupy or allow or permit any person
to use or occupy, by lease or otherwise, any real property during any period
such property is subject to an order of closure pursuant to section
8-16-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 950, 2-9-2009)
8-16-4: NOTICE:
   A.   When the enforcement officer has reasonable grounds to believe that
real property is being used or maintained in violation of section
8-16-3 of this chapter, the enforcement officer may institute proceedings
against the owner for the closure of the real property and the imposition of
civil penalties.
   B.   The enforcement officer shall provide preliminary notice of the
institution of proceedings in the following manner:
      1.   The enforcement officer shall notify the owner in writing that the
real property is believed to be chronic crime property. The notice shall
contain the following information:
         a.   The street address and legal description sufficient for
identification of the property;
         b.   A statement the property is chronic crime property, along with
specific findings supporting the determination. The findings shall contain a
concise description of the conditions establishing a violation of this chapter.
      2.   A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner at least ten (10)
days prior to filing of the complaint. Service of the notice shall be made by
personal delivery or by mailing a copy of the notice by certified mail to the
owner at the address as it appears on the tax rolls and the address as it
appears on the last recorded instrument of conveyance, if different from the
address specified on the tax rolls, and to the owner's actual address, if known
to be different than the above.
      3.   A copy of the notice shall be served on the occupant or occupants of
the real property not less than ten (10) days prior to the initiation of legal
proceedings as described below. Notice shall be made by mailing a copy of the
notice by first class mail, or by personal delivery to the occupant or
occupants of the real property.
      4.   A copy of the notice may be posted at the real property if ten (10)
days have elapsed from the service or mailing of the notice to the owner, and
no response has been received by the enforcement officer during that time.
      5.   The enforcement officer shall send a copy of the notice to the city
attorney of the city of Milton-Freewater, as well as any other documentation
supporting closure and imposition of civil penalties.
      6.   After notice has been given pursuant to this section, the city
council may authorize the filing of a complaint to initiate an action in the
Umatilla County circuit court, or in the small claims department thereof, as
allowed by Oregon Revised Statutes 105.560(5), to restrain and enjoin the
nuisance, and to otherwise enforce this chapter. However, if the city seeks
only to enforce the civil penalty provided for in subsection
8-16-7A of this chapter and to not otherwise seek an abatement or closure
order, the action may be initiated and prosecuted in municipal court according
to the procedures generally applicable therein. Nothing in this section shall
limit the power of the city to enter into an agreement with the owner of the
real property for voluntary abatement of the conditions giving rise to the
violation. (Ord. 950, 2-9-2009)
8-16-5: ABATEMENT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Except for an action authorized to be filed in municipal court pursuant
to subsection
8-16-4B6 of this chapter, an action to enforce this chapter may be commenced by
the filing of a complaint and prosecuting the action using the procedures and
rules provided in Oregon Revised Statutes 105.560 through 105.590.
   B.   If prior to any trial, the owner and the city enter into an agreement,
stipulating to the abatement of the conditions giving rise to the complaint,
the court upon motion by the city may stay proceedings for a period not to
exceed sixty (60) days. The owner may thereafter petition the court for
additional periods of time as may be necessary to complete the actions
stipulated to in the agreement. If the owner is not diligently pursuing the
actions stipulated in the agreement, the city may apply for relief at any time
to end the stay.
   C.   In any enforcement proceeding, proof shall be by a preponderance of the
evidence, and a conviction of the offenses referred to in section
8-16-2 of this chapter is not a necessary finding in any enforcement
proceedings under this chapter. On the issue of whether property is used in
violation of this chapter, evidence of the general reputation of the property
and the reputation of the persons residing in or frequenting it shall be
admissible. (Ord. 950, 2-9-2009)
8-16-6: EMERGENCY CLOSURES:
In an action commenced in circuit court, and if the enforcement officer
determines real property is an immediate threat to the public safety and
welfare by virtue of activity which would establish a violation of this
chapter, the city may apply to the court for a preliminary injunction ordering
closure of the real property. In such event, no preliminary notice required
under section
8-16-4 of this chapter need be given. The procedure for preliminary injunction
shall be those set by state law. (Ord. 950, 2-9-2009)
8-16-7: CLOSURE ORDER, CIVIL PENALTIES AND COSTS:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection C of this section, if the existence of
a nuisance is established in an action brought in circuit court, an order of
abatement shall be entered as part of the general judgment in the case. The
order of abatement may direct the effectual closing of the premises, building,
or place against its use for any purpose and so keeping it closed for a period
of up to one year, unless sooner released. The court shall not include
provisions for the closing of the premises under the provisions of this
subsection unless that relief is specifically requested in the complaint. In an
action brought in circuit court, the judgment of the court may include the
assessment of a civil penalty against each owner of up to five hundred dollars
($500.00) for a noncontinuing nuisance and up to one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for a continuing nuisance upon finding the owner had knowledge of
activities or conditions constituting the nuisance. In an action brought in
municipal court, the judgment of the court shall include the assessment of said
civil penalties as applicable. A person shall be deemed to have knowledge at a
date no later than the date notice is provided pursuant to section
8-16-4 of this chapter.
   B.   In establishing the amount of any civil penalty, the court may consider
the following factors:
      1.   The actions taken by the owner to mitigate or correct the problem at
the real property;
      2.   The financial condition of the owner;
      3.   Whether the problem at the real property was repeated or continuous;
      4.   The magnitude or gravity of the problem;
      5.   The economic or financial benefits accruing or likely to accrue to
the owner as a result of the failure to correct conditions at the real
property;
      6.   The cooperativeness of the owner with the city;
      7.   The costs and expenses to the city of investigating and correcting
or attempting to correct the condition;
      8.   Any other factors deemed material by the court.
   C.   No order of closure as to that owner shall be entered if the court
finds that the owner satisfied the conditions set forth in Oregon Revised
Statutes 105.580(3).
   D.   If an order of closure is granted, the city may physically secure the
real property against use or occupancy if the owner fails to do so within the
time specified by the order. All costs reasonably incurred by the city in such
action shall be a lien upon the property from the time notice specifying the
costs is filed of record.
   E.   If the city is the prevailing party in the action, the city shall
prepare a statement of costs, which shall be served on the owner and filed with
the court. If no objection to the statement is filed with the court within
fourteen (14) days of the date of service, the statement of costs shall be
entered as part of the judgment, and a certified copy filed as a lien against
the real property in the city's lien docket. The lien shall have priority as
set forth in Oregon Revised Statutes 105.585(1).
   F.   A notice of pendency of an action may be filed pursuant to Oregon
Revised Statutes 93.740.
   G.   Any prevailing party may be entitled to reasonable attorney fees in an
action in circuit court. (Ord. 950, 2-9-2009)
8-16-8: RELIEF FROM CLOSURE ORDER:
   A.   The owner of real property may obtain relief from a closure order if
the owner:
      1.   Appears and pays all civil penalties, and all costs and expenses
awarded to the city; and
      2.   Establishes to the satisfaction of the court that the nuisance
activity has been abated and will not likely recur; and
      3.   Establishes to the satisfaction of the court that all other terms
and conditions of the abatement order of the court have been satisfied.
   B.   Nothing in this section shall alter the abatement provisions of Oregon
Revised Statutes 105.580(4) and (5), where abatement was ordered on the basis
of manufacture of a controlled substance. (Ord. 950, 2-9-2009)
TITLE 9
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Applicability Of State Traffic Laws
9-1-2: Definitions
9-1-3: Administration
9-1-4: Authority Of Police And Fire Officers
9-1-5: Parades And Processions
9-1-6: Speed Limits In Public Parks
9-1-7: Boarding Or Alighting From Vehicle
9-1-8: Unlawful Riding
9-1-9: Use Of Roller Skates Restricted
9-1-10: Skis On Streets
9-1-11: Damaging Sidewalks And Curbs
9-1-12: Obstructing Streets
9-1-13: Removing Glass And Debris
9-1-14: Reserved
9-1-15: Vehicles, Horses Prohibited In Yantis Park
9-1-16: Illegal Cancellation Of Traffic Citations
9-1-1: APPLICABILITY OF STATE TRAFFIC LAWS:
Violation of provisions in Oregon Revised Statutes, chapters 153 and 801
through 822 inclusive, as now constituted (1995 edition) is an offense against
the city. (Ord. 820)
9-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
In addition to those definitions contained in the adopted sections of the motor
vehicle laws of Oregon, the following words or phrases, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning, shall mean:
BUS STAND: A fixed area in the roadway adjacent to the curb to be occupied
exclusively by buses for layover in operating schedules or waiting for
passengers.
CURB: The extreme edge of the roadway.
HOLIDAYS: Where used in this title or on signs erected in accordance with this
title: Sundays, New Year's Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day
and Christmas Day, Washington's birthday (third Monday in February) and
Veterans Day (November 11).
PARKWAY: That portion of a street not used as a roadway or as a sidewalk.
PASSENGER LOADING ZONE: Reserved only for the loading or unloading or
passengers and their luggage.
TAXICAB STAND: A fixed area in the roadway adjacent to the curb set aside for
taxicabs to stand or wait for passengers.
TRAFFIC LANE: That portion of the roadway used for the movement of a single
line of vehicles. (1956 Code § 7-002; amd. 1978 Code)
9-1-3: ADMINISTRATION:
The city manager, for best use of the streets in the public interest, shall
exercise the following powers, subject to approval by the city council, based
on standards established by the state highway commission and recognized traffic
control standards such as the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices"
published by the bureau of public roads, providing, where required by the motor
vehicle laws of Oregon approval by the state highway commission has first been
secured:
   A.   Designate streets, portions of streets, sides of streets or city owned
or leased land upon which parking or standing shall be prohibited or prohibited
during certain hours and the angle of such parking.
   B.   Designate through streets.
   C.   Designate one-way streets.
   D.   Designate truck routes.
   E.   Designate streets where trucks, machinery or any other large or heavy
vehicles exceeding specified weights shall be prohibited. Such vehicles may,
however, be operated on such streets for the purpose of delivering or picking
up materials or merchandise but then only by entering such streets at the
intersection nearest the destination of the vehicle and proceeding no farther
than the nearest intersection.
   F.   Designate where traffic control signals shall be placed and the time of
operation of such signals.
   G.   Establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other
passenger common carrier vehicles.
   H.   Designate the location of passenger loading zones for use in front of
the entrance to any hotel, auditorium, theater, church, school or public
building.
   I.   Designate and cause to be placed or maintained appropriate signs, marks
or lines for:
      1.   Intersections where drivers of vehicles shall not make right, left
or U-turns and the times when such prohibitions shall apply.
      2.   Crosswalks at intersections where deemed necessary for pedestrian
safety.
      3.   Safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as deemed
necessary for pedestrian safety.
      4.   Play streets, or such hours when certain streets may be used as
such, on which no person shall drive a vehicle upon such street or portion
thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are
within such closed area, and then such driver shall exercise the greatest care
in driving upon such street.
   J.   Cause to be placed or marked and maintained:
      1.   Traffic control signs;
      2.   Parking spaces;
      3.   Traffic lanes and other symbols;
      4.   All other signs and markings necessary to implement traffic and
parking controls.
   K.   Make and enforce temporary experimental or emergency regulations,
consistent with this title. No such regulations shall be effective and in force
until and unless adequate signs, signals, or other notices are erected clearly
indicating such regulation. No such regulation shall remain in effect for more
than ninety (90) days. (1956 Code § 7-003)
9-1-4: AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE OFFICERS:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the police department through its officers to
enforce this title.
   B.   In the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to
safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as
conditions may require.
   C.   Members of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct
or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
(1956 Code § 7-004)
9-1-5: PARADES AND PROCESSIONS:
   A.   Prohibited Activity: No person shall organize or participate in a
parade that may disrupt or interfere with traffic without obtaining a permit. A
permit shall be required for a procession using the public right of way that
consists of twenty (20) or more persons or ten (10) or more vehicles.
   B.   Parade Permit:
      1.   Application for a parade permit shall be made to the city manager at
least fifteen (15) days before the date of the parade unless the time limit is
waived by the city manager.
      2.   The application shall be signed by the person designated as
chairperson of the parade and shall include the following:
         a.   The name and address of the person responsible for the parade.
         b.   The date of the parade.
         c.   The desired route, including assembling and dispersal points.
         d.   The number of persons, vehicles and animals that will
participate.
         e.   The proposed starting and ending time.
   C.   Issuance Or Denial Of Permit:
      1.   The city manager shall issue a parade permit conditioned on the
applicant's written agreement to comply with terms of the permit unless the
city manager finds that:
         a.   The time, route and size of the parade will disrupt the movement
of other traffic to an unreasonable extent.
         b.   The parade is of a size or nature that requires the diversion of
so great a number of law enforcement officers to properly police the line of
movement and contiguous areas that allowing the parade would deny reasonable
law enforcement protection to the jurisdiction.
         c.   The parade will interfere with another parade or other activity
for which a permit has been issued.
         d.   Information contained in the application is found to be false or
a material detail is omitted.
         e.   The applicant refuses to agree to abide by or comply with all
conditions of the permit.
      2.   If one or more of the conditions listed in subsection C1 of this
section, other than subsection C1e of this section, exists, the city manager
may include provisions in the permit that are necessary to alleviate the
conditions, including, but not limited to:
         a.   Requiring an alternate date.
         b.   Requiring an alternate route.
         c.   Restricting the size of the parade.
      3.   The city manager shall notify the applicant of the decision within
five (5) days after receipt of the application.
      4.   If the city manager proposes alternatives or refuses to issue a
permit, the applicant may appeal the decision to the governing body.
   D.   Appeal:
      1.   An applicant may appeal the decision of the city manager by filing a
written request of appeal with the city manager's office within five (5) days
after the city manager has proposed alternatives or refused to issue a permit.
      2.   The governing body shall schedule a hearing, which shall not be
later than the second regular meeting following the filing of the written
appeal and shall notify the applicant of the date and time.
   E.   Parade Offenses:
      1.   No person shall unreasonably interfere with a parade or a parade
participant.
      2.   No person shall operate a vehicle that is not part of a parade
between the vehicles or persons in the parade.
   F.   Permit Revocable: The city manager may revoke a parade permit if
circumstances clearly show that the parade no longer can be conducted
consistent with public safety.
   G.   Funeral Processions:
      1.   No permit is required for a funeral procession.
      2.   A funeral procession shall proceed to the place of interment by the
most direct route that is both legal and practical.
      3.   The procession shall be accompanied by adequate escort vehicles for
traffic control.
      4.   All motor vehicles in the funeral procession shall be operated with
their lights on.
      5.   No person shall unreasonably interfere with a funeral procession.
      6.   No person shall operate a vehicle that is not a part of the
procession between the vehicles of a funeral procession. (1956 Code)
9-1-6: SPEED LIMITS IN PUBLIC PARKS:
No person shall drive a vehicle upon any street in any public park of the city
at a speed exceeding fifteen (15) miles per hour unless signs erected indicate
otherwise. (1956 Code)
9-1-7: BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLE:
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in
motion. (1956 Code)
9-1-8: UNLAWFUL RIDING:
No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or
intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an
employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to a person riding
within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. (1956 Code)
9-1-9: USE OF ROLLER SKATES RESTRICTED:
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any street except while crossing at a
crosswalk, or upon a play street, as designated by the chief of police. (1956
Code)
9-1-10: SKIS ON STREETS:
No person shall use the streets for traveling on skis, toboggans, sleds or
similar devices except upon play streets, as designated by the chief of police.
(1956 Code § 7-043; amd. 1978 Code)
9-1-11: DAMAGING SIDEWALKS AND CURBS:
   A.   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk or
parkway area except to cross at a permanent or temporary driveway.
   B.   No person shall place any dirt, wood or other material in the gutter or
space next to the curb of any street with the intention of using the same as a
driveway.
   C.   No person shall remove or damage in any way any portion of any curb or
move any heavy vehicle or thing over or upon a curb or sidewalk without first
notifying the city engineer, and such person shall be held responsible for any
and all damage. (1956 Code § 7-044)
9-1-12: OBSTRUCTING STREETS:
No person shall park or leave any vehicle or any part thereof or any trailer,
box, ware or merchandise of any description, or any other thing that in any way
impedes traffic, or obstructs the view, upon any street, including an alley,
parking strip, sidewalk or curb, except by such lawful use and parking of
vehicles upon streets and alleys as is allowed by the provisions of this code.
(1956 Code § 7-045)
9-1-13: REMOVING GLASS AND DEBRIS:
Any person causing glass to be broken upon, or any party to collision or other
vehicle accident upon any street in the city shall immediately remove or cause
to be removed from such street all glass and other foreign substances. (1956
Code § 7-048)
9-1-14: RESERVED:
9-1-15: VEHICLES, HORSES PROHIBITED IN YANTIS PARK:
No person shall ride or operate any motorbike, motor vehicle or horse on the
turfed area of Yantis park between the Milton Ditch and DeHaven Street on the
east and between Milton Ditch and Catherine Street extension on the north.
(Ord. 335, 8-25-1969)
9-1-16: ILLEGAL CANCELLATION OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of
any traffic citation in any manner except where approved by the municipal
judge. (1956 Code § 7-095; amd. 1978 Code)
CHAPTER 2
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING
SECTION:
9-2-1: Method Of Parking
9-2-2: Prohibited Parking
9-2-3: Painted Yellow Curb
9-2-4: Buses And Taxicabs
9-2-5: Lights On Parked Vehicle
9-2-6: Overtime, Improper Parking Fines
9-2-7: Impounding Vehicles
9-2-8: Time Limit Parking
9-2-1: METHOD OF PARKING:
   A.   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a street other than parallel
with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful traffic
movement, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches
(12") of the edge of the curb, except where the street is marked or signed for
angle parking.
   B.   Where parking space markings are placed on a street, no person shall
stand or park a vehicle other than in the indicated direction and within a
single marked space, unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance
impossible.
   C.   Whenever the owner or driver of a vehicle discovers that such vehicle
is parked immediately in front of or close to a building to which the fire
department has been summoned, he shall immediately remove such vehicle from the
area unless otherwise directed by police or fire officers. (1956 Code § 7-010)
9-2-2: PROHIBITED PARKING:
In addition to provisions of the motor vehicle laws of Oregon prohibiting
parking, no person shall park:
   A.   A vehicle upon any bridge, viaduct or other elevated structure used as
a street or within a street tunnel in the city.
   B.   A vehicle in any alley except to load or unload persons or materials
not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive minutes in any one hour period.
   C.   Any truck on any street between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00)
P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the following day in front of or adjacent
to any residence, auto court, or apartment house, or within two hundred feet
(200') of any hotel.
   D.   A vehicle upon any street for the principal purpose of:
      1.   Displaying such vehicle for sale.
      2.   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
      3.   Displaying advertising from such vehicle.
      4.   Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a duly established
marketplace or when so authorized or licensed under this code.
      5.   Storage, or as junkage or dead storage for more than seventy two
(72) hours. (1956 Code § 7-011)
   E.   Within fifty feet (50') of any intersection (measured from the
intersecting point of 2 public streets), if:
      1.   Any part of the vehicle is over six feet (6') in height.
      2.   The vehicle by manufacture or modification obscures the vision of:
         a.   Any official side mounted traffic control sign or signal;
         b.   Intersection traffic; or
         c.   Any pedestrian in a crosswalk.
For the purposes of this subsection, vehicles described in this subsection E2
include, but are not limited to:
         a.   Vehicles with darkened, shaded or curtained windows.
         b.   Vehicles modified to eliminate side windows or rear windows.
         c.   Vehicles with visibility through windows blocked by parcels,
packages, or freight.
         d.   Pickup vehicles of less than six feet (6') in height, but mounted
with a canopy or camper through which visibility is limited.
         e.   Panel trucks with no side windows or with no rear windows. (Ord.
542, 6-11-1979)
         f.   Any vehicle of a length that exceeds the space allowed in reduced
size stalls marked "compact car only". (Ord. 643, 3-22-1982)
   F.   A vehicle upon any parkway except where specifically authorized.
   G.   No driver of a vehicle shall stop, stand, or park it, whether attended
or unattended, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control signal,
in front of a private or public driveway. (1956 Code § 7-001; amd. Ord. 542, 6-
11-1979)
   H.   Any motor bus, motor home, mobile home, travel trailer or trailer in
excess of eight thousand (8,000) pounds' gross weight on any street or city
property, excepting commercial districts, between the hours of six o'clock (6:
00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day.
As used in this subsection, the terms "motor truck", "motor bus", "motor home",
"travel trailer", "mobile home", "trailer and vehicle" shall bear the meanings
contained in the Oregon vehicle code. Campers on pickup trucks are excluded for
the weight limitation of this subsection.
Violation of this subsection shall be punishable in accordance with section
9-1-12 of this code. (Ord. 497, 2-14-1977; amd. Ord. 542, 6-11-1979)
9-2-3: PAINTED YELLOW CURB:
   A.   No person shall stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle next to a
restrictively painted yellow curb when parallel parking, nor shall any person
stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle in front of a restrictively painted yellow
curb when parking at an angle.
   B.   Violation of this section shall be punishable in accordance with
section
9-2-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 368, 1-24-1972; amd. 1978 Code)
9-2-4: BUSES AND TAXICABS:
   A.   Use Of Stands Required: The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not stand
or park such vehicle upon any street in any business district at any place
other than at a bus stand or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this
provision shall not prevent the driver of any taxicab from temporarily stopping
for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the loading or unloading of
passengers. (1956 Code § 7-013)
   B.   Restricted Use Of Stands: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle
other than a bus in a bus stand or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand,
except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when
such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or
about to enter such zone. (1956 Code § 7-014)
9-2-5: LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLE:
No lights need be displayed upon any vehicle parked in accordance with this
title and upon a street where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or
object within a distance of five hundred feet (500') upon such street. (1956
Code § 7-015)
9-2-6: OVERTIME, IMPROPER PARKING FINES:
All persons who have improperly parked their vehicles or who have parked their
vehicles in violation in any limited time parking areas shall be fined in
accordance with the schedule set by the city council. (1956 Code)
9-2-7: IMPOUNDING VEHICLES:
   A.   Impoundment: In the event any vehicle shall be found standing or parked
in violation of any city regulation, such vehicle shall be given a traffic
citation and may be removed by the police department and taken to a garage,
parking lot or other suitable place, and there kept until an application for
its redemption shall be made by the owner or his authorized agent. (1956 Code §
7-080)
   B.   Redemption: Redemption may be made upon payment of towing and storage
charges, which amounts shall be in addition to any fine which might be made in
accordance with this title. (1956 Code § 7-081)
   C.   Sale: If the vehicle shall not be redeemed within thirty (30) days,
then such vehicle shall be sold in accordance with applicable provisions
relating to the sale of abandoned vehicles. (1956 Code § 7-082)
9-2-8: TIME LIMIT PARKING:
   A.   Except Sundays and holidays as specified in Oregon Revised Statutes
187.010 and 187.020, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle between the hours
designated for a longer consecutive period than provided in this section.
   B.   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no vehicle shall be
parked:
      1.   For more than two (2) hours on either side of North Main Street
between 4th and 8th Avenues; nor on either side of N.E. 5th or N.E. 6th Avenues
between Robbins and North Main Streets; nor on either side of N.W. 5th or N.W.
6th Avenues between North Main Street and the unnamed alley which lies between
Main and Evans Streets;
      2.   For more than two (2) hours on South Main Street between 8th and
12th Avenues; (Ord. 639, 12-28-1981)
      3.   For more than two (2) hours on S.E. 9th Avenue, one hundred feet
(100') east of South Main Street; (Ord. 643, 3-22-1982)
      4.   For more than two (2) hours on S.E. 10th, one hundred feet (100')
east of South Main Street; and S.W. 10th, one hundred feet (100') west of South
Main Street;
      5.   For more than two (2) hours on the south side of S.E. 11th Avenue,
one hundred feet (100') east of South Main Street;
      6.   For more than one hour on South Main Street between the north end of
Linden Drive and the south end of Linden Drive; or
      7.   For more than one hour on the south end of N.E. 5th Avenue between
Robbins and Ward Streets.
   C.   Between the hours of four o'clock (4:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M., it shall be unlawful for any vehicle to stop or park along any of the
streets named in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 639, 12-28-1981)
CHAPTER 3
BICYCLES AND OTHER NONMOTORIZED DEVICES
SECTION:
9-3-1: Requirements
9-3-2: License Required
9-3-3: Inspection
9-3-4: Transfer Of Ownership
9-3-5: Bicycle Dealers
9-3-6: Rental Agencies
9-3-7: Regulations
9-3-8: Violation, Impounding
9-3-1: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   No parent of any minor child and no guardian of any minor ward shall
authorize or knowingly permit any such minor child or ward to violate any of
the provisions of this title.
   B.   The provisions of this title relating to traffic shall apply whenever a
bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein. (1956
Code § 7-060)
9-3-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, who resides within the city, shall ride or propel a bicycle on any
street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles
unless such bicycle has been licensed. Applications for such license shall be
made to the chief of police, who may issue a license which shall be effective
until the next succeeding January 1, providing the applicant submits
satisfactory proof of ownership of the bicycle and evidences reasonable
knowledge of traffic safety rules. An annual license fee shall be paid to the
city before each license or renewal thereof is granted. (1956 Code § 7-061)
9-3-3: INSPECTION:
A police officer shall inspect each bicycle before licensing and shall refuse a
license for any bicycle which he determines is in unsafe mechanical condition.
(1956 Code § 7-062)
9-3-4: TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP:
Upon the sale or other transfer of a licensed bicycle, the licensee may, upon
proper application but without payment of additional fee, have the license
assigned to the purchaser or to another bicycle owned by the applicant. (1956
Code § 7-063)
9-3-5: BICYCLE DEALERS:
Every person engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles shall
maintain a record of every bicycle purchased, giving the name and address of
the person from whom purchased, a description of such bicycle by name or make,
the frame number thereof, and the license number, if any, found thereon. (1956
Code § 7-065)
9-3-6: RENTAL AGENCIES:
A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle
is licensed and such bicycle is equipped with all equipment required by the
motor vehicle laws of Oregon and this code. (1956 Code § 7-066)
9-3-7: REGULATIONS:
   A.   Riding On Sidewalks: No person shall ride or operate any bicycle,
skateboard, scooter, or any wheeled conveyance except wheelchairs for the
disabled, upon a sidewalk in a business district, or any designated walking
trail within the city. This section shall be directed with an emphasis towards
businesses having main entrances or front doors which open directly onto a
sidewalk and are located in established commercial zones. Business district
shall be those areas designated and set forth in the city zoning code.
   B.   Parking: No person shall park a bicycle upon a street or upon a
sidewalk except in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at
the curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian
traffic. (Ord. 934, 6-12-2006)
9-3-8: VIOLATION, IMPOUNDING:
In addition to any other penalty, the bicycle of any person violating the
provisions of this chapter may be impounded for a period not to exceed thirty
(30) days. Further, upon the violator's first offense of subsection
9-3-7A of this chapter, a parent or official guardian must accompany the
violating party to the police department and sign a release prior to the return
of the violator's bicycle, skateboard, scooter or any wheeled conveyance. Upon
a second violation of subsection
9-3-7A of this chapter, by the same violator, the police department shall
impound the offender's bicycle, skateboard, scooter or any wheeled conveyance
for a minimum period of fourteen (14) calendar days. (1956 Code § 7-075; amd.
Ord. 906; Ord. 934, 6-12-2006)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Title
10-1-2: Purpose And Intent
10-1-3: Establishment Of Districts
10-1-4: Determination Of District Boundaries
10-1-5: Lot Division Along Zone District Boundaries
10-1-6: Zoning Of Annexed Areas
10-1-7: Interpretation
10-1-8: Inspection And Right Of Entry
10-1-9: Nuisance
10-1-10: Notice Of Violation
10-1-11: Enforcement
10-1-12: Penalties
10-1-13: Permit Revocation
10-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known as the ZONING CODE OF THE CITY OF MILTON-FREEWATER.
In this text, the terms "zoning ordinance" and "ordinance" shall refer to this
title.
This title shall consist of this text and the map entitled zoning map of
Milton-Freewater, Oregon, attached as appendix 1 to the ordinance codified
herein. For convenience of use and accuracy of representation, this map shall
be divided into sections. Each section shall constitute the official map for
the area covered by the map, and may be separately employed for zone
identification or amendment. If conflicts arise between these specific boundary
maps and any general maps constructed for display or general distribution, the
zoning map of Milton-Freewater, Oregon shall prevail.
Both the text and the map of this title, may be amended from time to time.
Persons contemplating a decision involving this title should consult with the
planning department to verify the provisions which relate to their situation.
(Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-1-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this title is to enhance the quality of life and protect the
health, safety, and enhance the general welfare of the citizens of the city of
Milton-Freewater. This title intends to accomplish this purpose by defining and
quantifying the uses of land designated by the comprehensive plan. This title
is the principal means of implementing the plan. To this end, this title is
intended to:
   A.   Designate Land Use Zones: Designate land use zones which contribute to
organized development of the community by restricting the location and
relationships of uses, and providing for location and relationships of uses,
and providing for location of compatible uses in ways which encourage
efficiency and mutual benefit.
   B.   Organize Development Process: Quantify the responsibilities of the
private and public sectors involved in land development so that uncertainty and
delay are kept to a minimum.
   C.   Provide For Utility Development: Provide a reliable basis for the
provision of public service, utilities and facilities.
   D.   Citizen Involvement: Establish procedure by which citizens of the
community may participate in the land use process, and effect the changes
necessitated by new circumstances and needs. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-1-3: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS:
To implement the comprehensive plan land use designations, and the purpose and
intent statements of this title, the following land use districts are
established:
 
Abbreviation Zone District Name         
R-1 Residential (low density)
R-2 Residential (medium density)
R-3 Residential (high density)
MSR Main Street residential
DB  Downtown business
C-1 Retail and service commercial
C-2 General commercial
I-M Industrial-manufacturing
PL  Public lands
CO  Civic overlay
BP  Business park
R-M Residential mixed use
 
(Ord. 667, 9-24-1984; amd. Ord. 847, 12-1997; Ord. 925, 6-13-2005; Ord. 928, 6-
27-2005)
10-1-4: DETERMINATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
   A.   Right Of Way Lines: Where a zone district boundary is shown as
following a street, alley, canal, or railroad right of way, it shall be
construed as following the centerline of such right of way.
   B.   Map Measurement: Where a zone boundary divides a parcel into two (2)
zones, the location of the boundary shall be determined by scale measurements
of the zone map. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-1-5: LOT DIVISION ALONG ZONE DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Where a zone boundary divides a parcel into two (2) zones no partition or
subdivision which creates a substandard lot in either zone shall be permitted.
(Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-1-6: ZONING OF ANNEXED AREAS:
Upon annexation of an area inside the urban growth boundary, the area shall
simultaneously be zoned in conformance with the land use designation prescribed
for that property by the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-1-7: INTERPRETATION:
The planning director shall have the responsibility of interpreting all terms
and provisions of this title. Formal interpretation shall be requested in
writing on forms provided by the director. Issuance of a formal interpretation
shall be considered a level I procedure, with appeal as provided in section
10-3-12 of this title. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-1-8: INSPECTION AND RIGHT OF ENTRY:
Whenever the planning director has reasonable cause to suspect a violation of
this title, or when necessary to investigate matters pertinent to an
application made pursuant to this title, the director or his designee may enter
any property in a reasonable manner to exercise his responsibilities. (Ord.
667, 9-24-1984)
10-1-9: NUISANCE:
Any structure or use of land which is established, operated, erected, moved,
altered, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title is hereby
declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-1-10: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Notice of a violation of a provision of this title shall be in the form of a
certified return receipt letter, or a letter delivered in person to the
property owner.
The letter shall identify the property on which the violation is located, a
description of the violation, and a brief statement on the action necessary to
gain compliance with this title.
Notice shall be complete and deemed received upon any of the following:
   A.   Actual receipt.
   B.   Refusal of the certified letter.
   C.   Passage of two (2) weeks from the date of mailing of the certified
letter.
The owner shall be given ten (10) days from the date of receipt of the letter
to remedy the violation. If not remedied, enforcement will commence on the
eleventh day after receipt of notice.
By mutual agreement of the property owner and the city, a reasonable period in
excess of ten (10) days may be granted for remedy of the violation. If not
remedied by the established date, enforcement will commence on the following
day. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-1-11: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Primary Enforcement: The planning director is authorized to, and
charged with primary enforcement of the provisions of this title. The director
shall issue the notice of violation prescribed above.
   B.   Judicial Enforcement: Upon request from the city manager, the city
attorney shall institute any legal proceedings necessary to enforce the
provisions of this title. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-1-12: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision(s) of this title shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed ten (10) days,
or both a fine and imprisonment, as well as abatement of the public nuisance by
the owner, or by the city at the owner's expense.
Each day of a continuing violation constitutes a separate violation.
In addition to enforcement of the above penalties, the city may seek civil
remedies including, but not limited to, claims for injunctive relief, damages,
or any other remedies provided by law. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-1-13: PERMIT REVOCATION:
   A.   The planning director may revoke any zoning permit upon violation of
the terms under which said permit was issued.
   B.   The planning director shall issue a notice of intent to revoke the
permit via certified return receipt letter, or a letter delivered in person to
the property owner. The letter shall itemize the terms of the permit of which
the applicant is in violation. The letter shall specify a two (2) week time
period commencing on the date of the letter for applicant to rectify the
violation(s).
   C.   Should the applicant still be found in violation of the terms of the
permit at the end of two (2) weeks, notice of revocation of the permit shall be
issued in the form of a certified return receipt letter, or a letter delivered
in person to the property owner.
   D.   Applicant has the right to appeal the planning director's decision per
section
10-3-12 of this title. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
CHAPTER 2
CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Construction
10-2-2: Definitions
10-2-1: CONSTRUCTION:
The following rules of construction shall apply unless inconsistent with the
obvious meaning in the context of the provision.
   A.   Tense: Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
   B.   Number: Words used in the singular shall include the plural and words
used in the plural shall include the singular.
   C.   Shall, May, Should: The word "shall" is mandatory. The words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
   D.   Gender: The masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
   E.   Headings: In the event that there is any conflict or inconsistency
between the heading of a chapter, section, or paragraph of this title, and the
content thereof, the said heading shall not affect the scope, meaning, or
intent of the content. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, the following words and phrases shall mean:
ACCESS: A way or means of approach to provide pedestrian, bicycle, or motor
vehicular entrance or exit to a property.
ACCESS CONNECTION: Any driveway, street, turnout or other means of providing
for the movement of vehicles to or from the public roadway system.
ACCESS MANAGEMENT: The process of providing and managing access to land
development while preserving the regional flow of traffic in terms of safety,
capacity and speed.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure which augments the main use of the property
and is appropriate to the zone in which the property is located, but which is
incidental and subordinate to the main use.
ACCESSWAY: A walkway that provides pedestrian and bicycle passage, either
between streets or from a street to a building or other destination such as
school, park, or transit stop. Accessways generally include a walkway and
additional land on either side of the walkway, often in the form of an easement
or right of way, to provide clearance and separation between the walkway and
adjacent uses. Accessways through parking lots are generally physically
separated from adjacent vehicle parking or parallel vehicle traffic by curbs or
similar devices and including landscaping, trees, and lighting. Where
accessways cross driveways, they are generally raised, paved or marked in a
manner that provides convenient access for pedestrians.
ADJACENT: Shall be that having a common boundary and not to be construed as
that which is across a street or alley.
ALLEY: A serviceway providing a secondary means of public access to abutting
property, and not intended for general traffic circulation.
APARTMENT: See definition of Dwelling, Multi-Family.
APPROVING AUTHORITY: The planning director, planning commission, or city
council of the city of Milton-Freewater.
AUTOMOBILE AND TRAILER SALES AREA: An open area other than a street, used for
the display, sale or rental of new or used automobiles or trailers and where no
repair work is done except minor incidental repair of automobiles or trailers
to be displayed, sold or rented on the premises.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: A premises used for the storage or sale of used
automobile or truck parts, or for dismantling, or abandonment of junk, obsolete
automobiles, trailers, trucks, machinery, or parts thereof.
BICYCLE: A vehicle designed to operate on the ground on wheels, propelled
solely by human power, upon which any person or persons may ride and with two
(2) tandem wheels at least fourteen inches (14") in diameter. An adult tricycle
is considered a bicycle.
BICYCLE FACILITIES: A general term denoting improvements and provisions made to
accommodate or encourage bicycling, including parking facilities and all
bikeways.
BIKEWAY: Any road, path or way that is in some manner specifically open to
bicycles regardless of whether such facilities are designated for the exclusive
use of bicycles or are shared with other transportation modes. The five (5)
types of bikeways are:
  Bike Lane: A four (4) to six foot (6') wide portion of the roadway that has
been designated by permanent striping and pavement markings for the exclusive
use of bicycles.
  Multi-Use Path: A paved ten (10) to twelve foot (12') wide way that is
physically separated from motorized vehicular traffic; typically shared with
pedestrians, skaters, and other nonmotorized users.
  Multi-Use Trail: An unpaved path that accommodates all terrain bicycles;
typically shared with pedestrians.
  Shared Roadway: A travel lane that is shared by bicyclists and motor
vehicles.
  Shoulder Bikeway: The paved shoulder of a roadway that is four feet (4') or
wider; typically shared with pedestrians in rural areas.
BILLBOARDS: Signs advertising merchandise or services other than those
available for sale on the premises.
BOARDING, BED AND BREAKFAST, LODGING OR ROOMING HOUSE: A building furnishing no
more than five (5) guestrooms; where lodging with or without meals is provided
for compensation for guests.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and
intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual animal,
process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind or nature. Building does
not include deck roof, patio roof, or cabana.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance of a building measured from the finished
grade of the front yard to the highest point of the roof.
BUILDING SITE: A parcel of land which meets area requirements, setbacks and
access standards, is serviceable by utilities, and meets the provisions of the
zone in which the parcel is located.
CABANA: A freestanding roof supported only by columns or pillars with no
enclosing walls between them, and having no enclosures under the roof itself.
CAMP, TOURIST, OR TRAILER PARK: Any area or tract of land used or defined to
accommodate two (2) or more recreational vehicles, tents or outfits.
CARPORT: A roofed structure providing space for the parking or storage of motor
vehicles and enclosed only by the exterior walls of the associated structure,
if it is to be attached, and supported on all sides by columns or pillars with
no enclosing walls between them.
CHANGE OF USE: Alteration of the purpose for which land or a structure is
designated, arranged, or intended from an existing use, or an actual use in the
last six (6) months, to a different use which is allowable by the zoning
ordinance for the location in question.
CITY: The city of Milton-Freewater, Oregon.
CROSS ACCESS: A service drive providing vehicular access between two (2) or
more contiguous sites so the driver need not enter the public street system.
DAYCARE FACILITY: A facility operated by a school district, political
subdivision of this state or a governmental agency; or a residential facility
licensed under Oregon Revised Statutes 443.400 to 443.445.
DECK, LOW LEVEL: An unroofed exterior wood frame floorlike platform, either
attached to a dwelling or freestanding, which provides a surface for outdoor
activities. A low level deck, and any railings, benches or attachments must be
no higher than the fence height allowed in the yard in which the deck is
located.
DECK ROOF: A roof enclosed only by exterior walls of the associated dwelling,
and supported on all other sides by columns or pillars with no enclosing walls
between them.
DEVELOPMENT: Construction, reconstruction, relocation, enlargement of any
structure; initiation of use or conversion of use of any structure; or the
initiation of use, extension of use, or conversion of the use of land.
DUPLEX: See definition of Dwelling, Two-Family.
DWELLING, MAIN ENTRANCE: Entrance which is designed to be the primary entrance
to a dwelling.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A residential building containing three (3) or more
dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A residential building containing one dwelling unit.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A residential building containing two (2) dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT: One self-contained housekeeping unit with minimum standards of
floor area and facilities.
DWELLING UNIT, EFFICIENCY UNIT: A housekeeping unit contained in a residential
care facility or studio apartment development which is designed for minimum
maintenance and expense which can function as a self-contained dwelling unit or
as part of a communal food service and recreation program.
DWELLING UNIT, HABITABLE AREA: Habitable area is the total floor area, which by
virtue of meeting specified minimum ceiling heights, is considered as usable
for human occupation.
DWELLING UNIT, MAXIMUM DENSITY OF OCCUPATION: The maximum number of inhabitants
allowed in a residential structure, expressed in square feet per person.
EASEMENT: A grant of one or more property rights by a property owner to or for
use by the public, or another person or entity.
FENCE, SIGHT OBSCURING: A fence or planting arranged in such a way as to
effectively prevent vision of objects which are screened by it.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA: The area which has been or may be covered by a 100-year
flood as defined by the emergency management agency flood hazard boundary map.
FRONTAGE ROAD: A public or private drive which generally parallels a public
street between the right of way and the front building setback line. The
frontage road provides access to private properties while separating them from
the arterial street.
FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION: A system used to group public roadways into classes
according to their purpose in moving vehicles and providing access.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An enclosed accessory building or portion of a main building
used for the parking or temporary storage of vehicles owned or used by
occupants of the main building, and accessible only from a street unless the
planning commission permits access via an alley due to unique circumstances
involving the property. No residential use is permitted in garages.
GRADE (GROUND LEVEL): The average of the finished ground level at the center of
each exterior wall of the building.
HABITABLE AREA: The space inside a structure used for living purposes including
working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, which has a ceiling height of
not less than seven feet six inches (7'6").
HOME OCCUPATION: A lawful business activity commonly carried on within a
dwelling by members of the family occupying the dwelling with no servant,
employee, or other person being employed, and may be allowed in any zone,
subject to the provisions of section
10-5-11 of this title, and to precedents of neighborhood impact of similar
businesses operated in the city.
ISOLATED LOT: An undeveloped substandard lot in separate ownership from
surrounding property.
JOINT ACCESS: A driveway connecting two (2) or more contiguous sites to the
public street system.
LOT: A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat,
subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit.
LOT AREA: The total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any street
rights of way.
LOT, CORNER: A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two (2) or more streets at
their intersection or upon two (2) parts of the same street forming an interior
angle of less than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
LOT DEPTH: The distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot line.
For lots where the front and rear lot lines are not parallel, the lot depth
shall be measured by drawing lines from the front to rear lot line at right
angles to the front lot line, every ten feet (10') and averaging the length of
these lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: See definition of Lot, Through.
LOT, FLAG: A lot not meeting minimum frontage requirements and where access to
the public road is by a narrow, private right of way line.
LOT FRONTAGE: The length of the front lot line measured at the street right of
way line.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, LANDLOCKED: A lot which has no deeded access to a public street.
LOT LINE: A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from another
lot or from a public or private street of any other public space.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The lot line separating a lot from a street right of way, or
in the case of a flag lot, the line closest to a street right of way excluding
the flagpole portion of the property.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line;
or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a line ten
feet (10') in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum
distance from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot which fronts upon two (2) parallel streets, or which fronts
upon two (2) streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured at
right angles to its depth along with a straight line parallel to the front lot
line at the minimum required building setback line.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure constructed for movement on the public highways
that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human
occupancy, that is being or will be used for residential purposes and that was
constructed in accordance with federal manufacturing housing construction and
safety standards regulations in effect at the time of construction (HUD, public
law 93-383).
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: Any place where four (4) or more manufactured homes are
parked on a lot, tract, or parcel of land, within five hundred feet (500') of
one another; the purpose of which is to rent space or keep space for rent to
any person for a charge or fee paid or to be paid for the rental or use of the
facilities or to offer space free in connection with securing the trade or
patronage of such person.
MOBILE HOME: A structure constructed for movement on the public highways that
has sleeping, cooking, and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human
occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes and that was constructed
between January 1, 1962 and June 15, 1976, and met the construction
requirements of Oregon mobile home law in effect at the tine of construction.
MODULAR HOME: A building or structural unit which has been in whole or
substantial part manufactured at an off site location, to be wholly or
partially assembled on site, but does not classify as a mobile home or
manufactured home.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use or activity which was lawful prior to the adoption,
revision or amendment of this title, but which fails, by reason of such
adoption, revision or amendment, to conform to the present requirements of the
zone in which it is located.
OFFICES: A facility where the primary activity is of a business meeting or
professional service nature (doctor, lawyer, realtor, etc.). The primary
activity cannot be retail in nature, where the item is stocked and sold on the
premises. The following institutions are not covered by this definition: banks,
savings and loans, credit unions.
OPEN AREA: Land exclusive of any buildings, driveways and parking lots.
Intended to be retained in a natural or a landscaped state.
PARCEL: A division of land comprised of one or more lots in contiguous
ownership.
PARKING SPACE: A clear, off street area for the temporary parking or storage of
one automobile. A parking space shall be directly accessible from public
streets, and separate from required loading areas or other required uses.
PATIO ROOF: See definition of Deck Roof.
PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES: A general term denoting improvements and provisions made
to accommodate or encourage walking, including sidewalks, accessways,
crosswalks, ramps, paths and trails.
PERSON: Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: An area designed as a unified combination of land
uses; generally with a mixture of residential, single- and multi-family types,
open space or recreation areas for the direct use and benefit of all the lot
owners within the development and sometimes shopping or community facilities. A
planned development includes a "planned unit", a "homes association", and
"common property".
PLANNING COMMISSION: The planning commission of the city of Milton-Freewater.
PLANNING DIRECTOR: The person designated by the city manager as head of the
planning department.
REASONABLE ACCESS: The minimum number of access connections, direct or
indirect, necessary to provide safe access to and from the roadway, as
consistent with the purpose and intent of this code and any applicable plans
and policies of the city of Milton-Freewater.
REASONABLY DIRECT: A route that does not deviate unnecessarily from a straight
line or a route that does not involve a significant amount of out of direction
travel for likely users.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular type portable structure without permanent
foundation, which can be towed, hauled or driven and primarily designed as
temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping and travel trailers,
truck campers, camping trailers and self-propelled motor homes. Any such
vehicle with less than seven hundred twenty (720) square feet is a recreational
vehicle.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: Any place where two (2) or more recreational
vehicles are parked on a parcel of land; the purpose of which is to rent space
or keep space for rent to any person for use of facilities, or to offer space
free in connection with securing the trade or patronage of such person.
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY: A facility licensed by or under the authority of the
department of human resources under Oregon Revised Statutes 443.400 to 443.460
which provides residential care alone or in conjunction with treatment or
training or a combination thereof for six (6) or more individuals who need not
be related.
RESIDENTIAL HOME: A home licensed by or under the authority of the department
of human resources under Oregon Revised Statutes 443.400 to 443.825 which
provides residential care alone or in conjunction thereof for five (5) or fewer
individuals who need not be related.
RETAIL BUSINESS: Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the
general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services
incidental to the sale of such goods. Retail businesses may process some of
their products, but processing is secondary to selling of the product. Retail
businesses include retail lumber and building supply outlets, office supply
sales, eating and drinking places, and produce sales outlets which bring in
goods from more than one farm.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced
dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied or
occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or
gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer and other similar uses.
SAFE AND CONVENIENT: Bicycle and pedestrian routes that are reasonably free
from hazards, and provide a reasonably direct route of travel between
destinations, considering that the optimum travel distance is one-half (1/2)
mile for pedestrians and three (3) miles for bicyclists.
SIGN: A presentation or representation which by words, letters, figures,
designs, pictures, or color publicly displayed gives notice relative to a
person, a business, an article or merchandise, a service, an assemblage, a
solicitation or a request for aid or other type of advertising. This includes
the surface upon which the presentation or representation is displayed. Each
display surface of a sign shall be considered to be a sign.
SITE PLAN: The development plan for one or more lots on which is shown the
existing and proposed conditions of the lot including: topography, vegetation,
drainage, floodplains, marshes and waterways; open spaces, walkways, means of
ingress and egress, utility services, landscaping, structures and signs,
lighting and screening devices; any other information that reasonably may be
required in order that an informed decision can be made by the approving
authority.
STALL: The parking space into which vehicles park.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the top story
shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the
top floor and ceiling above. In any case, a story shall be a maximum of ten
feet (10'). If the finished floor level directly above a basement or cellar is
more than six feet (6') above grade, such basement or cellar shall be
considered a story.
STREET: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way which provides
for public use for the purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and
including the terms "road", "highway", "lane", "place", "avenue", or other
similar designations. Nothing may be placed or located in this area except
public utilities.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change to the supporting members of a structure
including foundations, bearing walls, or partitions, columns, beams, girders,
or any structural change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed. An edifice or building of any
kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts jointed
together in some definite manner and which requires a location on the ground or
which is attached to something having a location on the ground, whether
assembled on site, or assembled elsewhere, and placed on the site.
STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL: The main building to which the property has been
allocated.
STUB OUT (STUB STREET): A portion of a street or cross access drive used as an
extension to an abutting property that may be developed in the future.
SUBDIVIDE LAND: To divide an area or tract of land into four (4) or more lots
when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land
under a single ownership at the time of adoption of this title.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE: A structure without any foundation or footings and which
is removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the
temporary structure was erected has ceased.
TEMPORARY USE: A use established for a period of time fixed in the permit which
authorizes the use.
USE: The purpose for which land or a structure is designated, arranged, or
intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
VISION CLEARANCE AREA: A triangular area on a lot at the intersection of two
(2) streets, a street and an alley, or a street and a railroad, two (2) sides
of which are lot lines measured from the corner intersection of the lot lines
to a distance specified in these regulations. The third side of the triangle is
a line across the corner of the lot joining the ends of the other two (2)
sides. (See section
10-5-3 of this title.)
WALKWAY: A hard surfaced area intended and suitable for pedestrians, including
sidewalks and the surfaced portions of accessways.
WALL, RETAINING: A structure necessary for support of a cut-fill grade.
Retaining wall shall be a maximum of nine inches (9") above finished grade or
the fill side of the wall.
YARD: An open space on a lot which is unobstructed from the ground upward by a
principal structure.
YARD, FRONT: The front yard of any given property is defined as that side of
the property which faces a street. With regard to corner lots, the front yard
is that side of the property that faces a street and contains the main entrance
to the structure. (The planning director may modify strict application of this
definition based on facts existing at the time.)
YARD, REAR: A space extending across the full width of the lot between the
principal building and the rear lot line, and measured perpendicular to the
building to the closest point of the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE: A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the
principal building and the side lot line measured perpendicular from the side
lot line to the closest point of the principal building. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984;
amd. Ord. 745, 1-22-1990; Ord. 752, 2-11-1991; Ord. 764, 5-26-1992; Ord. 873,
9-13-1999; Ord. 956, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-1-2010)
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-3-1: Development Permit Required
10-3-2: Preapplication Conference
10-3-3: Development Permit Application
10-3-4: Submission Of Development Permit Application
10-3-5: Agency Review
10-3-6: Procedure For Processing Applications
10-3-7: Level I Procedure
10-3-8: Level II Procedure
10-3-9: Level III Procedure
10-3-10: Level IV Procedure
10-3-11: Written Notice Of Decision
10-3-12: Appeal, Notice
10-3-13: Procedure For Acting On An Appeal
10-3-14: Public Hearing Procedure
10-3-15: Notification Of Surrounding Property Owners Or Affected Parties
10-3-16: Fees
10-3-1: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED:
Prior to development of a structure or land, a person shall obtain a
development permit from the city. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-3-2: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE:
Prior to submittal of a development permit application, the applicant and the
director (or a designee) shall discuss the proposal for the purpose of
determining the appropriate processing procedure level. The determination of
the director shall be appealable to the planning commission as provided in
section
10-3-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-3-3: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPLICATION:
An application for a development permit shall consist of the materials
specified in this section.
   A.   A completed development permit application form, which includes the
applicant's current address which shall serve as the address for all
correspondence and notices regarding the application. It shall be the
applicant's responsibility to notify the city in writing of any change in
address.
   B.   An explanation of intent, stating the nature of the proposed
development, reasons for the permit request, pertinent background information,
information required by the pertinent sections of this title, and other
information that may have a bearing on the processing of an application of that
level.
   C.   Proof that the property affected by the application is in the exclusive
ownership of the applicant, or that the applicant has the consent of all
partners in ownership of the affected property.
   D.   Legal description of the property affected by the application.
   E.   Additional information required by other sections of this title because
of the level of development proposal or the area involved. (Ord. 667, 9-24-
1984)
10-3-4: SUBMISSION OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPLICATION:
Application materials shall be submitted to the director who shall have the
date of submission indicated on each copy of the materials submitted. Within
five (5) days from the date of submission, the director shall determine whether
an application is complete. If the application is incomplete or otherwise does
not conform to the provisions of this chapter, the director shall notify the
applicant as soon as possible by mail, and by other means if necessary. Such
notification shall contain a clear statement of the chapter provisions which
have not been met.
An incomplete application may be resubmitted as soon as it is revised to
overcome the deficiencies listed in the notification.
Upon receipt of a complete application, the director shall accept it and note
the date of acceptance and the procedure necessary to process the application.
(Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-3-5: AGENCY REVIEW:
For level III procedures, or level II procedures, when necessary the director
may transmit one copy of the application, or appropriate parts of the
application to any public agency or governmental unit which may have a special
concern related to the application, so that they can review and comment. If the
referral agency does not comment within ten (10) days, unless an extension of
up to ten (10) days is requested by the agency and granted by the director, the
referral agency is presumed to have no comment. The director shall grant an
extension only if the application involves unusual circumstances or if due to
circumstances related to level III procedure. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-3-6: PROCEDURE FOR PROCESSING APPLICATIONS:
An application for a development permit shall be processed under a level I, II,
III or IV procedure. The director shall determine which procedure is specified
by this chapter for a particular application. An application shall be processed
under the highest number procedure required for any part of the proposal. (Ord.
667, 9-24-1984)
10-3-7: LEVEL I PROCEDURE:
   A.   Under the level I procedure, an application shall be processed, without
public hearing or notification of other property owners.
The director shall issue a decision on a level I proposal within five (5) days
of acceptance of the application.
   B.   Appeal of level I decisions is provided in section
10-3-12 of this chapter.
   C.   The director shall submit a list of the past month's level I actions to
the planning commission at their regular business meetings.
   D.   In zones where level I uses are subject to site plan review, the
procedures specified in chapter 8 of this title shall be used in addition to
the level I procedures. When site plan review is required, the decision on a
level I proposal shall be issued within fifteen (15) days of acceptance of the
application. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-3-8: LEVEL II PROCEDURE:
   A.   Under level II procedures, an application shall be processed without a
public hearing.
   B.   The director shall mail notice of the proposal to persons designated by
section
10-3-15 of this chapter to receive such notice. Form and content of the notice
shall be as prescribed by section
10-3-15 of this chapter. Comments must be received within seven (7) days of the
mailing date to be considered in the decision.
   C.   The director shall issue a decision on a level II proposal within ten
(10) days of acceptance of the application.
   D.   Appeal of level II decisions is provided in section
10-3-12 of this chapter.
   E.   The director shall submit a list of the past month's level II actions
to the planning commission at their regular business meetings.
   F.   In zones where level II uses are subject to site plan review, the
procedures specified in chapter 8 of this title shall be used in addition to
the level II procedure. When site plan review is required, the decision on a
level II proposal shall be issued within thirty (30) days of acceptance of the
application. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-3-9: LEVEL III PROCEDURE:
   A.   Under the level III procedure, an application is scheduled for public
hearing before the planning commission pursuant to section
10-3-14 of this chapter. The form of notice and persons to receive notice are
as required by section
10-3-15 of this chapter.
The purpose of the public hearing is to gather information on the proposal and
its relationship to the relevant criteria and standards of this title.
   B.   The commission may approve, deny, or approve with such conditions as
are necessary to bring the proposal into conformance with the standards of this
title. Conditions of approval may include actions necessary to avoid imposition
of undue public service obligations on the city, or mitigation of detrimental
effects on other property owners. Conditions of approval shall state the
standard or policy which permits or requires such condition. (Ord. 667, 9-24-
1984)
   C.   Action on level III procedure application shall be completed by the
planning commission within fifty five (55) days of acceptance of the
application unless circumstances such as the need for additional information
warrant continuation of the public hearing or deferral of decision to a later
meeting. In cases of delay, a specific statement of the grounds for the delay,
and a date for final action shall be announced as part of the decision to
delay. In any case, the commission shall complete a level III action within
sixty five (65) days of acceptance of the application. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
   D.   The decision of the commission may be appealed by a party to the
hearing in accordance with section
10-3-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-3-10: LEVEL IV PROCEDURE:
   A.   Under the level IV procedure, applications are first scheduled for a
public hearing before the planning commission pursuant to section
10-3-14 of this chapter, the planning commission then makes a recommendation to
the city council who also holds a public hearing. The purpose of the hearings
is to gather information on the proposal, and its relationship to any relevant
zoning criteria and to any relevant comprehensive plan policies. (Ord. 667, 9-
24-1984)
   B.   The planning commission shall complete action on the proposal within
fifty five (55) days of acceptance of the application unless a delay is
approved as permitted in subsection
10-3-14B of this chapter. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
   C.   If the planning commission has recommended denial of a proposal, the
city council may review the record of the planning commission's action, and
terminate action on the proposal without further review.
For actions which are not terminated or for actions which receive a
recommendation of approval from the planning commission, the city council shall
conduct a public hearing. Form of notice and persons to receive notice are as
required by section
10-3-15 of this chapter.
At the public hearing, the council shall review the report of the planning
commission and other pertinent information, and interested persons shall be
given the opportunity to present new testimony and information relevant to the
proposal that was not heard before the planning commission and make final
arguments why the matter should or should not be approved, and if approved, the
nature of the provisions to be contained in approving action.
   D.   The city council shall make a finding of fact for each applicable
criteria and comprehensive plan policy, and may uphold or reverse a finding or
recommendation of the planning commission.
The council may approve, deny, or modify a proposal. Changes in the zone map or
zoning ordinance test approved under the level IV procedure shall be made by
ordinance.
   E.   The council shall complete action on a level IV procedure within one
hundred twenty (120) days of acceptance of the application. (Ord. 667, 9-24-
1984)
10-3-11: WRITTEN NOTICE OF DECISION:
Approval or denial of an application made pursuant to this chapter shall be
accompanied by a brief statement which explains the criteria and standards
applicable to the application, and the findings which support the decision
shall be entered in the minutes of the meeting during which the findings are
adopted. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-3-12: APPEAL, NOTICE:
   A.   Authorization To Appeal: A person may appeal a decision of the planning
director or of the site plan review committee to the planning commission. A
person may appeal a decision of the planning commission to the city council.
   B.   Standing To Appeal: A person shall have standing to appeal if the
person:
      1.   Is the applicant.
      2.   Is on the affected party notification list.
      3.   Was not on the affected party notification list, but participated in
the original decision process.
   C.   Review Of Lower Decision: The city council may review a decision of the
planning commission on its own initiative.
The planning commission may review a decision of the planning director on its
own initiative.
Notice for review by initiative shall be the same as required for the original
application.
   D.   Notice And Form Of Appeal: Written notice of the intent to appeal must
be filed with the planning director within fifteen (15) days of the date of the
decision which is being appealed. If notice is not filed within this period,
the decision shall be final.
Appeals shall be filed on forms provided by the planning department. Appeals
shall state the decision or portion thereof which is being appealed, the
provision(s) of this title which was the basis of the decision, and grounds of
appeal which is alleged to invalidate the decision. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-3-13: PROCEDURE FOR ACTING ON AN APPEAL:
The planning commission or city council shall hold a hearing on the appeal
within forty five (45) days from the date the appeal is filed.
An appeal shall be based on, but not limited to, the record of the decision
being appealed.
Upon adoption of findings, the appellate body may affirm, modify, or reverse
the lower decision.
Hearing procedure for appeals shall be as prescribed in section
10-3-14 of this chapter. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-3-14: PUBLIC HEARING PROCEDURE:
   A.   The city council shall adopt by resolution and publish procedures for
public hearings for quasi-judicial, legislative, and appeal hearings. These
procedures shall give opportunity to interested parties to present, oppose, and
rebut testimony and evidence which relates to the published standards and
criteria of this title or other portions of this code. Testimony which is not
related to these standards and criteria cannot be considered by the commission
in its decision. Public hearings shall be conducted in a businesslike fashion.
Disruptive or abusive conduct may be grounds for immediate suspension of the
proceedings.
   B.   The city council or the planning commission may continue a hearing to a
date and time specified if the council or commission feels that additional
factual information is necessary to make a decision. Hearings may also be
continued to serve notice to persons in addition to those originally notified
when the council or commission feels that additional citizen involvement is
warranted. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-3-15: NOTIFICATION OF SURROUNDING PROPERTY OWNERS OR AFFECTED PARTIES:
   A.   Form Of Notice: All individual public notice provided to surrounding
property owners or affected parties required by this chapter to receive such
notice shall at a minimum contain the following:
      1.   Explain the nature of the application and the proposed use or uses
which could be authorized;
      2.   List the applicable criteria from the ordinance and the plan that
apply to the application at issue;
      3.   Set forth the street address or other easily understood geographical
reference to the subject property;
      4.   State the date, time and location of the hearing;
      5.   State that failure of an issue to be raised in a hearing, in person
or by letter, or failure to provide sufficient specificity to afford the
decision maker an opportunity to respond to the issue precludes appeal to the
board based on that issue;
      6.   Include the name of a local government representative to contact and
the telephone number where additional information may be obtained;
      7.   State that a copy of the application, all documents and evidence
relied upon by the applicant and applicable criteria are available for
inspection at no cost and will be provided at reasonable cost;
      8.   State that a copy of the staff report will be available for
inspection at no cost at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing and will be
provided at reasonable cost; and
      9.   Include a general explanation of the requirements for submission of
testimony and the procedure for conduct of hearings. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
Required notice shall be mailed to owners of record, as indicated by the county
assessor records, by first class mail. Failure of a person to receive notice
prescribed by this chapter shall not impair the validity of the hearing or the
decision.
   B.   Persons To Receive Notice Of Level II Applications:
      1.   Notice of level II applications shall be given to all persons owning
property which has a common boundary with the subject parcel, or which would
have a common boundary but for the presence of a public right of way.
      2.   Comments on a level II application must be received in the planning
department within seven (7) days of the mailing date of the notice to be
considered in the decision.
      3.   The director shall issue a decision on a level II proposal within
ten (10) days of acceptance of the application. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
   C.   Persons To Receive Notice Of Level III Applications:
      1.   Notice of level III applications shall be given to all persons
owning property within two hundred feet (200') of the exterior boundary of the
subject parcel. Level III notice shall be mailed at least twenty (20) days
prior to the hearing date.
      2.   Notice of level III applications shall also include one notice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the area (newspaper must be published in
Oregon) at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. (Ord. 764, 5-26-
1992)
   D.   Persons To Receive Notice Of Level IV Applications:
      1.   Notice of level IV applications shall be given to all persons owning
property within two hundred feet (200') of the exterior boundary of the subject
parcel. Notice shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing
date.
      2.   Notice of level IV applications shall also include two (2) notices
in a newspaper of general circulation in the area (newspaper must be published
in Oregon) for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the hearing date, with the
first date of publication to be at least twenty (20) days prior to the hearing
date. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
      3.   Notice of level IV application shall be sent to the department of
land conservation and development as required by Oregon Revised Statutes
197.610.
      4.   When a level IV application is a text amendment, and not specific to
any property, notice as provided in subsection D1 of this section is not
required.
   E.   Additional Notice: Nothing in this section shall be construed as
limiting the provisions of notice to additional persons by whatever means,
consistent with the principle of gathering productive citizen input. (Ord. 667,
9-24-1984)
10-3-16: FEES:
The city council shall adopt by resolution and publish a schedule of fees for
the various permits and administrative procedures prescribed by this title.
(Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
CHAPTER 4
LAND USE ZONES
SECTION:
10-4-1: General Description And Intent Of Use Zones
10-4-2: R-1 Residential
10-4-3: R-2 Residential
10-4-4: R-3 Residential
10-4-5: MSR Main Street Residential
10-4-6: DB Downtown Business
10-4-7: C-1 Retail And Service Commercial
10-4-8: C-2 General Commercial
10-4-9: I-M Industrial-Manufacturing
10-4-10: PL Public Lands
10-4-11: CO Civic Overlay
10-4-12: BP Business Park
10-4-13: R-M Residential Mixed Use
10-4-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION AND INTENT OF USE ZONES:
   A.   R-1 Low Density Residential: The low density residential zone is
intended to provide for larger more secluded homesites. Minimum dwelling
dimensions apply. A maximum of four (4) units per acre is permitted.
   B.   R-2 Medium Density Residential: The medium density residential zone is
intended to provide a greater range of housing types and densities than the R-
1 zone, while maintaining the general character of a single-family residential
neighborhood. Densities up to sixteen (16) units per acre are permitted.
   C.   R-3 High Density Residential: The high density residential zone is
intended to provide the widest range of housing alternatives including
manufactured home parks and multi-family housing. The development options of
this zone provide the most affordable housing to the widest range of residents.
A maximum density of twenty six (26) units per acre is permitted.
   D.   R-M Residential Mixed Use: The residential mixed use zone is intended
to provide a wide range of housing options including townhouse and condominium
developments. The zone allows a limited amount of office and business uses
along arterial and collector streets to transition between residential and
business uses. A maximum density of twenty six (26) units per acre is
permitted. (Ord. 947, 5-12-2008)
   E.   MSR Main Street Residential: The Main Street residential district is
intended to preserve the residential feel of the district while allowing small
scale businesses that are compatible with the existing residential uses.
   F.   DB Downtown Business: The downtown business district is the place for
people to gather and promote commercial activity. Improved pedestrian access
and streetscape through the downtown will improve the district's image.
Elements of design and appropriate mixed use development will enhance this
goal. (Ord. 925, 6-13-2005; amd. Ord. 947, 5-12-2008)
   G.   C-1 Retail And Service Commercial: The retail and service commercial
zone provides for general retail and light service commercial uses such as hair
care salons, restaurants, and supermarkets.
   H.   C-2 General Commercial: The general commercial zone provides for
commercial service such as auto repair and building supply outlets which
involve more outside storage and heavier traffic than C-1 uses.
   I.   I-M Industrial-Manufacturing: The industrial-manufacturing zone
provides for the full range of production, fabrication and processing uses
which form the industrial base of the economy. (Ord. 947, 5-12-2008)
   J.   BP Business Park: The business park zone is established to provide for
economic development opportunities in an orderly and aesthetically pleasing
manner. Development within the business park zone will meet the following
objectives:
      1.   Create an attractive business environment;
      2.   Enhance the appearance at the gateway to the city;
      3.   Provide a mix of land uses that offer a variety of services;
corporate and business offices, light industrial facilities, and supportive
commercial services;
      4.   Promote sound economic development. (Ord. 928, 6-27-2005; amd. Ord.
947, 5-12-2008)
   K.   PL Public Lands: The public lands zone provides for the full range of
structures, services, and land uses provided by public agencies on publicly
owned land. Due to the diversity of land types and uses included in this
designation, the site plan review process is used to determine yard and lot
standards. Public uses are required to meet all parking, vehicle maneuvering,
landscaping, and other development standards of this title. (Ord. 947, 5-12-
2008)
   L.   CO Civic Overlay: The civic overlay district contains special uses to
emphasize the city's desire to concentrate civic facilities in the heart of the
downtown. This chapter lists those uses allowable in the civic overlay
district. The development standards in section
10-4-6, "DB Downtown Business", of this chapter shall apply to all development
in the civic overlay district. (Ord. 925, 6-13-2005; amd. Ord. 947, 5-12-2008)
10-4-2: R-1 RESIDENTIAL:
   A.   Permitted Uses: The following outright uses are permitted in accordance
with level I application procedures:
City governmental structure or land use including, but not limited to, a public
park, playground, recreation building, fire station, library, or museum.
Home occupation.
Manufactured housing on individual lots in compliance with the following
placement standards:
      1.   The manufactured home shall be multisectional and enclose a space of
not less than one thousand four hundred (1,400) square feet.
      2.   Installation of all manufactured homes shall be in accordance with
the most recent Oregon manufactured dwelling standard.
      3.   The manufactured home shall be attached and anchored to a foundation
approved by the Oregon state building codes agency and/or any other state or
federal regulations.
      4.   The manufactured home shall have an approved support system with
skirting enclosing the entire perimeter of the home.
      5.   Skirting and backup framing shall be of weather resistant,
noncombustible or self-extinguishing materials which blend with the exterior
siding of the home, and which are aesthetically compatible with homes in the
surrounding area.
      6.   The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof, except that no
standard shall require a slope of greater than a nominal three feet (3') in
height for each twelve feet (12') in width.
      7.   The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which
in color, material, and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and
roofing material commonly used on residential dwellings within the community or
which is comparable to the predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings
as determined by the planning department.
      8.   The manufactured home shall be certified by the manufacturer to meet
HUD manufactured housing standards.
      9.   An attached or detached garage constructed of like materials shall
be required pursuant to subsection G of this section.
Public utility facilities.
Single-family dwelling.
Structures and uses accessory to residential uses as specified in section
10-5-6 of this title.
All single-family dwellings shall be required to have the main entrance
situated on that side of the structure which is closest to the front yard.
   B.   Conditional Uses: The following conditional uses are permitted in
accordance with level III application procedures:
   Church.
   Golf course, private park, community center.
   Planned unit development.
   Public or private school.
   C.   Minimum Lot Dimensions:
      1.   Single-family dwelling: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
      2.   Minimum street frontage: Fifty feet (50').
      3.   Minimum lot depth: Eighty feet (80').
      4.   Dimensions for uses other than those listed in subsection C1 of this
section are as follows:
         a.   Church: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
         b.   Community center: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
   D.   Minimum Yard Requirements: For residential uses:
      1.   Interior lots:
         a.   Front yard: Twenty two feet (22').
         b.   Side yard: Twelve feet (12') each side.
         c.   Rear yard: Twenty two feet (22').
      2.   Corner lots:
         a.   Front yard: Twenty two feet (22'). "Front yard" is defined as
that side of the property which faces a street and contains the main entrance
to the structure.
         b.   Side yards: Twelve feet (12'). If garage, carport, or driveway is
located on the property's street facing side yard, the minimum setback is
twenty two feet (22'). If the garage, carport, or driveway is not located on
the property's street facing side yard, the minimum setback is twelve feet
(12'). (City planner may modify strict application of this standard based on
actual proposed location of garage or carport in relation to streets.)
         c.   Rear yard: Twenty two feet (22').
      3.   Yards for uses other than those listed above are as follows:
 
                 YARD (FEET)
Use              Front Side Rear
 
Church           22    22   22
Community center 22    22   22
 
   E.   Lot Coverage: Buildings shall occupy a maximum of fifty percent (50%)
of the lot.
   F.   Building Height: No buildings shall exceed twenty eight feet (28').
   G.   Additional Standards: All dwellings constructed or located in the R-
1 zone shall be required to meet the following standards:
      1.   Have a living area of not less than one thousand four hundred
(1,400) square feet for single-story residences, and one thousand eight hundred
(1,800) square feet for multi-story residences.
      2.   Construct an enclosed garage of not less than four hundred (400)
square feet.
      3.   All building elevations visible from the front street facing side of
the home shall provide a combination of doors, porches, balconies and/or
windows. A minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the total front wall area facing
the street shall meet this standard. For corner lots, a minimum of fifteen
percent (15%) of the total wall area of the secondary wall shall meet this
standard. The dwelling shall also utilize at least six (6) of the following
design features to provide visual relief along the front, street facing side of
the home:
         a.   Dormers.
         b.   Gables.
         c.   Recessed entries.
         d.   Covered porch entries.
         e.   Cupolas.
         f.   Pillars or posts.
         g.   Bay or bow windows.
         h.   Eaves (minimum of 6 inch projection).
         i.   A roof pitch of six feet (6') or higher in height for each twelve
feet (12') in width.
         j.   Offsets on building face (minimum 16 inches).
         k.   Decks and railings.
         l.   Decorative bricks, stones, rock, or other distinct pattern in
surface.
         m.   Window shutters or trim (4 inch minimum trim) (must be on all
windows on the street facing side).
         n.   An alternative feature providing visual relief, similar to
subsections G3a through G3m of this section.
Adjustments to these standards may be applied for. Requests for adjustments
must show that the intent of the above standards can be satisfied by
alternative design features. Adjustments shall be processed in accordance with
level III application procedures as described in section
10-3-9 of this title. (Ord. 947, 5-12-2008)
10-4-3: R-2 RESIDENTIAL:
   A.   Permitted Uses: The following outright uses are permitted in accordance
with level I application procedures:
City governmental structure or land use including, but not limited to, a public
park, playground, recreation building, fire station, library, or museum.
Duplex.
   Home occupation.
Manufactured housing on individual lots in compliance with the following
placement standards:
      1.   The manufactured home shall be multisectional and enclose a space of
not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet.
      2.   Installation of all manufactured homes shall be in accordance with
the most recent Oregon manufactured dwelling standard.
      3.   The manufactured home shall be attached and anchored to a foundation
approved by the Oregon state building codes agency and/or any other state or
federal regulations.
      4.   The manufactured home shall have an approved support system with
skirting enclosing the entire perimeter of the home.
      5.   Skirting and backup framing shall be of weather resistant,
noncombustible or self-extinguishing materials which blend with the exterior
siding of the home and which are aesthetically compatible with homes in the
surrounding area.
      6.   The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof, except that no
standard shall require a slope of greater than a nominal three feet (3') in
height for each twelve feet (12') in width.
      7.   The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which
in color, material, and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and
roofing material commonly used on residential dwellings within the community or
which is comparable to the predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings
as determined by the planning department.
      8.   The manufactured home shall be certified by the manufacturer to meet
HUD manufactured housing standards.
      9.   An attached or detached garage or carport constructed of like
materials will be required if such a structure is consistent with the
predominant construction of immediately surrounding dwellings.
Modular home single-family dwelling.
   Public utility facilities.
   Single-family dwelling.
Structures and uses accessory to residential uses as specified in section
10-5-6 of this title.
   B.   Conditional Uses:
      1.   The following conditional uses are permitted in accordance with
level III application procedures:
   Boarding/rooming house.
   Church.
   Golf course, private park, or community center.
   Planned unit development.
Public or private school, childcare facility.
      2.   Density bonus allowing up to eight (8) additional units per acre
(attached or detached) in exchange for providing a minimum of four (4) of the
following nine (9) standards:
         a.   Additional landscaping of one hundred (100) square feet per unit.
         b.   Covered parking.
         c.   Transit facilities provided, such as a bus shelter.
         d.   Plaza.
         e.   Parks/recreational areas.
         f.   Diversity of design of units.
         g.   Limit number of total units allowed to be attached to twelve
(12).
         h.   Connectivity (sidewalks, paths, etc.) which connect with the
existing sidewalk or street system, and which will result in reduced vehicle
use.
         i.   How well natural resources (streams, riparian areas, wetlands)
are protected, integrated into the design of the development, defined as common
area and made accessible.
   C.   Minimum Lot Dimensions:
      1.   Single-family dwelling: Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square
feet.
      2.   Duplex: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
      3.   Minimum frontage for subsections C1 and C2 of this section: Fifty
feet (50').
      4.   Minimum lot depth: Seventy feet (70').
      5.   Dimensions for uses other than subsections C1 and C2 of this section
are as follows:
         a.   Boarding/rooming house: Nine thousand (9,000) square feet.
         b.   Childcare facility: Nine thousand (9,000) square feet.
         c.   Church: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
         d.   Community center: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
         e.   Multi-family dwelling: Two thousand seven hundred (2,700) square
feet per unit.
   D.   Minimum Yard Requirements: For single-family dwelling or duplex:
      1.   Interior lots:
         a.   Front yard: Twenty two feet (22').
         b.   Side yard: Minimum of six feet (6') on any side, with both sides
combining for a minimum of sixteen feet (16').
         c.   Rear yard: Eighteen feet (18').
      2.   Corner lots:
         a.   Front yard: Twenty two feet (22'). "Front yard" is defined as
that side of the property which faces a street and contains the main entrance
to the structure.
         b.   Side yards: Minimum of six feet (6') on interior side, with both
sides combining for a minimum of sixteen feet (16'). If garage, carport or
driveway is located on the property's street facing side yard, the minimum
setback is twenty two feet (22'). If the garage, carport or driveway is not
located on the property's street facing side yard, the minimum setback is ten
feet (10'). (City planner may modify strict application of this standard based
on actual proposed location of garage or carport in relation to streets.)
         c.   Rear yard: Eighteen feet (18').
      3.   Yards for uses other than those listed above are as follows:
 
     YARD (FEET)
Use  Front Side Rear
                            
Boarding/rooming house  22 12 22
Childcare facility      22 12 22
Church                  22 22 22
Community center        22 22 22
Multi-family dwelling   22 12 22
 
   E.   Lot Coverage: Buildings shall occupy a maximum of fifty percent (50%)
of the lot.
   F.   Building Height: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35').
   G.   Additional Standards:
      1.   Single-family dwellings (site built, modular, and manufactured
homes) to be constructed or located in an R-2 zoned lot created after September
13, 1999, shall be required to also construct a carport or garage. Single-
family dwellings constructed on R-2 zoned lots existing as of September 13,
1999, shall only be required to provide two (2) off street parking spaces. All
single-family dwellings shall be required to have the main entrance situated on
that side of the structure which is closest to the front yard. All building
elevations visible from the front street facing side of the home shall provide
a combination of doors, porches, balconies and/or windows. A minimum of thirty
percent (30%) of the total wall area facing the street shall meet this
standard. For corner lots, a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the total wall
area of the secondary wall shall meet this standard. The dwelling shall also
utilize at least six (6) of the following design features to provide visual
relief along the front, street facing side of the home:
         a.   Dormers.
         b.   Gables.
         c.   Recessed entries.
         d.   Covered porch entries.
         e.   Cupolas.
         f.   Pillars or posts.
         g.   Bay or bow windows.
         h.   Eaves (minimum of 6 inch projection).
         i.   A roof pitch of six feet (6') or higher in height for each twelve
feet (12') in width.
         j.   Offsets on building face (minimum 16 inches).
         k.   Decks and railings.
         l.   Decorative bricks, stones, rock, or other distinct pattern in
surface.
         m.   Window shutters or trim (4 inch minimum trim) (must be on all
windows on the street facing side).
         n.   An alternative feature providing visual relief, similar to
subsections G1a through G1m of this section.
Adjustments to these standards may be applied for. Requests for adjustments
must show that the intent of the above standards can be satisfied by
alternative design features. Adjustments shall be processed in accordance with
level III application procedures as described in section
10-3-9 of this title. (Ord. 947, 5-12-2008)
      2.   Subdivisions, planned unit developments and multi-family
developments must be served by continuously improved streets which are built to
city standards. (Ord. 873, 9-13-1999)
10-4-4: R-3 RESIDENTIAL:
   A.   Permitted Uses: The following outright uses are permitted in accordance
with level I application procedures:
City governmental structure or land use including, but not limited to, a public
park, playground, recreation building, fire station, library, or museum.
Duplex.
   Home occupation.
Manufactured housing on individual lots in compliance with the following
placement standards:
      1.   The manufactured home shall be multisectional and enclose a space of
not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet.
      2.   Installation of all manufactured homes shall be in accordance with
the most recent Oregon manufactured dwelling standard.
      3.   The manufactured home shall be attached and anchored to a foundation
approved by the Oregon state building codes agency and/or any other state or
federal regulations.
      4.   The manufactured home shall have an approved support system with
skirting enclosing the entire perimeter of the home.
      5.   Skirting and backup framing shall be of weather resistant,
noncombustible or self-extinguishing materials which blend with the exterior
siding of the home and which are aesthetically compatible with homes in the
surrounding area.
      6.   The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof, except that no
standard shall require a slope of greater than a nominal three feet (3') in
height for each twelve feet (12') in width.
      7.   The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which
in color, material, and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and
roofing material commonly used on residential dwellings within the community or
which is comparable to the predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings
as determined by the planning department.
      8.   The manufactured home shall be certified by the manufacturer to meet
HUD manufactured housing standards.
Modular home single-family dwelling.
Public utility facilities.
Single-family dwelling.
Structures and uses accessory to residential uses as specified in section
10-5-6 of this title.
   B.   Permitted Uses With Site Plan Review: The following outright uses are
permitted in accordance with level I application procedures and site plan
review specified in chapter 8 of this title:
   Church.
   Golf course, private park, or community center.
   Manufactured home subdivision.
Multi-family dwelling.
   C.   Conditional Uses: The following conditional uses are permitted in
accordance with level III application procedures:
   Boarding/rooming house.
   Manufactured home park.
   Nursing home, residential care facility.
   Planned unit development.
   Public or private school, childcare facility.
   Storage units.
   D.   Minimum Lot Dimensions:
      1.   Single-family dwelling: Five thousand (5,000) square feet.
      2.   Duplex: Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet.
      3.   Minimum frontage for subsections D1 and D2 of this section: Fifty
feet (50').
      4.   Minimum lot depth: Seventy feet (70').
      5.   Dimensions for uses other than those listed in subsections D1 and D2
of this section are as follows:
         a.   Boarding/rooming house: Seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
         b.   Childcare facility: Nine thousand (9,000) square feet.
         c.   Church: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
         d.   Community center: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
         e.   Manufactured home park: Three thousand five hundred (3,500)
square feet per manufactured home site.
         f.   Multi-family dwelling: Six thousand (6,000) square feet for the
first unit plus one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet for each
additional dwelling unit.
         g.   Nursing home, residential care facility: Two thousand five
hundred (2,500) square feet per bed or living unit.
   E.   Minimum Yard Requirements: For single-family dwelling or duplex:
      1.   Interior lots:
         a.   Front yard: Twenty two feet (22').
         b.   Side yard: Minimum of six feet (6') on any side with both side
yards combining for a minimum of fourteen feet (14').
         c.   Rear yard: Sixteen feet (16').
      2.   Corner lots:
         a.   Front yard: Twenty two feet (22'). "Front yard" is defined as
that side of the property which faces a street and contains the main entrance
to the structure.
         b.   Side yards: Minimum of six feet (6') on interior side, with both
sides combining for a minimum of sixteen feet (16'). If garage, carport or
driveway is located on the property's street facing side yard, the minimum
setback is twenty two feet (22'). If the garage, carport or driveway is not
located on the property's street facing side yard, the minimum setback is ten
feet (10'). (City planner may modify strict application of this standard based
on actual proposed location of garage or carport in relation to streets.)
         c.   Rear yard: Sixteen feet (16').
      3.   Yards for uses other than those listed above are as follows:
 
     YARD (FEET)
Use  Front Side Rear
Boarding/rooming house     22 12 22
Childcare facility         22 12 22
Church                     22 22 22
Community center           22 22 22
Multi-family dwelling      22 12 22
Nursing home, residential  22 12 22
  care facility
 
   F.   Lot Coverage: Buildings shall occupy a maximum of forty five percent
(45%) of the lot. Total coverage including driveways and parking lots shall not
exceed eighty percent (80%).
   G.   Building Height: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35').
   H.   Additional Standards:
      1.   Single-family dwellings (site built, modular, manufactured homes)
shall be required to provide two (2) off street parking spaces. All single-
family dwellings shall be required to have the main entrance situated on that
side of the structure which is closest to the front yard. All building
elevations visible from the front street facing side of the home shall provide
a combination of doors, porches, balconies and/or windows. A minimum of thirty
percent (30%) of the total wall area facing the street shall meet this
standard. For corner lots, a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the total wall
area of the secondary wall shall meet this standard. The dwelling shall also
utilize at least six (6) of the following design features to provide visual
relief along the front, street facing side of the home:
         a.   Dormers.
         b.   Gables.
         c.   Recessed entries.
         d.   Covered porch entries.
         e.   Cupolas.
         f.   Pillars or posts.
         g.   Bay or bow windows.
         h.   Eaves (minimum of 6 inch projection).
         i.   A roof pitch of six feet (6') or higher in height for each twelve
feet (12') in width.
         j.   Offsets on building face (minimum 16 inches).
         k.   Decks and railings.
         l.   Decorative bricks, stones, rock, or other distinct pattern in the
surface.
         m.   Window shutters or trim (4 inch minimum trim) (must be on all
windows on the street facing side).
         n.   An alternative feature providing visual relief, similar to
subsections H1a through H1m of this section.
Adjustments to these standards may be applied for. Requests for adjustments
must show that the intent of the above standards can be satisfied by
alternative design features. Adjustments shall be processed in accordance with
level III application procedures as described in section
10-3-9 of this title. (Ord. 947, 5-12-2008)
10-4-5: MSR MAIN STREET RESIDENTIAL:
   A.   Permitted Uses: The following outright uses are permitted in accordance
with level I application procedures:
Duplex.
Home occupations.
Single-family residential.
Structures and uses accessory to residential uses specified in section
10-5-6 of this title.
Upper floor residential.
   B.   Permitted Uses With Site Plan Review: The following outright uses are
permitted in accordance with a level I application and site plan review
specified in chapter 8 of this title.
Bed and breakfast.
Mixed use.
Offices (business, professional, public, nonprofit) with the business owner
residing on site.
Private park.
   C.   Conditional Uses: The following conditional uses are permitted in
accordance with level III application procedures:
Any use allowed by subsections 10-4-6A and B of this chapter unless otherwise
prohibited by this chapter, where the proposed use would be carried out in a
structure not originally constructed for residential use.
Boarding/rooming house.
Church.
Offices (business, professional, medical, dental, public, nonprofit) without
the business owner residing on site.
   D.   Prohibited Auto Oriented And Auto Dependent Uses: Auto oriented uses
including drive-through facilities are not permitted in the MSR district (e.g.,
gas stations, vehicle repair/sales/services, drive-through uses). Auto
dependent uses such as gas stations, car washes, and similar uses are also
prohibited.
   E.   Minimum Lot Area Dimensions:
      1.   Single-family residential and duplex: Minimum six thousand (6,000)
square feet for single-family residential and seven thousand five hundred
(7,500) square feet for a duplex.
      2.   Offices, churches, bed and breakfast: No minimum or maximum.
      3.   Boarding/rooming house: Minimum seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
      4.   Mixed use development: Minimum seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
   F.   Minimum Lot Width/Length Dimensions:
      1.   Single-family residential:
         a.   Minimum width: Thirty foot (30') width at front property line.
         b.   Maximum length: Three (3) times the lot width.
      2.   Duplex:
         a.   Minimum width: Sixty foot (60') width at front property line.
         b.   Maximum length: Three (3) times the lot width.
      3.   All other uses:
         a.   Minimum width: Sixty foot (60') width at front property line.
         b.   Maximum length: No maximum length.
   G.   Yard Requirements:
      1.   Front Setbacks For All Uses: A minimum setback of fifteen feet (15')
is required, except that an unenclosed porch may be within eight feet (8'), as
long as it does not encroach into a public utility easement. Garages shall be
recessed behind the front building elevation by a minimum of four feet (4').
      2.   Front Setback; Lot Located Between Existing Single-Family
Residences: If the site is located between two (2) existing single-family
residences, a front yard setback similar to that of the nearest single-family
residence shall be used. "Similar" means the setback is within five feet (5')
of the setback provided by the nearest single-family residence. For example, if
the nearest existing single-family residence has a front yard setback of twenty
feet (20'), then the new building shall have a front yard setback between
fifteen feet (15') and twenty five feet (25'). In no case shall the setback be
less than fifteen feet (15').
      3.   Rear Setbacks For All Uses: A minimum rear yard setback shall be
fifteen feet (15') for street access lots and six feet (6') for alley access
lots (all structures).
      4.   Side Yard Setbacks For All Uses: The minimum side yard setback shall
be five feet (5') on interior side yards and ten feet (10') on corner side
yards.
      5.   Setback Exceptions: The following architectural features are allowed
to encroach into the setback yards: eaves, chimneys, bay windows, overhangs,
and similar architectural features may encroach into the setbacks by no more
than three feet (3'). Porches, decks, and similar structures not exceeding
thirty six inches (36") in height may encroach into setbacks by no more than
six feet (6'). Walls and fences may be placed on property lines and shall
comply with vision clearance standards.
      6.   Garages And Carports: Garages and carports should be accessed from
alleys if practicable. If accessed from the front, garages and carports should
be recessed behind the front building elevation by four feet (4').
   H.   Lot Coverage: Buildings shall occupy a maximum of fifty percent (50%)
of the lot.
   I.   Building Height Requirements:
      1.   Maximum Height: Building heights shall be a maximum thirty five feet
(35').
      2.   Building Height Transition: To provide compatible building scale and
privacy between developments, taller buildings shall "step down" to create a
building height transition to adjacent single-story building(s).
         a.   This applies to new and vertically expanded buildings within
twenty feet (20') (as measured horizontally) of an existing single-story
building with a height of twenty feet (20') or less.
         b.   The building height transition standards are met when the height
of the taller building does not exceed one foot (1') of height for every one
foot (1') separating the two (2) buildings.
   J.   Building Orientation Standards: The following standards are intended to
orient buildings close to streets, to promote human scale development, slow
traffic down, and encourage walking in the MSR district. Placing residences and
other buildings close to the street also encourages security and safety by
having more "eyes on the street".
      1.   All buildings shall be oriented to the street. The building
orientation standard is met when all of the following criteria are met:
         a.   Compliance with the setback standards in subsection G of this
section.
         b.   All buildings shall have their primary entrance(s) oriented to
the street.
         c.   A direct walkway shall be provided between the building entrance
and street right of way.
   K.   Architectural Standards: These standards are intended to provide
detailed, human scale design, while affording flexibility to a variety of
building styles. Note: For consistency, the standards should apply to all
buildings.
      1.   Building Form: All buildings shall incorporate design features to
preclude expanses of uninterrupted building surfaces. Buildings are required to
have offsets or recess features at least every thirty feet (30') to prohibit
expanses of blank building surfaces.
      2.   Eyes On The Street: All building elevations visible from a street
right of way shall provide doors, porches, balconies, and/or windows. A minimum
of twenty five percent (25%) of front elevations and a minimum of twenty five
percent (25%) of side and rear building elevations, that are visible from the
street, shall meet this standard. As part of the compliance with this standard,
a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the wall area of each elevation visible
from the street shall contain windows or glass doors.
      3.   Detailed Design: All buildings shall provide detailed design along
all elevations visible from the street. Detailed designs shall be provided by
using at least six (6) of the following architectural features on all
elevations visible from the street, as appropriate for the proposed building
type and style (may vary features on rear/side/front elevations):
         a.   Dormers.
         b.   Gables.
         c.   Recessed entries.
         d.   Covered porch entries.
         e.   Cupolas or towers.
         f.   Pillars or posts.
         g.   Eaves (minimum 6 inch projection).
         h.   Offsets on building face or roof (minimum 16 inches).
         i.   Window trim (minimum 4 inches wide).
         j.   Bay windows.
         k.   Balconies.
         l.   Decorative patterns on exterior finish (e.g., scales/shingles,
wainscoting, ornamentation, or similar features).
         m.   Decorative cornices and rooflines (e.g., for flat roofs).
         n.   An alternative feature providing visual relief, similar to
subsections K3a through K3m of this section.
   L.   Access And Circulation: The intent of this section is to manage vehicle
access to the development through a connected street system, while preserving
the flow of traffic in terms of safety, roadway capacity, and efficiency. This
section shall apply to all properties that abut a public street.
      1.   Access Options: When vehicle access is required for the development,
access shall be provided by one of the following methods (a minimum 10 feet per
lane is required). These methods are "options" to the developer, unless one
method is specifically required under special standards for certain uses.
         a.   Option 1: Access from an existing or proposed alley or midblock
lane.
         b.   Option 2: Access from a private street or driveway connecting to
an adjoining property that has direct access to a public street ("shared
driveway"). A shared public access easement covering the driveway shall be
recorded in this case to assure access to the closest public street for all
users of the street/driveway.
         c.   Option 3: Access from South Main if an access permit is approved
by Oregon department of transportation.
         d.   Option 4: Access from a public right of way other than South or
North Main Street.
      2.   Special Provisions: Direct street access may be restricted for some
land uses. For example, access consolidation, shared access, and/or access
separation greater than is required in the transportation system plan may be
required by the city or Oregon department of transportation for the purpose of
protecting the function, safety, and operation of the street for all users.
      3.   Number Of Access Points: One street access per lot is allowed,
except that two (2) access points may be allowed for corner lots.
      4.   Driveway Openings: Driveway openings, or curb cuts, shall be the
minimum width necessary to provide the required number of vehicle travel lanes
(10 feet for each travel lane). The following standards are required to provide
adequate site access, minimize surface water runoff, and avoid conflicts
between vehicles and pedestrians:
         a.   Single-family and duplex uses shall have a minimum driveway width
of ten feet (10') and a maximum width of twenty four feet (24').
         b.   Access widths of all other uses shall be based on ten feet (10')
of width for every travel lane.
         c.   Driveway aprons (when required) shall be constructed of concrete
and installed between the right of way and the private drive. Driveway aprons
shall conform to ADA standards for sidewalks and pathways, which require a
continuous travel lane that is a minimum of three feet (3') in width, with a
cross slope not exceeding two percent (2%).
      5.   Construction: Driveways, parking areas, and turnarounds may be paved
with asphalt, concrete, or comparable surface, or a durable nonpaving material
may be used to reduce surface water runoff and protect water quality. When
paved surfaces are used, all driveways, parking areas, and turnarounds shall
have on site collection or infiltration of surface waters to eliminate sheet
flow of such waters onto public rights of way and abutting property.
   M.   Site Planning And General Building Design Guidelines: Original exterior
materials and details (including doors and windows) are encouraged to be
preserved.
   N.   Landscaping And Screening: This section applies to all development. All
developments containing significant vegetation as defined below shall comply
with the standards of this section. The use of mature, native vegetation within
the developments is a preferred alternative to removal of vegetation and
replanting.
      1.   Significant Vegetation: Individual trees with a trunk diameter ten
inches (10") or greater, as measured four feet (4') above the ground (dbh), and
all plants within the drip line of such trees and shrubs shall be protected.
         a.   Protection Standards: Significant trees, as identified in
subsection N1 of this section, shall be retained whenever practicable.
Preservation may become impracticable when it would prevent reasonable
development of public streets, utilities, or land use permitted by the
applicable land use district.
         b.   Construction: All areas of significant vegetation shall be
protected prior to, during, and after construction.
         c.   Exemptions: Vegetation that is dead or diseased or poses a hazard
to personal safety, property, or health may be removed. The applicant shall
provide a report from a certified arborist or other qualified professional.
      2.   Landscape Area Standards: Twenty percent (20%) of the site area
shall be landscaped.
      3.   Landscape Materials:
         a.   A combination of trees, shrubs, and ground covers shall be used
for all planted areas, the selection of which shall be based on local climate,
exposure, water availability, and drainage conditions. Nonnative invasive
plants are prohibited.
         b.   Hardscape features (i.e., patios, decks, plazas, etc.) may cover
up to ten percent (10%) of the required landscape area.
         c.   Trees shall be a minimum one and one-half inch (11/2") caliper at
the time of planting.
         d.   Landscaping shall define pedestrian pathways and open space.
         e.   A combination of plants shall be used for year long color and
interest.
         f.   Landscaping shall be used to screen outdoor storage and
mechanical equipment areas.
      4.   Buffering And Screening:
         a.   Where a parking or maneuvering area is adjacent and parallel to a
street, a decorative wall (masonry or similar quality material), arcade,
trellis, evergreen hedge, or similar screen shall be established parallel to
the street. The required wall shall provide breaks, as necessary, to allow for
access to the site and sidewalk by pedestrians via pathways. Evergreen hedges
used to comply with this standard shall be a minimum of twenty four (24) and a
maximum of thirty six inches (36") in height at maturity, and shall be of such
species, number, and spacing to provide the required screening one year after
planting.
      5.   Street Trees: Street trees shall be planted for all development.
         a.   Trees shall be selected based on growth characteristics and site
conditions, including available space, overhead clearance, soil conditions,
exposure, and desired color and appearance.
         b.   All trees shall be a minimum one and one-half inch (11/2")
caliper at the time of planting based on the American Association of Nurserymen
Standards.
         c.   Street trees shall be placed in planting strips and in sidewalk
tree wells on streets without planting strips.
         d.   Street tree spacing shall be based on the type of tree(s)
selected. In general, trees shall be spaced approximately thirty feet (30') on
center and no more than thirty feet (30') apart, except where planting a tree
would conflict with existing trees, retaining walls, utilities, and similar
physical barriers.
   O.   Vehicle And Bicycle Parking: The purpose of this section is to provide
basic and flexible standards for development of vehicle and bicycle parking.
This section applies to all development. Parking shall be provided in
accordance with the standards in chapter 6 of this title, and the following
additional standards:
      1.   Location Of Parking: Parking shall be located as follows:
         a.   No parking shall be located between the building and public
streets, not including alleys.
         b.   No parking shall be located closer to a public street than a
primary building on the property.
         c.   These standards may be modified through a conditional use review.
In such cases, the planning commission shall consider the buffering and
screening provisions of this chapter, and may require buffering, screening, low
walls, landscaping, or other measures to reduce the visual impact of parking
areas.
      2.   Maximum Parking Standard: The maximum parking standard shall be one
hundred twenty percent (120%) of the minimum. This standard is intended to
ensure that parking areas that are out of scale with the zone district are not
permitted outright.
      3.   Shared Parking: Required parking facilities for two (2) or more
uses, structures, or parcels of land may be satisfied by the same parking
facilities used jointly, to the extent that the owners or operators show that
the need for parking facilities does not materially overlap (e.g., uses
primarily of a daytime vs. nighttime nature), and provided that the right of
joint use is evidenced by a deed, lease, contract, or similar written
instrument establishing the joint use.
      4.   Mixed Use: If more than one type of land use occupies a single
structure or parcel of land, the total requirements for off street automobile
parking shall be the sum of the requirements for all uses, unless it can be
shown that the peak parking demands are actually less (i.e., the uses operate
on different days or at different times of day). In that case, the total
requirements shall be reduced accordingly.
   P.   Special Standards For Certain Uses: Standards are provided for the
following land uses to control the scale and compatibility of those uses in the
MSR district. These are in addition to those listed in chapter 8 of this title.
If any conflicts arise between this section and chapter 8 of this title, the
more restrictive standard shall apply unless adjusted by the planning
commission or city council.
      1.   Accessory Dwellings (Attached, Separate Cottage, Or Above Detached
Garage): The accessory dwelling shall comply with the following:
         a.   Code Compliance: Oregon structural specialty code.
         b.   Owner Occupied: The primary residence or accessory dwelling shall
be owner occupied. Alternatively, the owner may appoint a family member as a
resident caretaker of the principal house and manager of the accessory
dwelling.
         c.   One Unit: The maximum of one accessory dwelling unit is allowed
per lot.
         d.   Floor Area: The maximum floor area of the accessory dwelling
shall not exceed six hundred (600) square feet.
         e.   Building Height: The building height of detached accessory
dwellings that are not above a garage or primary structure shall not exceed
twenty five feet (25').
         f.   Buffering: A minimum six foot (6') hedge or fence may be required
to buffer a detached accessory dwelling from dwellings on adjacent lots, when
buffering is necessary for the privacy and enjoyment of yard areas by either
the occupants or adjacent residents.
         g.   Parking: A minimum of one parking space shall be provided for
each accessory dwelling.
         h.   Additional Standards: The above standards are in addition to the
minimum lot size required for accessory dwellings.
      2.   Accessory Uses And Structures: Accessory uses and structures shall
comply with the following:
         a.   Primary Use Required: An accessory structure shall not be allowed
without another permitted use.
         b.   Restrictions: A structure shall not be placed over an easement
that prohibits such placement. No structure shall encroach onto a public right
of way.
         c.   Floor Area: The maximum floor area of the accessory structure
shall not exceed six hundred feet (600').
         d.   Building Height: The building height of detached accessory
dwellings shall not exceed twenty five feet (25').
         e.   Buffering: A minimum six foot (6') hedge or fence shall be
required to buffer an accessory structure from dwellings on adjacent lots,
unless a similar screen is provided or the distance to adjacent dwellings is
greater than one hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 925, 6-13-2005)
10-4-6: DB DOWNTOWN BUSINESS:
   A.   Permitted Uses: The following outright uses are permitted in accordance
with level I application procedures:
Bed and breakfast inns.
Upkeep, repair, replacement of existing residential structures and/or uses
accessory to residential uses provided that such activity does not increase the
density of dwelling units on the property.
   B.   Site Plan Review: The following outright uses are permitted in
accordance with a level I application and site plan review specified in chapter
8 of this title.
Accessory dwellings.
Churches and places of worship.
Clubs, lodges, and similar uses.
Entertainment (e.g., theaters, clubs, amusement uses).
Home occupations.
Hotels/motels.
Light manufacture (e.g., small scale crafts, electronic equipment, bakery,
furniture, similar goods when in conjunction with retail).
Medical and dental offices, clinics and laboratories.
Mixed use development (any combination of permitted and/or conditional uses).
Personal and professional services (e.g., childcare center, catering/food
services, restaurants, laundromats and dry cleaners, barbershops and salons,
banks and financial institutions, and similar uses).
Private utilities.
Public parking lots and garages.
Repair services (must be enclosed within building).
Residential on upper floors.
Retail trade and services (except auto oriented uses).
School (public and private).
Single-family attached townhomes, duplexes, and triplexes, and multi-family in
conjunction with mixed use development on the same parcel.
   C.   Conditional Uses: The following conditional uses are permitted in
accordance with level III application procedures:
Government offices and facilities (administration, utilities, and similar
uses). These uses are allowed conditionally if a finding can be made that it is
not feasible to locate in the civic overlay district.
Libraries, museums, community centers, and similar uses. These uses are allowed
conditionally if a finding can be made that it is not feasible to locate in the
civic overlay district.
Telecommunication equipment, including wireless.
   D.   Prohibited Auto Oriented And Auto Dependent Uses: Auto oriented uses
including drive-through facilities are not permitted in the DB district (e.g.,
gas stations, vehicle repair/sales/service, drive-through uses). Auto dependent
uses such as gas stations, car washes, and similar uses are also prohibited.
Drive-through facilities for banks are not subject to this prohibition; they
are permitted. Drive-through facilities for banks shall be located to the side
or rear of the building and accessed from side streets.
   E.   Minimum Lot Dimensions: No minimum lot dimensions are required. Lot
dimensions may be established during site plan review.
   F.   Minimum Yard Requirements: The following yard requirements are the base
standards and may be modified during site plan review.
      1.   Front Yard Setback: There is no minimum front yard setback
requirement.
      2.   Rear Yard Setback: The minimum rear yard setback for all structures
shall be zero feet (0') for street access lots and six feet (6') for alley
access lots.
      3.   Side Yard Setbacks: There is no minimum side yard setback required.
      4.   Setback Exceptions: Eaves, chimneys, bay windows, overhangs,
cornices, awnings, canopies, porches, decks, pergolas, and similar
architectural features may encroach into setbacks by no more than six feet
(6'), subject to compliance with applicable standards of the uniform building
code and uniform fire code.
   G.   Lot Coverage: No lot coverage dimensions are required except compliance
with other sections of this title, including site plan review, may preclude one
hundred percent (100%) coverage.
   H.   Height Requirements: Building shall be no more than forty five feet
(45') in height.
   I.   Building Orientation Standards: The following standards are intended to
orient buildings close to streets to promote human scale development, slow
traffic down, and encourage walking in the DB district. Placing buildings close
to the street also encourages security and safety by having more "eyes on the
street".
All buildings in the DB district shall be oriented to the street. The building
orientation standard is met when all of the following criteria are met:
      1.   Compliance with the setback standards in subsection F of this
section.
      2.   All buildings shall have their primary entrance(s) oriented to the
street.
      3.   A direct walkway not exceeding fifteen feet (15') shall be provided
between the building entrance and street right of way.
      4.   Off street parking, drives, and other vehicle areas shall not be
placed between buildings and streets.
   J.   Architectural Guidelines And Standards: These standards apply to
townhomes, duplex and triplex developments, multi-family housing, public and
institutional buildings, commercial, and mixed use buildings. They are intended
to provide detailed, human scale design.
      1.   Detailed Storefront Design: All buildings shall contribute to the
storefront character and visual relatedness of Main Street buildings.
         a.   Corner building entrances on corner lots are encouraged.
         b.   Regularly spaced and similar shaped windows are encouraged,
consistent with the historic character.
         c.   Large display windows on ground floors shall be provided
(nonresidential uses only).
         d.   Decorative cornices at the top of buildings (flat roof), or eaves
with a pitched roof, are required.
      2.   Design Of Large Scale Buildings And Developments: The standards
below shall apply to "large scale buildings and development" as defined in
subsections J2a and J2b of this section:
         a.   Buildings with greater than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet
of enclosed ground floor space. Multi-tenant buildings shall be counted as the
sum of all tenant spaces within the same building shell; and
         b.   Multiple-building developments with a combined ground floor space
(enclosed) greater than forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
         c.   All large scale buildings and development, as defined in
subsections J2a and J2b of this section, shall provide human scale design by
conforming to all of the following criteria:
            (1)   Incorporate changes in building direction (articulation), and
divide large masses into varying heights and sizes. Such changes may include
building offsets; projections; changes in elevation or horizontal direction;
sheltering roofs; terraces; a distinct pattern of divisions in surface
materials; and use of windows, screening trees; and small scale lighting.
            (2)   Every building elevation adjacent to a street with a
horizontal dimension of fifty feet (50'), as measured from end wall to end
wall, shall have a building entrance, except that building elevations that are
unable to provide an entrance due to the internal function of the building
space (i.e., mechanical equipment, area where the public or employees are not
received, etc.) may not be required to meet this standard. Pathways shall
connect all entrances to the street right of way.
   K.   Pedestrian And Transit Amenities: This section is intended to
complement the building orientation standards and street standards by providing
comfortable and inviting pedestrian spaces within the downtown. Pedestrian
amenities serve as informal gathering places for socializing, resting, and
enjoyment of the downtown, and contribute to a walkable district. This section
applies to three (3) or more attached townhomes on their own lots, duplexes and
triplexes, multi-family housing, public and institutional buildings,
commercial, and mixed use buildings.
      1.   Guidelines: Each development shall provide one or more of the
following:
         a.   A plaza, courtyard, street furniture, square or extra wide
sidewalk next to the building entrance.
         b.   Sitting space (i.e., dining area, benches or ledges between the
building entrance, and sidewalk [a minimum of 16 inches in height and 30 inches
in width]).
         c.   Building canopy, awning, pergola, or similar weather protection
(minimum projection of 4 feet over a sidewalk or other pedestrian space).
         d.   Public art which incorporates seating (e.g., fountain, sculpture,
etc.).
   L.   Special Standards For Certain Uses: This section contains standards to
control the scale and compatibility of those uses within the DB district. These
are in addition to those listed in chapter 8 of this title. If any conflicts
arise between this section and chapter 8 of this title, the more restrictive
standard shall apply unless adjusted by the planning commission or city
council.
      1.   Residential Uses:
         a.   Permitted When: Residential uses shall be permitted only when
part of a mixed use development.
         b.   Limitation On Street Level Housing: No more than fifty percent
(50%) of a single street frontage may be occupied by residential uses. This
standard is intended to reserve storefront space for commercial uses and public
uses; it does not limit residential uses above the street level on upper
stories.
         c.   Density: There is no minimum or maximum density standard.
         d.   Parking, Garages, And Driveways: Parking shall be oriented to
alleys, placed in aboveground floors, or located to the side or behind
buildings.
         e.   Creation Of Alleys: When a subdivision is proposed, a public or
private alley shall be created for the purpose of vehicle access. Alleys are
not required when existing development patterns or topography make construction
of an alley impracticable.
         f.   Common Areas: All common areas (e.g., walkways, drives,
courtyards, private alleys, parking courts, etc.) and building exteriors shall
be maintained by a homeowners' association or other legal entity. Copies of any
applicable covenants, restrictions, and conditions shall be recorded and
provided to the city prior to building permit approval.
   M.   Accessory Uses And Structures: Accessory uses and structures are of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure
on the same lot. Typical accessory uses in a downtown include small workshops,
greenhouses, studios, storage sheds, and similar structures. Accessory
structures shall comply with the following:
      1.   Primary Use Required: An accessory structure shall not be allowed
before or without a primary use.
      2.   Setback Standards: Accessory structures shall comply with required
setback standards.
      3.   Design Guidelines: Accessory structures shall comply with the design
guidelines as provided in this chapter.
      4.   Restrictions: A structure shall not be placed over an easement that
prohibits such placement and shall not encroach into the public right of way.
   N.   Access And Circulation: The intent of this section is to manage vehicle
access to the development through a connected street system, while preserving
the flow of traffic in terms of safety, roadway capacity, and efficiency. This
section shall apply to all properties that abut a public street.
      1.   Access Options: When vehicle access is required for development,
access shall be provided by one of the following methods (a minimum 10 feet per
lane is required). These methods are "options" to the developer, unless one
method is specifically required under special standards for certain uses.
         a.   Option 1: Access from an existing or proposed alley or midblock
lane.
         b.   Option 2: Access from a private street or driveway connecting to
an adjoining property that has direct access to a public street ("shared
driveway"). A shared public access easement covering the driveway shall be
recorded in this case to assure access to the closest public street for all
users of the street/driveway.
         c.   Option 3: Access from South Main if an access permit is approved
by Oregon department of transportation.
         d.   Option 4: Access from a public right of way other than South or
North Main Street.
      2.   Special Provisions: Direct street access may be restricted for some
land uses. For example, access consolidation, shared access, and/or access
separation greater than is required in the transportation system plan may be
required by the city or Oregon department of transportation for the purpose of
protecting the function, safety and operation of the street for all users.
      3.   Number Of Access Points: One street access per lot is allowed,
except that two (2) access points may be allowed for corner lots.
      4.   Access Spacing: Access spacing requirements shall follow the
recommendations outlined in the most current transportation system plan.
      5.   Driveway Openings: Driveway openings, or curb cuts, shall be the
minimum width necessary to provide the required number of vehicle travel lanes
(10 feet for each travel lane). The following standards are required to provide
adequate site access, minimize surface water runoff, and avoid conflicts
between vehicles and pedestrians:
         a.   Single-family and duplex uses shall have a minimum driveway width
of ten feet (10') and a maximum width of twenty four feet (24').
         b.   Multiple-family uses with between four (4) and seven (7) dwelling
uses shall have a minimum driveway width of twenty feet (20') and a maximum
width of twenty four feet (24').
         c.   Multiple-family uses with eight (8) or more dwelling units and
off street parking areas with sixteen (16) or more spaces shall have a minimum
driveway width of twenty four feet (24') and a maximum width of thirty feet
(30').
         d.   Access widths of all other uses shall be based on ten feet (10')
of width for every travel lane.
         e.   Driveway aprons (when required) shall be constructed of concrete
and installed between the right of way and the private drive. Driveway aprons
shall conform to ADA standards for sidewalks and pathways, which require a
continuous travel lane that is a minimum of three feet (3') in width, with a
cross slope not exceeding two percent (2%).
      6.   Construction Driveways, Parking Areas, And Turnarounds: Construction
driveways, parking areas, and turnarounds may be paved with asphalt, concrete,
or comparable surface, or a durable nonpaving material may be used to reduce
surface water runoff and protect water quality. When paved surfaces are used,
all driveways, parking areas, and turnarounds shall have on site collection or
infiltration of surface waters to eliminate sheet flow of such waters onto
public rights of way and abutting property.
   O.   Site Planning And General Building Design Standards: So far as
practicable, all original exterior materials and details (including doors and
windows) should be preserved.
   P.   Landscaping And Screening: This section applies to all development. All
developments containing significant vegetation as defined below shall comply
with the standards of this section. The use of mature, native vegetation within
developments is a preferred alternative to removal of vegetation and
replanting.
      1.   Significant Vegetation: Individual trees with a trunk diameter ten
inches (10") or greater, as measured four feet (4') above the ground (dbh), and
all plants within the drip line of such trees and shrubs shall be protected.
         a.   Protection Standards: Significant trees, as identified in
subsection P1 of this section, shall be retained whenever practicable.
Preservation may become impracticable when it would prevent reasonable
development of public streets, utilities, or land use permitted by the
applicable land use district.
         b.   Construction: All areas of significant vegetation shall be
protected prior to, during, and after construction.
         c.   Exemptions: Vegetation that is dead or diseased or poses a hazard
to personal safety, property, or health may be removed. The applicant shall
provide a report from a certified arborist or other qualified professional.
      2.   Landscape Area Standards: There is no minimum landscaping
requirement. Landscaping shall be addressed in the site plan review process.
      3.   Landscape Materials:
         a.   A combination of trees, shrubs, and ground covers shall be used
for all planted areas, the selection of which shall be based on local climate,
exposure, water availability, and drainage conditions. Nonnative invasive
plants are prohibited.
         b.   Hardscape features (i.e., patios, decks, plazas, etc.) may cover
up to ten percent (10%) of the required landscape area.
         c.   Trees shall be a minimum one and one-half inch (11/2") caliper at
the time of planting.
         d.   Landscaping shall define pedestrian pathways and open space.
         e.   A combination of plants shall be used for year long color and
interest.
         f.   Landscaping shall be used to screen outdoor storage and
mechanical equipment areas.
      4.   Buffering And Screening:
         a.   Where a parking or maneuvering area is adjacent and parallel to a
street, a decorative wall (masonry or similar quality material), arcade,
trellis, evergreen hedge, or similar screen shall be established parallel to
the street. The required wall shall provide breaks, as necessary, to allow for
access to the site and sidewalk by pedestrians via pathways. Evergreen hedges
used to comply with this standard shall be a minimum of twenty four inches
(24") and a maximum of thirty six inches (36") in height at maturity, and shall
be of such species, number, and spacing to provide the required screening one
year after planting.
      5.   Street Trees: Street trees shall be planted for all development.
         a.   Trees shall be selected based on growth characteristics and site
conditions, including available space, overhead clearance, soil conditions,
exposure, and desired color and appearance.
         b.   All trees shall be a minimum one and one-half inch (11/2")
caliper at the time of planting based on the American Association of Nurserymen
Standards.
         c.   Street trees shall be placed in planting strips and in sidewalk
tree wells on streets without planting strips.
         d.   Street tree spacing shall be based on the type of tree(s)
selected. In general, trees shall be spaced no more than thirty feet (30')
apart, except where planting a tree would conflict with existing trees,
retaining walls, utilities, and similar physical barriers.
   Q.   Vehicle And Bicycle Parking: The purpose of this section is to provide
basic and flexible standards for development of vehicle and bicycle parking.
This section applies to all development. Parking shall be provided in
accordance with the standards in chapter 6 of this title and the following
additional standards:
      1.   Location Of Parking: Parking shall be located as follows:
         a.   No parking shall be located between the building and public
streets, not including alleys.
         b.   No parking shall be located closer to a public street than the
primary building on the property.
         c.   These standards may be modified through a conditional use review.
In such cases, the planning commission shall consider the buffering and
screening provisions of this chapter, and may require buffering, screening, low
walls, landscaping, or other measures to reduce the visual impact of parking
areas.
      2.   Maximum Parking: The maximum parking standard shall be one hundred
twenty percent (120%) of the minimum. This standard is intended to ensure that
parking areas that are out of scale with the zone district are not permitted
outright.
      3.   Shared Parking: Required parking facilities for two (2) or more
uses, structures, or parcels of land may be satisfied by the same parking
facilities used jointly, to the extent that the owners or operators show that
the need for parking facilities does not materially overlap (e.g., uses
primarily of a daytime vs. nighttime nature), and provided that the right of
joint use is evidenced by a deed, lease, contract, or similar written
instrument establishing the joint use.
      4.   Mixed Use: If more than one type of land use occupies a single
structure or parcel of land, the total requirements for off street automobile
parking shall be the sum of the requirements for all uses, unless it can be
shown that the peak parking demands are actually less (i.e., the uses operate
on different days or at different times of day). In that case, the total
requirements shall be reduced accordingly. (Ord. 925, 6-13-2005)
10-4-7: C-1 RETAIL AND SERVICE COMMERCIAL:
   A.   Permitted Uses: The following outright uses are permitted in accordance
with level I application procedures:
   Public utility facilities.
Structures and uses accessory to residential uses as specified in section
10-5-6 of this title on lots with existing residential structures.
Upkeep, repair, replacement of existing commercial uses which are C-2 general
commercial type uses, provided that such activity does not increase the area or
intensity of use. Expansion of C-2 type uses in the C-1 zone is provided for in
section
10-11-5 of this title.
Upkeep, repair, replacement of existing residential structures provided that
such activity does not increase the density of dwelling units on the property.
   B.   Permitted Uses With Site Plan Approval: The following outright uses are
permitted in accordance with level I application procedures and site plan
review specified in chapter 8 of this title:
Business, government or professional office, public or private school.
Church.
Commercial amusement establishment such as a bowling alley or lounge, when
wholly enclosed within a structure.
Dwelling units, subject to conditions that:
      1.   The dwelling is located in commercial districts of Milton-Freewater
and occupies space in a structure housing a permitted business;
      2.   The units are located either in the upper story or rear of the
structure that is designed and used for a permitted commercial business;
      3.   No more than one apartment unit shall be constructed within
buildings one story in height. First story apartment units existing as of the
date of March 9, 1998, shall be limited to owner/operator occupancy only;
      4.   The primary access shall be via a collector or arterial street that
is improved to city standards prior to occupancy of any unit, unless approved
by the planning department;
      5.   Public facilities and services are available to the site and are
deemed adequate by the city to meet the requirements of this use. Any extension
or over sizing of sewer/water and/or stormwater to serve the development shall
be totally at the expense of the developer and consistent with applicable city
policies and ordinances;
      6.   Off street parking shall be reviewed by the planning department on a
case by case basis.
Financial institution.
Personal and business service such as barbershop, tailoring shop, printing
shop, funeral home, laundry or dry cleaning establishment.
Retail trade establishment such as food store, drugstore, hardware store,
furniture sales, or repair.
Service commercial establishment such as motel or restaurant with inside
seating only. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984; amd. Ord. 764, 5-26-1992; Ord. 788, 2-14-
1994; Ord. 850, 3-9-1998; Ord. 925, 6-13-2005)
   C.   Conditional Uses: The following conditional uses are permitted in
accordance with level III application procedures:
   Automobile fuel service station.
   Enclosed storage.
General automobile repair and maintenance, but not to include bodywork,
painting, machining, or storage of vehicles for parts.
Restaurant with service to persons other than those seated inside the
structure.
A commercial use not listed above may be reviewed via the conditional use
process for appropriateness in the zone; in all instances, review will include
consideration of subsections C1 and C2 of this section.
In permitting a new conditional use or the alteration or extension of an
existing conditional use, the planning commission shall use the following
considerations in review of applications:
      1.   Conformance with the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan
and the standards and policies of the zone.
      2.   Compatibility of the conditional use with the surrounding area or
neighborhood in terms of lot size, building height, or bulk, traffic
circulation, parking, provision of signs, buffering, screening, landscaping,
open space, control of smoke glare, noise or hours of operation. (Ord. 667, 9-
24-1984; amd. Ord. 764, 5-26-1992; Ord. 788, 2-14-1994; Ord. 925, 6-13-2005)
   D.   Minimum Lot Dimensions:
      1.   When dividing land to be allocated to existing residential
structures, the minimum lot shall be:
         a.   Single-family dwelling: Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
         b.   Duplex: Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet.
         c.   Boarding/rooming house: Nine thousand (9,000) square feet.
      2.   When dividing land to be allocated to existing commercial
structures, or for development of a new commercial use, the minimum lot shall
be determined by:
         a.   Submittal of a site plan as specified in chapter 8 of this title,
which proposes use for the property.
         b.   Parking requirements, access standards and other applicable
provisions of this title shall be utilized to determine the size of parcel
necessary to accommodate the proposed use.
         c.   Land in the C-1 zone shall not be available for the land
partition or subdivision process without an approved site plan as specified in
subsections D2a and D2b of this section. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984; amd. Ord. 925,
6-13-2005)
   E.   Minimum Yard Requirements: For existing single-family, duplex, or
boarding/rooming house which is being divided from a larger parcel.
      1.   Interior lots:
         a.   Front yard: Twenty two feet (22'). (Ord. 745, 1-22-1990; amd.
Ord. 925, 6-13-2005)
         b.   Side yard: Minimum of six feet (6') on any side, with both side
yards combining for a minimum of fourteen feet (14').
         c.   Rear yard: Sixteen feet (16'). (Ord. 873, 9-13-1999; amd. Ord.
925, 6-13-2005)
      2.   Corner lots:
         a.   Front yard: Twenty two feet (22'). "Front yard" is defined as
that side of the property which faces a street and contains the main entrance
to the structure. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992; amd. Ord. 925, 6-13-2005)
         b.   Side yards: Minimum of six feet (6') on interior side, with both
sides combining for a minimum of fourteen feet (14'). If garage, carport, or
driveway is located on the property's street facing side yard, the minimum
setback is twenty two feet (22'). If the garage, carport, or driveway is not
located on the property's street facing side yard, the minimum setback is ten
feet (10'). (Planning director may modify strict application of this standard
based on actual proposed location of garage or carport in relation to streets.)
         c.   Rear yard: Sixteen feet (16'). (Ord. 873, 9-13-1999; amd. Ord.
925, 6-13-2005)
      3.   Setbacks for commercial uses shall be determined by the site plan
review process specified in subsection D2 of this section. (Ord. 745, 1-22-
1990; amd. Ord. 925, 6-13-2005)
   F.   Lot Coverage: Residential structures shall occupy a maximum of fifty
percent (50%) of their lots, with total coverage including driveways not to
exceed seventy five percent (75%). Coverage for commercial structures shall be
determined by the site plan review process specified in subsection D2 of this
section.
   G.   Building Height: Buildings in a C-1 zone within one hundred fifty feet
(150') of a residential zone shall not exceed thirty five feet (35').
Commercial buildings in a C-1 zone in excess of one hundred fifty feet (150')
of a residential zone shall not exceed forty five feet (45'). (Ord. 667, 9-24-
1984; amd. Ord. 925, 6-13-2005)
   H.   Additional Standards: All single-family dwellings shall be required to
have the main entrance situated on that side of the structure which is closest
to the front yard. (Ord. 873, 9-13-1999; amd. Ord. 925, 6-13-2005)
10-4-8: C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL:
   A.   Permitted Uses: The following outright uses are permitted in accordance
with level I application procedures:
   Public utility facilities.
Structures and uses accessory to residential uses as specified in section
10-5-6 of this title on lots with existing residential structures.
Upkeep, repair, replacement of existing C-1 retail and service commercial type
uses provided that such activity does not increase the area or intensity of the
use.
Upkeep, repair, replacement of existing residential structures provided that
such activity does not increase the density of dwelling units on the property.
(Ord. 667, 9-24-1984; amd. Ord. 925, 6-13-2005)
   B.   Permitted Uses With Site Plan Review: The following outright uses are
permitted in accordance with level I application procedures and site plan
review specified in chapter 8 of this title:
Automobile and truck repair, but not including bodywork, painting, and
machining.
Automotive, truck, recreational vehicle, or farm implement sales lot.
Business, governmental or professional office, public or private school.
Church.
Commercial amusement establishment such as bowling alley or lounge, when wholly
enclosed within a structure.
Dwelling, subject to the conditions that:
      1.   The dwelling is located in the commercial districts of Milton-
Freewater and occupies space in a structure housing a permitted business.
      2.   The units are located either in the upper story or rear of the
structure that is designed and used for a permitted commercial business.
      3.   No more than one apartment unit shall be constructed within
buildings one story in height. First story apartment units existing as of March
9, 1998, shall be limited to owner/operator occupancy only.
      4.   The primary access shall be via a collector or arterial street that
is improved or will be improved to city standards prior to occupancy of any
unit, unless approved by the planning department.
      5.   Public facilities and services are available to the site and are
deemed adequate by the city to meet the requirements of this use. Any extension
or oversizing of sewer/water and/or stormwater to serve the development shall
be totally at the expense of the developer and consistent with applicable city
policies and ordinances.
      6.   Off street parking shall be reviewed by the planning department on a
case by case basis.
   Enclosed storage.
   Financial institution.
Lumberyard or building supply dealership with outside storage.
Personal and business service such as barbershop, tailoring shop, printing
shop, funeral home, laundry or dry cleaning establishment.
Retail trade establishment such as food store, drugstore, hardware store,
furniture sales or repair.
Service commercial establishment such as motel, or restaurant with inside
seating only. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984; amd. Ord. 764, 5-26-1992; Ord. 788, 2-14-
1994; Ord. 925, 6-13-2005)
   C.   Conditional Uses: The following conditional uses are permitted in
accordance with level III application procedures:
Automotive fuel service station.
Automotive or truck repair including bodywork, painting, and machining.
Restaurant with service to persons other than those seated inside the
structure.
A commercial use not listed above may be reviewed via the conditional use
process for appropriateness in the zone; in all instances, review will include
consideration of subsections C1 and C2 of this section.
In permitting a new conditional use or the alteration or extension of an
existing conditional use, the planning commission shall use the following
considerations in review of applications:
      1.   Conformance with the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan
and the standards and policies of the zone.
      2.   Compatibility of the conditional use with the surrounding area or
neighborhood in terms of lot size, building height, or bulk, traffic
circulation, parking, provision of signs, buffering, screening, landscaping,
open space, control of smoke, glare, noise or hours of operation. (Ord. 667, 9-
24-1984; amd. Ord. 764, 5-26-1992; Ord. 925, 6-13-2005)
   D.   Minimum Lot Dimensions:
      1.   When dividing land to be allocated to existing residential
structures, the minimum lot shall be:
         a.   Single-family dwelling: Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
         b.   Duplex: Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet.
         c.   Boarding/rooming house: Nine thousand (9,000) square feet.
      2.   When dividing land to be allocated to existing commercial
structures, or for development of a new commercial use, the minimum lot shall
be determined by:
         a.   Submittal of a site plan as specified in chapter 8 of this title,
which proposes a use for the property.
         b.   Parking requirements, access standards, and other applicable
provisions of this title shall be utilized to determine the size of parcel
necessary to accommodate the proposed use.
         c.   Land in the C-2 zone shall not be available for the land
partition or subdivision process without an approved site plan as specified in
subsections D2a and D2b of this section. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984; amd. Ord. 925,
6-13-2005)
   E.   Minimum Yard Requirements: For existing single-family dwelling or
duplex:
      1.   Interior lots:
         a.   Front yard: Twenty two feet (22'). (Ord. 745, 1-22-1990; amd.
Ord. 925, 6-13-2005)
         b.   Side yard: Minimum of six feet (6') on any side, with both side
yards combining for a minimum of fourteen feet (14').
         c.   Rear yard: Sixteen feet (16'). (Ord. 873, 9-13-1999; amd. Ord.
925, 6-13-2005)
      2.   Corner lots:
         a.   Front yard: Twenty two feet (22'). "Front yard" is defined as
that side of the property which faces a street and contains the main entrance
to the structure. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992; amd. Ord. 925, 6-13-2005)
         b.   Side yards: Minimum of six feet (6') on interior side, with both
sides combining for a minimum of fourteen feet (14'). If garage, carport or
driveway is located on the property's street facing side yard, the minimum
setback is twenty two feet (22'). If the garage, carport, or driveway is not
located on the property's street facing side yard, the minimum setback is ten
feet (10'). (Planning director may modify strict application of this standard
based on actual proposed location of garage or carport in relation to streets.)
         c.   Rear yard: Sixteen feet (16'). (Ord. 873, 9-13-1999; amd. Ord.
925, 6-13-2005)
   F.   Lot Coverage: Residential structures shall occupy a maximum of fifty
percent (50%) of their lots, with total coverage including driveways not to
exceed seventy five percent (75%).
   G.   Building Height: Buildings in a C-2 zone within one hundred fifty feet
(150') of a residential zone shall not exceed thirty five feet (35').
Commercial buildings in excess of one hundred fifty feet (150') of a
residential zone shall not exceed forty five feet (45'). (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984;
amd. Ord. 925, 6-13-2005)
   H.   Additional Standards: All single-family dwellings shall be required to
have the main entrance situated on that side of the structure which is closest
to the front yard. (Ord. 873, 9-13-1999; amd. Ord. 925, 6-13-2005)
10-4-9: I-M INDUSTRIAL-MANUFACTURING:
   A.   Permitted Uses: The following outright uses are permitted in accordance
with level I application procedures:
Modular or mobile dwelling for caretaker or night watchman on industrial use
premises.
Public utility facilities.
   B.   Permitted Uses With Site Plan Review: The following outright uses are
permitted in accordance with level I application procedures and site plan
review specified in chapter 8 of this title:
Manufacture, assembly, compounding, packaging, or storage of materials when
such activity does not create emissions or discharge other than normal sanitary
sewer or industrial sewer wastes, or which does not necessitate permits to be
issued by the Oregon department of environmental quality. Such industrial use
may involve retail sales, provided that retail sales are a minor accessory use
to the major industrial activity. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984; amd. Ord. 925, 6-13-
2005)
   C.   Conditional Uses: The following conditional uses are permitted in
accordance with level III application procedures:
Automobile, truck or farm equipment repair including bodywork, painting and
machining.
Automobile wrecking yard.
Machine shop, welding shop, glass shop.
Manufacture, assembly, compounding, packaging, or storage of materials when
such activity does not create emissions or discharge other than normal sanitary
sewer or industrial sewer wastes, or which necessitates permits to be issued by
the Oregon department of environmental quality. Such industrial use may involve
retail sales, provided that retail sales are a minor accessory use to the major
industrial activity.
Office park complex with a minimum size of three (3) acres.
Any use, which in the opinion of the planning commission, is similar to those
listed above. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984; amd. Ord. 710, 5-16-1987; Ord. 736, 5-22-
1989; Ord. 830, 12-11-1995; Ord. 925, 6-13-2005)
   D.   Minimum Lot Dimensions:
      1.   When dividing land to be allocated to existing residential
structures, the minimum lot shall be:
         a.   Single-family dwelling: Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
         b.   Duplex: Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet.
         c.   Boarding/rooming house: Nine thousand (9,000) square feet.
      2.   When dividing land to be allocated to existing industrial
structures, or for development of a new industrial use, the minimum lot shall
be determined by:
         a.   Submittal of a site plan as specified in chapter 8 of this title,
which proposes use for the property.
         b.   Parking requirements, access standards, and other applicable
provisions of this title shall be utilized to determine the size of parcel
necessary to accommodate the proposed use.
         c.   Land in the I-M zone shall not be available for the land
partition or subdivision process without an approved site plan as specified in
subsections D2a and D2b of this section.
   E.   Minimum Yard Requirements:
      1.   Front yard: Twenty two feet (22'). (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984; amd. Ord.
925, 6-13-2005)
      2.   Where an industrial use abuts a residential zone, the yard abutting
the residential zone shall be a minimum of thirty five feet (35'). (Ord. 873,
9-13-1999; amd. Ord. 925, 6-13-2005)
      3.   Other yard requirements shall be determined by the fire clearances
specified by the uniform building code and the state fire marshal's office for
that type of construction and use.
   F.   Building Height:
      1.   Buildings in the I-M zone within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a
residential zone shall not exceed forty five feet (45').
      2.   Industrial buildings in excess of one hundred fifty feet (150') of a
residential zone shall not exceed fifty five feet (55'). (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984;
amd. Ord. 925, 6-13-2005)
10-4-10: PL PUBLIC LANDS:
   A.   Permitted Uses: The following outright uses are permitted in accordance
with level I application procedures:
   Public utility facilities.
   B.   Conditional Uses: The following conditional uses are permitted in
accordance with level I application procedure and site plan review specified in
chapter 8 of this title:
   Golf course.
Governmental structure or land use including, but not limited to, a public
park, playground, recreation building, fire station, library, or museum.
Public schools and associated facilities.
   C.   Minimum Lot Dimensions: Due to the wide range of land uses, structure
types, and lot sizes inherent to the generalized category of public lands, lot
dimensions are best determined through the site plan review process. When a
proposed use is permitted in another zone with specified lot dimensions, the
requirements of that zone shall apply in the public lands zone.
In any case, lot dimensions shall be sufficient to accommodate parking, vehicle
maneuvering areas, landscaping, open space, and other development standards
required by this title for the use as determined by the site plan review
process. (See chapter 8 of this title.)
   D.   Minimum Yard Requirements: When a proposed use is permitted in another
zone with specified yard requirements, the requirements of that zone shall
apply in the public lands zone.
In any case, yard requirements shall be sufficient to meet fire and other
standards as determined by the site plan review process. (See chapter 8 of this
title.)
   E.   Building Height: Building height shall be determined by the site plan
review process to be compatible with appropriate use of adjacent properties.
(Ord. 667, 9-24-1984; amd. Ord. 925, 6-13-2005)
10-4-11: CO CIVIC OVERLAY:
   A.   Permitted Uses: The following outright uses are permitted in accordance
with a level I application and site plan review procedures specified in chapter
8 of this title:
Government offices and facilities (administration, public safety,
transportation, utilities, and similar uses).
Libraries, museums, community centers and similar uses.
Private utilities.
Public parking lots and garages.
Schools (public and private). (Ord. 925, 6-13-2005)
10-4-12: BP BUSINESS PARK:
   A.   Relationship To Other Regulations: The land use designations and design
standards in this section take precedence over other city design standards.
Where there are conflicts the more stringent standards apply. All additional
city, state or federal regulations, requirements and permits must be adhered to
and obtained.
   B.   Land Uses: The business park subdistrict is intended to provide a mix
of professional offices, small businesses, other compatible commercial purposes
and light industrial activities.
      1.   Use: Allowed uses consist of a broad range of light industry,
business, commercial and supporting service uses. See table 1 "Land Use
Matrix", of this section to determine which uses are allowed outright,
conditionally allowed, or prohibited in each district.
      2.   Prohibited Uses: Generally, heavy industries are prohibited. These
industries include:
         a.   Waste related industries,
         b.   Rendering plants,
         c.   Petroleum or chemical refineries,
         d.   Mineral extraction, and
         e.   Others determined by the planning commission.
The conditional use review provides an opportunity to allow a use when there
are minimal impacts, to allow a use but impose conditions specifying mitigation
measures to address identified impacts or to deny a use if the impacts are
substantial and the impacts cannot be mitigated.
The following table outlines uses not allowed, allowed uses and uses allowed
under a conditional use permit:
A = Allowed use
C = Conditionally allowed use
N = Use not allowed
   TABLE 1
   LAND USE MATRIX
 
Use
   Residential:                                                               
      Hotel/motel                                                         C
   Commercial:                                                                
      Adult entertainment                                                 N
      Automotive services in conjunction with other uses                  C
      Business service retail                                             A
      Eating and drinking establishments                                  A
      Gasoline filling stations                                           C
      Large retail stores, greater than 10,000 square feet                C
      New car dealerships                                                 C
      Personal services                                                   A
      Recreation, indoor                                                  A
      Recreation, outdoor                                                 A
      Rental services                                                     A
      Repair services                                                     A
      Retail, less than 10,000 square feet                                A
   Business office:                                                           
      Financial institutions                                              A
      General office                                                      A
      Medical and dental offices                                          A
      Office based research facilities and medical laboratories           A
      Professional services                                               A
   Industrial:                                                                
      Agricultural production                                             N
      Equipment sales, including incidental service and repair (excludes  C
retail sales of specific items on display)
      Heavy industry                                                      N
      Light manufacturing, processing and fabrication                     A
      Outdoor fabrication                                                 N
      Railroad yards and loading                                          N
      Research and development                                            A
      Warehouse and freight movement                                      N
      Waste related activities                                            N
      Wholesale sales                                                     C
   Institutional:                                                             
      Fraternal organizations                                             C
      Preschool/childcare                                                 C
      Public facilities                                                   C
      Schools K-12                                                        C
      Sports facilities                                                   C
      Vocational and job training facilities                              A
 
      3.   Uses Not Listed: Uses not categorized in the land use matrix are
subject to site plan committee interpretation. Appeals of decision may be made
to the planning commission as provided by section
10-3-12 of this title.
      4.   General Restricted Activities:
         a.   Maximum noise levels shall not exceed the city standards.
         b.   Vibration discernable at the property line without the use of
measuring instruments is prohibited.
         c.   Air emissions shall not exceed federal air quality standards.
         d.   Emissions of odorous gases or matter beyond the property of the
industrial activity are prohibited.
         e.   Outside activities producing heat or glare are prohibited. If
such activities are required they shall be conducted within buildings.
         f.   Outdoor storage of raw materials or finished products.
         g.   Movement of heavy equipment on and off the site, except truck
deliveries.
         h.   Movement of live animals or the waste or byproduct of dead
animals to the site.
         i.   Outdoor testing of products or processes on the site.
         j.   Highly combustible, explosive or hazardous materials or waste.
   C.   Development Standards: Standards are governed by chapter 14 of this
title and subject to the requirements of this chapter. All requirements
contained in this section represent minimum standards.
Because these statements are subjective and not quantitative, a site plan
review committee (SPRC) will review plans submitted. The committee will have
the authority to request modifications to any design submitted for review to
better meet the design standards outlined herein. The committee's
responsibility will include buildings, landscaping, site plans, lighting,
signs, mechanical equipment locations, fences, and vaults.
      1.   Temporary Structures:
         a.   Temporary buildings or other temporary structures shall not be
allowed within the business park.
         b.   Construction trailers and construction related temporary
buildings will be allowed on site during construction periods.
         c.   The structures must be removed within thirty (30) days of
construction completion.
         d.   Temporary construction structures shall be located as
inconspicuously as possible and shall cause no inconvenience to owners and
occupants of neighboring parcels.
      2.   Construction Activities:
         a.   Construction activities shall not disrupt business and the
operations of adjacent parcels.
         b.   Construction activity shall not block access to any other parcel.
         c.   The developer shall be responsible for the repair of any street,
public feature, or adjoining property damaged during the course of
construction.
         d.   The developer is responsible for street cleaning necessitated by
construction activity.
         e.   The developer shall maintain a dust suppression program, water
erosion prevention measures and wind erosion stabilization measures.
      3.   Site Development Requirements:
         a.   Building Setbacks:
            (1)   All buildings are to be set back from the property line to
ensure that adequate space is provided between buildings for safety, screening,
and visual appeal and as defined in table 2 of this section.
            (2)   All setback areas except those where parking is allowed and
exists shall be landscaped.
            (3)   Landscape areas within the setback can be plant material or
attractive hardscape for pedestrian use.
            (4)   Site plan review committee will determine the side setbacks
for individual corner lots.
            (5)   Setbacks are measured from the property line.
The following table outlines the site development requirements:
   TABLE 2
   SITE DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
 
  Business Park
Minimum area of lot (in square feet)     40,000
Minimum lot dimensions:               
   Width                           75 feet
   Depth                           80 feet
Building setback:                     
   Front                           20 feet
   Rear                            10 feet
   Side                            20 feet
   Corner 1                        20 feet
   Highway 11                      50 feet
   Arterial frontage               25 feet
Maximum building height               45 feet
Parking and loading setback:          
   Front                           15 feet
   Rear                            10 feet
   Side                            5  feet
   Corner                          15 feet
   Highway 11                      30 feet
Minimum landscape area                15 percent
 
         b.   Parking Setbacks:
            (1)   A minimum five foot (5') wide landscape area shall screen
parking from adjoining parcels of the same zone. When abutting a less intense
zone the side setback shall be ten feet (10').
            (2)   All parking setbacks shall be landscaped.
            (3)   All parking will be set back ten feet (10') from the front
face of the building. The setback area shall have landscape material or
pedestrian amenities.
         c.   Buffers Between Zoning Districts: Property that abuts a less
intense subdistrict will provide a twenty foot (20') wide landscape buffer.
         d.   Landscape Area Requirement: All unpaved property on developed
sites will be landscaped. Gravel and bare ground is not acceptable.
      4.   Building Design: All buildings shall be visually interesting and not
monotonous with special attention to street facing building facades. The use of
windows, canopies, parapets, fascias, cornices and a variety of building
materials is encouraged to break up large, monolithic walls and indicate
pedestrian entry areas.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9fce89613db33abafc9763fa7174eb0da9638a04/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1673.gif]
 
Accent paint and details within the concrete effectively breaks up the bulk of
the facade.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9fce89613db33abafc9763fa7174eb0da9638a04/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1675.gif]
 
Building functions, like office and loading docks, should be physically
separated. Access to office entrance should be convenient and safe.
      5.   Building Materials:
         a.   Materials: All buildings shall be constructed from a combination
of tilt-up concrete, brick, concrete block, metal (as a partial element), and
glass.
         b.   Wood: Wood may be used as an element of detail but not as a
primary material.
         c.   Windows, Doors And Wall Articulation: The front yard face of
buildings, the facade facing Highway 11 and facades facing less intense
districts shall be governed by chapter 14 of this title and the following
requirements:
            (1)   Monotonous and unarticulated facades are not allowed.
            (2)   Changes of materials, detailing, shadows, color, and texture
shall be incorporated into building facades.
            (3)   Where blank walls are required for the type of business
operation, then the design shall be reviewed as an adjustment from this
standard.
            (4)   Design standards will be reviewed by the site plan review
committee and approved by the planning commission.
         d.   Building Entries: Entries shall be obvious with clear and direct
pedestrian access. They shall be accentuated with a combination of features
such as building material change, parapet, canopies, and landscaping.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9fce89613db33abafc9763fa7174eb0da9638a04/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1677.gif]
 
      6.   Circulation, Parking And Loading: The site design for each lot will
comply with the development standards outlined in this document and all
requirements of the city of Milton-Freewater.
         a.   Pedestrian Circulation:
            (1)   Safe and direct concrete accessways will be provided
throughout the development.
            (2)   Materials used for pedestrian paths and sidewalks shall be of
a contrasting material when adjacent to paved surfaces and separated by a
concrete curb.
            (3)   Pedestrian walkways and crosswalks shall be clearly marked
and meet the needs of individuals with disabilities.
            (4)   Clear and direct pedestrian access shall be provided from the
public right of way to the main entries of all buildings.
         b.   Vehicular Access:
            (1)   Vehicular access shall be provided to each lot. Shared
driveways between abutting lots shall be employed where feasible.
            (2)   No more than one curb cut per lot will be allowed without
site plan review committee approval.
         c.   Parking: The number and size of parking stalls for employees and
visitors will be governed by chapter 6 of this title and will meet the
following standards:
            (1)   Rows of parking stalls shall be separated from drive aisles
with a curbed landscape island at least eight feet (8') wide.
            (2)   Long rows of parking stalls shall have one landscape island
for at least every twelve (12) stalls.
         d.   Loading And Service Access: The intent of this subsection is to
reduce and mitigate direct visibility of service and loading activities.
            (1)   Loading facilities should be located so that they are not
visible from primary streets. In situations where this is not possible, then a
sight obscuring wall should be built with landscape material on the outside
face to screen the service doors, docks, and vehicles.
            (2)   The landscape screening area shall be fifteen feet (15') wide
minimum and be located along all public rights of way and lot lines.
            (3)   Where adjoining lots have abutting service and loading areas
a landscape buffer is not required to foster shared circulation.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9fce89613db33abafc9763fa7174eb0da9638a04/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1679.gif]
 
Where necessary, due to operational or site constraints, service docks may face
the street if well organized and maintained in a neat and orderly manner and
screened as possible.
Utilities should be ground mounted and postal boxes should be safely
accessible.
      7.   Landscaping: Landscape requirements are governed by section
10-14-4 of this title and this chapter. All pervious surfaces shall be
landscaped with healthy and well maintained plant materials in a manner
consistent with and complementary to the native landscape. All landscaped
surfaces shall be properly maintained and contribute to the visual appeal of
the development and surroundings. The property owner is responsible for
replacement of damaged or dead plant material.
         a.   Plant material should provide visual interest and variety. Plant
material shall be acclimated to the general climate.
         b.   Designs should make use of native and drought tolerant plant
material.
         c.   Landscaping shall employ a variety of trees, shrubs and ground
covers.
         d.   Boulders, gravel and assorted rocks can be used as a design
accent element that supplements the overall landscape plan.
         e.   Bark, mulch, wood shavings or other organic products shall be
used as a supplement to the plantings and shall not be the primary design
element.
         f.   All landscape areas will be irrigated with an underground
irrigation system.
         g.   Special attention should be paid to fire safety issues.
         h.   Decorative walls and fencing may replace landscape shrubs with
site plan review committee approval.
         i.   Courtyards and paved pedestrian areas may meet up to twenty
percent (20%) of the landscape area requirement.
      8.   Buffers:
         a.   Buffers shall be used to visually screen parking, loading, trash
areas, and other such uses from public streets by vegetation or attractive
walls. Buffers shall be composed of a combination of hedges, informal screens,
and mounds. Monotonous long rows of hedging are discouraged. Hedging should be
no higher than forty two inches (42") to ensure visual access to the building
for security purposes. Taller shrubs and trees are allowed sporadically along
the frontage.
         b.   Plant material should be appropriate to the climate.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9fce89613db33abafc9763fa7174eb0da9638a04/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1681.gif]
 
Informal plantings act as a buffer between parking areas and public street or
neighboring parcels.
Buffers act as wind breaks and can improve the microclimate.
         c.   The landscape buffer for loading and service and adjoining
parcels shall be ten feet (10') minimum unless the loading has a shared access.
      9.   Parking Lot Islands: All islands shall be landscaped with ground
covers and shrubs. Deciduous shade trees or appropriate evergreens shall be
installed in islands to reduce heat and reflection where space allows. Islands
will be edged with a six inch (6") concrete curb.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9fce89613db33abafc9763fa7174eb0da9638a04/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1683.gif]
 
Evergreen trees provide an effective buffer between loading doors and brick
framed office windows. The striped crosswalk provides a pedestrian link to the
building entrance. Landscaped islands within the parking area help direct
traffic and provide visual relief in large pavement areas.
On parcels with multiple buildings, the landscaping should be used to break up
large expanses of walls and paving. Traffic and pedestrian circulation system
should provide for safe movement throughout the development.
      10.   Trash And Outdoor Storage:
         a.   Materials, supplies or equipment shall not be stored outside
unless screened from a neighboring parcel or street.
         b.   Outdoor storage is not allowed.
         c.   Trash areas shall be screened with sight obscuring fencing or
vegetation on three (3) sides.
         d.   The use of trash compactors is strongly encouraged.
      11.   Fencing And Walls: Fencing and walls are allowed if they are
attractive and placed appropriately.
Fencing and walls over forty two inches (42") are not allowed in the front
yards.
      12.   Signs: "Signs" are defined as lettering, numbers, and business
logos associated with a building or site for purposes of business
identification. Signage shall be governed by chapter 7 of this title and the
requirements of this chapter.
         a.   Flashing and moving signs are not permitted.
         b.   Reader boards and video displays are not permitted.
         c.   Windows shall not have flashing or moving displays intended to
attract attention.
         d.   Signs may not be used for advertising or for businesses not
located in the park.
      13.   Lighting: Exterior lighting shall be governed by section
10-14-8 of this title and the requirements of this section. Lighting
illumination levels that meet industry safety standards will be installed when
the parcels are developed.
         a.   Lighting fixtures shall be consistent throughout the business
park.
         b.   Building fronts can be illuminated at night from ground mounted
fixtures provided that no glare is directed onto the streets, adjacent parcels,
or toward the flight path of aircraft.
         c.   Lighting shall not be used as a design element to attract
attention.
      14.   Utilities And Mechanical Equipment:
         a.   All utilities shall be constructed below grade. Aboveground
utility vaults shall be screened by sight obscuring vegetation.
         b.   Satellite dishes shall be appropriately screened.
         c.   Roof mounted equipment shall be located within an area that is
screened on all sides.
      15.   Stormwater Detention And Quality: Stormwater detention and quality
requirements will be met for each new development through city facilities when
available or on site facilities constructed by the owner according to the city
of Milton-Freewater standards. (Ord. 928, 6-27-2005)
 
Notes
  1. SPRC may reduce setback if the second street frontage is less visible
1 (Milton-Freewater South Hill neighborhood master plan appendix A, business
  park zoning).
10-4-13: R-M RESIDENTIAL MIXED USE:
   A.   Permitted Uses: The following outright uses are permitted in accordance
with level I application procedures and a site plan review specified in chapter
8 of this title:
Attached single-family dwellings.
Banks and financial institutions that do not include drive-up windows.
Childcare facility.
City governmental structure or land use including, but not limited to, a public
park, playground, recreation building, fire station, library, or museum.
Condominium developments.
Duplex.
Home office occupation.
Indoor health clubs and gyms.
Multi-family dwellings.
Offices.
Public utility facilities.
Restaurants (drive-up windows are not allowed).
Single-family dwelling.
   B.   Conditional Uses: The following conditional uses are permitted in
accordance with level III application procedure:
Bed and breakfast establishments.
Church.
Nursing home.
Personal and business services not exceeding two thousand (2,000) square feet.
Planned unit development.
Public or private school.
   C.   Unlisted Uses: Uses not listed are generally prohibited. Questionable
uses should be processed through a level III process.
   D.   Minimum Lot Dimensions:
      1.   Single-family dwelling: Five thousand (5,000) square feet.
      2.   Attached single-family dwellings: Two thousand (2,000) square feet
per unit.
      3.   Multi-family dwellings: Two thousand (2,000) square feet per unit.
      4.   Offices, banks and financial institutions, and childcare facilities:
Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
      5.   Restaurants (drive-up windows are not allowed): Twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet.
      6.   Indoor health clubs and gyms: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
      7.   Church: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
      8.   Planned unit development: Eighty thousand (80,000) square feet.
      9.   Nursing home: Two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet per bed
or living unit.
      10.   Personal and business services: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet
(multi-tenant buildings encouraged).
   E.   Minimum Yard Requirements:
      1.   Residential uses:
         a.   Front yard: Twenty feet (20').
         b.   Side yard: Seven feet (7') from a residential use except attached
home where there is no setback for shared walls.
            (1)   Fifteen feet (15') to a public right of way.
            (2)   Thirty feet (30') from a nonresidential use combining for a
total of at least forty feet (40') between uses.
         c.   Rear yard: Fifteen feet (15').
      2.   Nonresidential uses:
         a.   Front yard: Twenty feet (20') minimum.
         b.   Side yard: Ten feet (10') from a nonresidential use and thirty
feet (30') from a residential use combining for a total of at least forty feet
(40') between uses.
         c.   Rear yard: Twenty feet (20').
All nonresidential uses must have side or front yard frontage on an arterial or
collector street.
   F.   Lot Coverage And Landscape Requirement:
      1.   Residential uses: No more than eighty percent (80%) of the lot will
be covered by building, parking or driveways. The remaining twenty percent
(20%) shall be live plant material, except for paved patio or walkways for the
exclusive use of pedestrians.
      2.   Nonresidential uses: No more than eighty five percent (85%) of the
lot will be covered by building, parking or driveways. The remaining fifteen
percent (15%) of the lot shall be live plant material, except for paved patio
or walkways for the exclusive use of pedestrians.
   G.   Building Height: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height.
   H.   Pedestrian Connections: Pedestrian connections shall be provided
between residential developments and other uses.
   I.   Screening: Nonresidential uses shall screen parking, loading,
mechanical units, trash enclosures and other such uses from the public right of
way and from residential uses.
   J.   Design Standards:
      1.   Architectural Standards:
         a.   Purpose: The architectural standards are intended to provide
detailed, human scale design, while affording flexibility to use a variety of
building styles.
         b.   Applicability: This section applies to all of the following types
of buildings, and shall be applied during site plan review:
            (1)   Single-family attached townhomes which are subject to site
plan review (3 or more attached units);
            (2)   Multi-family housing;
            (3)   Public and institutional buildings; and
            (4)   Neighborhood commercial and mixed use buildings.
         c.   Standards: All buildings which are subject to this section shall
comply with all of the following standards. The graphics provided with each
standard are intended to show examples of how to comply. Other building styles
and designs can be used to comply, so long as they are consistent with the text
of this section. An architectural feature (i.e., as shown in the graphics) may
be used to comply with more than one standard.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9fce89613db33abafc9763fa7174eb0da9638a04/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1685.gif]
 
            (1)   Building Form: The continuous horizontal distance (i.e., as
measured from end wall to end wall) of individual buildings shall not exceed
one hundred twenty feet (120'). All buildings shall incorporate design features
such as offsets, balconies, projections, window reveals, or similar elements to
preclude large expanses of uninterrupted building surfaces, as shown in figure
1 of this section. Along the vertical face of a structure, such features shall
occur at a minimum of every thirty feet (30'), and on each floor shall contain
at least two (2) of the following features:
               (A)   Recess (e.g., deck, patio, courtyard, entrance or similar
feature) that has a minimum depth of four feet (4');
               (B)   Extension (e.g., floor area, deck, patio, entrance, or
similar feature) that projects a minimum of two feet (2') and runs horizontally
for a minimum length of four feet (4'); and/or
               (C)   Offsets or breaks in roof elevation of two feet (2') or
greater in height.
         d.   Eyes On The Street: All building elevations visible from a street
right of way shall provide doors, porches, balconies, and/or windows.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9fce89613db33abafc9763fa7174eb0da9638a04/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1687.gif]
 
         e.   Additional Standards: Single-family dwellings (site built,
modular, manufactured homes) shall be required to provide covered parking for
each dwelling. All single-family dwellings shall be required to have the main
entrance situated on that side of the structure which is closest to the front
yard. All building elevations visible from the front street facing side of the
home shall provide a combination of doors, porches, balconies and/or windows. A
minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the total wall area facing the street shall
meet this standard. For corner lots, a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the
total wall area of the secondary wall shall meet this standard. All dwellings
shall also utilize at least six (6) of the following design features to provide
visual relief along the front, street facing side of the homes.
            (1)   Dormers.
            (2)   Gables.
            (3)   Recessed entries.
            (4)   Covered porch entries.
            (5)   Cupolas.
            (6)   Pillars or posts.
            (7)   Bay or bow windows.
            (8)   Eaves (minimum of 6 inch projection).
            (9)   A roof pitch of six feet (6') or higher in height for each
twelve feet (12') in width.
            (10)   Offsets on building face (minimum 16 inches).
            (11)   Decks and railings.
            (12)   Decorative bricks, stones, rock, or other distinct pattern
in the surface.
            (13)   Window shutters or trim (4 inch minimum trim) (must be on
all windows on the street facing side).
            (14)   An alternative feature providing visual relief, similar to
subsections J1e(1) through J1e(13) of this section.
Adjustments to these standards may be applied for. Requests for adjustments
must show that the intent of the above standards can be satisfied by
alternative design features. Adjustments shall be processed in accordance with
level III application procedures as described in section
10-3-9 of this title. (Ord. 947, 5-12-2008)
CHAPTER 5
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-5-1: Fences
10-5-2: Walls, Hedges, Berms, Landscaping
10-5-3: Vision Clearance
10-5-4: Additional Yard Requirements
10-5-5: Residential Dwelling Standards
10-5-6: Residential Accessory Structures
10-5-7: Authorization Of Similar Uses
10-5-8: Building Height Exemptions
10-5-9: Frontage And Access
10-5-10: Manufactured Homes
10-5-11: Home Occupations
10-5-12: Modular Homes
10-5-13: Transportation Improvements
10-5-14: Access Management And Connectivity
10-5-1: FENCES:
Fences are subject to the provisions of this chapter and require a permit prior
to construction. Fence permits are to be processed under level I procedures.
   A.   Vision Clearance: Fences shall not conflict with requirements for
vision clearance areas in section
10-5-3 of this chapter. For public safety reasons, no variances from these
provisions shall be applied for or permitted.
   B.   Private Property: Fences shall always be required to be built on
private property and never on public right of way. Private property lines may
be a considerable distance back from actual street surfaces or curb lines.
   C.   Property Line: It shall be the property owner's responsibility and
obligation to identify his property line when proposing to construct a fence on
said property line. A property survey may be required.
   D.   Construction And Maintenance: All fences shall be constructed and
maintained in a structurally sound manner. Fences which are structurally
unsound and/or hazardous are subject to abatement.
   E.   Residential Zone Fences:
      1.   Rear And Side Yards: Fences not to exceed six feet (6') in height
are permitted in side and rear yards, but shall not extend past the front of
the residence or the front of a detached garage, whichever is farther from the
front lot line.
      2.   Front Yard: From the front of the structure (as described in
subsection E1 of this section) to the front property line, chainlink, woven
wire and split rail fences not to exceed four feet (4') in height are
permitted. Fences of other materials and sight obscuring fences shall not
exceed three feet (3').
      3.   Corner Lots: On corner lots, the provisions of subsection E2 of this
section apply to the front yard. Side yard facing on secondary street may
incorporate fencing at a maximum height allowed from rear lot line to front of
house, at which point it would conform to maximum front yard fencing height.
At the discretion of the city planner, fencing along entire side yard fronting
on a street, or any portion thereof (excluding that portion from the front of
the house to the front lot property line, which shall in all instances conform
to the front yard fencing height restrictions), may be reduced in height for
purposes of visual clearance.
   F.   Commercial Zone And Residential Office Zone Fences: All provisions of
subsection E of this section apply to residences, commercial or office
development in these zones.
   G.   Industrial Zone Fences: In industrial zones, fences not to exceed eight
feet (8') in height are permitted in all yards of industrial developments
except as restricted by vision clearance requirements. (Ord. 947, 5-12-2008)
10-5-2: WALLS, HEDGES, BERMS, LANDSCAPING:
   A.   All walls, hedges, berms, and other landscaping features shall conform
to the vision clearance requirements of section
10-5-3 of this chapter. For public safety reasons, no variances from this
requirement shall be issued.
   B.   Any freestanding property perimeter wall which is not a retaining wall
shall conform to provisions of section
10-5-1 of this chapter. Retaining walls may be constructed to the height
necessary to protect a cut-fill grade, but shall be a maximum of nine inches
(9") above finished grade on the fill side of the wall.
   C.   Where a retaining wall is located on a line separating lots, the
retaining wall may be topped by a fence of the height permitted in the
particular yard in which the wall is located. The allowable height of the fence
shall be determined by measuring from the finished grade of the wall.
   D.   Where an earthen berm is required, the size shall be determined by the
site plan review committee or the planning commission. The berm may be topped
by a fence, wall, or hedge of the height permitted in the particular yard in
which the berm is located. The height shall be measured from the highest
finished grade of the berm.
   E.   Landscaping installed for required screening shall be of sufficient
size to provide the required degree of screening at the time of installation.
Required landscaping with living materials shall be lawn, ground cover, shrubs
and trees suitable to the local climate. Landscaping shall be irrigated,
properly maintained and protected from damage. (Ord. 947, 5-12-2008)
10-5-3: VISION CLEARANCE:
Vision clearance requirements apply to all zones.
   A.   All corner lots shall maintain a triangular area for clear vision
purposes. Two (2) sides of the triangle are lines measured from the corner
intersection of the property lines to a distance of twenty five feet (25') from
the corner point. The third side of the triangle is the straight line
connecting the two (2) 25-foot sides. Corner lots include intersections of
public streets and private streets such as in mobile home parks or apartment
developments.
   B.   All lots which abut alleys which intersect with streets shall maintain
a triangular area for clear vision purposes. The sides of the triangle forming
the corner angle shall be fifteen feet (15'). The third side of the triangle is
the straight line connecting the two (2) 15-foot sides.
   C.   No screen or other visual obstruction with the exception of one tree or
shrub trunk no larger than ten inches (10") in diameter shall be permitted to
be between two and one-half (21/2) and eight feet (8') above the grade of
street centerline, or curb top if one is present. Woven wire and chainlink
fences are permitted provided that there is no other landscaping or visual
obstruction.
   D.   The vision clearance requirement may be increased by the site plan
review committee or planning commission in areas of unusual circumstances. For
example, streets permitting high speed travel or with excessive curbs may
require a larger field of vision.
   E.   Any obstruction of a visual clearance area is subject to abatement by
the city upon twenty four (24) hours' notice irrespective of standard abatement
procedures in section
10-1-10 of this title. (Ord. 947, 5-12-2008)
10-5-4: ADDITIONAL YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Measurement Of Yards: All required yards, whether specified in
subsection C of this section shall be measured from the property line to the
foundation line of the structure.
   B.   Permitted Intrusions Into Required Yards: The following intrusions may
extend up to two feet (2') into a front, rear, or side yard. Additional uses of
required yards are provided in section
10-5-6, "Residential Accessory Structures", of this chapter.
      1.   Eaves, bay windows, dormers, chimneys, solar collectors.
      2.   Stairways, fire escapes.
      3.   Planting boxes.
      4.   Other architectural features similar to those listed above.
   C.   Yard Requirements For Property Abutting Future Street Right Of Way:
      1.   If a lot abuts a street having only a portion of its required width
dedicated, no building or structure shall be constructed on that portion of the
lot needed to complete the road widths plus width and/or depth of the yards
required on the lot by this title.
      2.   Where a precise plan adopted pursuant to law includes the plans for
widening the existing streets, the connecting of existing or the establishment
of new streets, the placement of buildings and maintenance of yards, where
required by this title, shall adhere to the future street boundaries as
determined by said precise plans.
   D.   Single Use Of Required Yard: No required yard or other open space
dedicated to a particular structure or use shall be considered as providing
required yard or open space for any other structure or use.
   E.   Exceptions To Required Front Yard: The following exceptions to the
front yard requirement are authorized for a residential lot:
      1.   If there are dwellings on both abutting lots with front yards of
less than the required depth for the zone, the front yard for the lot need not
exceed the average front yard of the abutting dwelling.
      2.   If there is a dwelling on one abutting lot with a front yard of less
than the required depth for the zone, the front yard for the lot need not
exceed a depth one-half (1/2) way between the depth of the abutting lot and the
required front yard depth. (Ord. 947, 5-12-2008)
10-5-5: RESIDENTIAL DWELLING STANDARDS:
All dwellings constructed under this title shall conform to the following
minimum standards:
   A.   Dwelling Unit:
      1.   At least one room of not less than one hundred fifty (150) square
feet.
      2.   At least one additional room of not less than seventy (70) square
feet.
      3.   At least one bathroom containing a toilet, a sink, and a shower
stall or bathtub.
      4.   Only one kitchen or cooking area (this is a maximum standard)
containing at least a sink, a cooking appliance, and a food refrigeration unit.
   B.   Efficiency Dwelling Unit: Efficiency or studio apartment dwelling units
shall contain:
      1.   A living room of not less than two hundred twenty (220) square feet.
      2.   An additional one hundred (100) square feet of living area for each
occupant in excess of two (2).
      3.   A separate closet.
      4.   Unless meals are provided by the management as a standard service of
the facility, each unit shall contain a food preparation area containing a
sink, a cooking appliance, and a food refrigeration appliance, each with at
least thirty inches (30") of clear workspace in front.
      5.   A separate bathroom containing a toilet, a sink, and a shower stall
or bathtub.
   C.   Habitable Area: Habitable area shall be the sum of the following areas
within one dwelling unit:
      1.   A living room, bedroom, dining room, family room, and similar living
areas with a ceiling height of at least seven feet six inches (7'6").
      2.   Kitchen, hallway, bathroom, with a ceiling height of at least seven
feet (7').
      3.   In rooms with sloping ceilings, at least one-half (1/2) of the room
area need meet the ceiling height prescribed above, except that no area with a
ceiling height of less than five feet (5') shall be considered as habitable
area. (Ord. 947, 5-12-2008)
10-5-6: RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
Accessory structures are permitted as accessory use to a residence in any zone
subject to the following requirements:
   A.   Small Structures Exempt: Accessory structures of less than twelve (12)
square feet in area and four feet (4') in height may encroach in a required
rear or side yard, and do not require permits. Accessory structures of less
than fifty (50) square feet in area and eight feet (8') in height may encroach
in a required rear or side yard, provided that the structure is constructed
with flame retardant siding or of a noncombustible material and no portion of
the building or roofline projects over any property lines.
   B.   Permit Required: Prior to construction of an accessory structure or
principal garage (except small structures in subsection A of this section), a
permit shall be obtained. Applications for these structures shall be processed
by level I procedures.
   C.   Principal Garage Not An Accessory Structure: One principal garage,
whether attached or detached, is permitted for each residence. The size of the
principal garage is limited by the size of the lot and the lot coverage
standards, but is not limited to any specific maximum square footage.
   D.   Limitation On Size And Number Of Structures: Accessory structures shall
be limited to two hundred forty (240) square feet and fifteen feet (15') in
height. No more than two (2) accessory structures which require permits shall
be allowed per residence.
   E.   Yard Intrusion Permitted: Accessory structures shall not intrude into
required front or side yards. Accessory structures requiring permits may
intrude into required rear yards provided that a minimum setback of five feet
(5') from all property lines is maintained.
   F.   Separation Required: Accessory structures shall be detached from the
residence and all other structures by at least nine feet (9') measured from the
foundation line. (Ord. 947, 5-12-2008)
10-5-7: AUTHORIZATION OF SIMILAR USES:
The planning commission may permit placement of a use in a zone when such use
is not listed, if the proposed use is similar to the uses listed in that zone.
This provision does not apply if the proposed use is listed in another zone, or
is more similar to uses listed in another zone than it is to the zone in which
the use is proposed. (Ord. 947, 5-12-2008)
10-5-8: BUILDING HEIGHT EXEMPTIONS:
The following types of structures or structural parts may exceed the building
height limitations upon issuance of a conditional use permit as provided in
section
10-9-7 of this title:
Chimneys, cupolas, tanks, church spires, belfries, domes, derricks, monuments,
fire and hose towers, observation towers, transmission towers, smokestacks,
flagpoles, radio and television towers, masts, aerials, cooling towers, water
towers, elevator shafts, windmills, conveyors, and other similar projections.
(Ord. 947, 5-12-2008)
10-5-9: FRONTAGE AND ACCESS:
   A.   Residential lots fronting on streets other than a cul-de-sac shall have
a minimum frontage of fifty feet (50') on a dedicated public street.
   B.   Residential lots fronting entirely on the circumference of a cul-de-sac
shall have a minimum frontage of twenty five feet (25').
   C.   Residential lots fronting partially on a cul-de-sac circumference and
partly on a straight street shall have minimum frontage of forty feet (40').
   D.   Access shall be onto a public street other than an alley. (Ord. 947, 5-
12-2008)
10-5-10: MANUFACTURED HOMES:
Manufactured homes are permitted in manufactured home parks, which are a
conditional use in the R-3 zone.
   A.   Design Standards: A manufactured home placed in a manufactured home
park shall be designed in accordance with section
10-2-2 of this title.
   B.   Certification: Manufactured homes shall bear the Oregon department of
commerce "insignia of compliance", and shall have been manufactured after June
15, 1976.
   C.   Placement Standards: Manufactured homes placed in manufactured home
parks shall be placed in conformance with the following standards:
      1.   The manufactured home shall have the wheels, towing assembly (if
detachable), travel lights, and all other transport hardware removed.
      2.   The manufactured home shall have a continuous perimeter of skirting
which meets one of the following standards:
         a.   Skirting of the same or similar appearance as the exterior of the
manufactured home. If metal skirting is used, the wooden supporting members
shall be separate from the ground by at least two inches (2") using galvanized
stakes or similar metal members.
         b.   Three-eighths inch (3/8") exterior grade plywood skirting
separated from the ground by three inches (3") of metal or concrete.
         c.   Continuous concrete or masonry block.
      3.   All plumbing, electric and gas service connections shall be made
according to instructions approved by the state department of commerce.
      4.   Upon removal of the manufactured home, the owner of the property
shall remove all accessory structures and additions to the manufactured home,
permanently disconnect sewer, water, and other utilities unless otherwise
authorized by the city. In the event the owner fails to accomplish said work
within thirty (30) days from the date on which the manufactured home is moved
from its foundations, the city may perform such work and place a lien against
the property for the cost of such work. Said lien may be initiated by the city
council. This condition shall not apply in the event the manufactured home is
replaced on the original foundation by another approved manufactured home
within thirty (30) days of the original unit's removal. (Ord. 947, 5-12-2008)
10-5-11: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
It is the intent of this section to allow home occupations as long as they are
not in violation of the terms of this section and do not alter the residential
character of the neighborhood nor infringe upon the right of neighboring
residents to the peaceful enjoyment of their homes.
   A.   Signage: One nonilluminated wall sign of not more than two (2) square
feet in area is permitted.
   B.   Display Prohibited: There shall be no display other than a sign that
indicates from the exterior that the building is used in whole or part for any
purpose other than a dwelling.
   C.   Characteristics Of Residence To Be Retained: The building shall retain
the characteristics of a residence.
   D.   Outside Storage Prohibited: There shall be no outside storage of
materials.
   E.   Mechanical Equipment: No mechanical equipment shall be permitted except
that which is compatible with residential uses.
   F.   No Employees To Reside At Dwelling: There shall be no employees other
than family members who reside at the dwelling.
   G.   Secondary Use: The home occupation shall be secondary to the main use
of the property as a residence, and shall be operated by the resident of the
property on which the business is located, within the same dwelling or in an
accessory building normally associated with uses located in the zone.
   H.   Delivery And Parking Restrictions: No materials or commodities shall be
delivered to or from the property which are of such bulk or quantity as to
require delivery by a commercial vehicle or a trailer. There shall be no
parking of customers' vehicles in a manner or frequency so as to cause
disturbance or inconvenience to nearby residents or so as to necessitate off
street parking.
   I.   Retail Sales: Retail sales shall be limited or accessory to a service.
   J.   Produce Sales/Display Stand: Temporary sales of produce is permitted
subject to the following:
      1.   The produce for sale shall have been grown on the premises from
which it is being sold.
      2.   The sales area shall be located entirely on private property.
      3.   The operation shall not create hazardous traffic conditions or
unreasonably increase traffic conditions in residential areas for on street or
off street parking.
      4.   If any of the terms of this section are violated, produce sales
shall immediately cease.
   K.   Daycare Centers: Daycare centers providing for six (6) or less children
shall be a permitted outright use in any residential or commercial zone,
provided that prior to permit issuance the physical facilities for the care of
the children, such as building construction, sanitation, plumbing, heating,
lighting, ventilation, maintenance, indoor and outdoor activity areas and fire
protection, are approved by inspection of such by city provided inspector(s).
(Ord. 947, 5-12-2008)
10-5-12: MODULAR HOMES:
Modular homes are residential structures which are constructed to the standards
of chapter 50 (Oregon amendments) of the uniform building code, and the
structural, mechanical, electrical, and plumbing specialty codes. (Ord. 947, 5-
12-2008)
10-5-13: TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Improvements Permitted Outright: Except where otherwise specifically
regulated by this code, the following improvements are permitted outright:
      1.   Normal operation, maintenance, repair and preservation activities of
existing transportation facilities.
      2.   Installation of culverts, pathways, medians, fencing, guardrails,
lighting, and similar types of improvements within the existing right of way.
      3.   Projects specifically identified in the transportation system plan
as not requiring further land use regulation.
      4.   Landscaping as part of a transportation facility.
      5.   Emergency measures necessary for the safety and protection of
property.
      6.   Acquisition of right of way for public roads, highways, and other
transportation improvements designated in the transportation system plan except
for those that are located in exclusive farm use or forest zones.
      7.   Construction of a street or road as part of an approved subdivision
or land partition consistent with the applicable land division ordinance.
   B.   Transportation Projects; Criteria:
      1.   Construction, reconstruction or widening of highways, roads,
bridges, or other transportation projects that are: a) not improvements
designated in the transportation system plan or b) not designed and constructed
as part of a subdivision or planned development subject to conditional use
permit review, which shall comply with the transportation system plan and
applicable standards, shall address the following criteria. For state projects
that require an environmental impact statement (EIS) or environmental
assessment (EA) the draft EIS or EA shall be reviewed and used as the basis of
findings to comply with the following criteria:
         a.   The project is designed to be compatible with existing land use
and social patterns, including noise generation, safety and zoning.
         b.   The project is designed to minimize avoidable environmental
impacts to identified wetlands, wildlife habitat, air and water quality,
cultural resources, and scenic qualities.
         c.   The project preserves or improves the safety and function of the
facility through access management, traffic calming, or other design features.
         d.   The project includes provision for bicycle and pedestrian
circulation as consistent with the comprehensive plan and other requirements of
this code.
      2.   If review under this section indicates that the use or activity is
inconsistent with the transportation system plan, the procedure for a plan
amendment shall be undertaken prior to or in conjunction with the conditional
permit review.
   C.   Time Limitation On Transportation Related Conditional Use Permits:
      1.   Authorization of a conditional use shall be voided after a period
specified by the applicant as reasonable and necessary based on season, right
of way acquisition, and other pertinent factors. This period shall not exceed
three (3) years. (Ord. 947, 5-12-2008)
10-5-14: ACCESS MANAGEMENT AND CONNECTIVITY:
The intent of this section is to manage access to land development while
preserving the movement of people and goods in terms of safety, capacity,
functional classification, and level of service as categorized in the
transportation system plan. This section shall apply to all arterials and
collectors within the city of Milton-Freewater and to all properties that abut
these roadways.
   A.   Joint Use Driveways And Cross Access:
      1.   Adjacent commercial or office properties classified as major traffic
generators (i.e., shopping plazas, office parks) shall provide a cross access
drive and pedestrian access to allow circulation between sites.
      2.   A system of joint use driveways and cross access easements shall be
established wherever feasible.
      3.   Shared parking areas shall be permitted a reduction in required
parking spaces if peak demands do not occur at the same time periods.
      4.   Pursuant to this section, property owners shall:
         a.   Record an easement with the deed allowing cross access to and
from other properties served by the joint use driveways and cross access or
service drive;
         b.   Record an agreement with the deed that remaining access rights
along the roadway will be dedicated to the city of Milton-Freewater and
preexisting driveways will be closed and eliminated after construction of the
joint use driveway;
         c.   Record a joint maintenance agreement with the deed defining
maintenance responsibilities of property owners.
      5.   The city of Milton-Freewater may reduce required separation distance
of access points where they prove impractical, provided all of the following
requirements are met:
         a.   Joint access driveways and cross access easements are provided in
accordance with this section.
         b.   The property owner enters into a written agreement with the city
of Milton-Freewater, recorded with the deed, that preexisting connections on
the site will be closed and eliminated after construction of each side of the
joint use driveway.
      6.   The city of Milton-Freewater may modify or waive the requirements of
this section where the characteristics or layout of abutting properties would
make the development of a unified or shared access and circulation system
impractical.
   B.   Access Connection And Driveway Design:
      1.   Driveways shall meet the following standards:
         a.   If the driveway is a one-way in or one-way out drive, then the
driveway shall be a minimum width of ten feet (10') and shall have appropriate
signage designating the driveway as a one-way connection.
         b.   For two-way access, each lane shall have a minimum width of ten
feet (10') and a maximum width of twelve feet (12').
      2.   Driveway approaches provide an exiting vehicle with an unobstructed
view. Construction of driveways along acceleration or deceleration lanes and
tapers shall be avoided due to the potential for vehicular weaving conflicts.
      3.   The length of driveways shall be designed in accordance with the
anticipated storage length for entering and exiting vehicles to prevent
vehicles from backing into the flow of traffic on the public street or causing
unsafe conflicts with on site circulation.
   C.   Nonconforming Access Features:
      1.   Legal access connections in place as of the adoption date hereof
that do not conform with the standards herein are considered nonconforming
features and shall be brought into compliance with applicable standards under
the following conditions:
         a.   When new access connection permits are requested;
         b.   Change in use or enlargements or improvements that will increase
trip generation.
   D.   Reverse Frontage:
      1.   Lots that front on more than one street shall be required to locate
motor vehicle accesses on the street with the lower functional classification.
      2.   When a residential subdivision is proposed that would abut an
arterial, it shall be designed to provide through lots along the arterial with
access from a frontage road or interior local road. Access rights of these lots
to the arterial shall be dedicated to the city of Milton-Freewater and recorded
with the deed.
   E.   Shared Access:
      1.   Subdivisions with frontage on the state highway system shall be
designed into shared access points to and from the highway. Normally a maximum
of two (2) accesses shall be allowed regardless of the number of lots or
businesses served. If access off of a secondary street is possible, then access
should not be allowed onto the state highway. If access off of a secondary
street becomes available, then conversion to that access is encouraged, along
with closing the state highway access.
      2.   New direct accesses to individual one- and two-family dwellings
shall be prohibited on all state highways except district level state highways.
   F.   Connectivity:
      1.   The street system of proposed subdivisions shall be designed to
connect with existing, proposed, and planned streets outside of the
subdivision, as provided in this section.
      2.   Wherever a proposed development abuts unplatted land or a future
development phase of the same development, street stubs shall be provided to
provide access to abutting property or to logically extend the street system
into the surrounding area. All street stubs shall be provided with a temporary
turnaround unless specifically exempted by the city engineer. Restoration and
extension of the street shall be the responsibility of any future developer of
the abutting land.
      3.   Minor collector and local residential streets shall connect with
surrounding streets to permit the convenient movement of traffic between
residential neighborhoods or facilitate emergency access and evacuation.
Connections shall be designed to avoid or minimize through traffic on local
streets. Appropriate design, such as narrow streets, traffic control such as
four-way stops, and traffic calming measures are the preferred means of
discouraging through traffic.
   G.   Pedestrian And Bicycle Circulation:
      1.   On site facilities shall be provided that accommodate safe and
convenient pedestrian and bicycle access within new subdivisions, multi-family
developments, planned development, shopping centers, and commercial districts,
and connection to adjacent residential areas and neighborhood activity centers
within one-half (1/2) mile of the development. Residential developments shall
include streets with sidewalks and accessways. Pedestrian circulation through
parking lots shall be provided in the form of accessways.
      2.   Bikeways shall be required along arterials and collectors with ADTs
greater than three thousand (3,000). Sidewalks shall be required along
arterials, collectors and most local streets, except that sidewalks are not
required along controlled access roadways (freeways).
   H.   Cul-De-Sacs And Accessways:
      1.   Cul-de-sacs or permanent dead end streets may be used as part of a
development plan; however, through streets are encouraged except where
topographical, environmental, or existing adjacent land use constraints make
connecting streets infeasible. Where cul-de-sacs are planned, accessways shall
be provided connecting the ends of cul-de-sacs to each other, to other streets,
or to neighborhood activity centers.
      2.   Accessways for pedestrians and bicyclists shall be ten feet (10')
wide and located within a twenty foot (20') wide right of way or easement. If
the streets within the subdivision are lighted, the accessways shall also be
lighted. Stairs or switchback paths may be used where grades are steep.
      3.   Accessways for pedestrians and bicyclists shall be provided at
midblock where the block is longer than six hundred feet (600').
      4.   The city planner may determine, based upon evidence in the record,
that an accessway is impracticable. Such evidence may include, but is not
limited to: (Ord. 947, 5-12-2008)
         a.   Physical or topographic conditions make an accessway connection
impractical. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, freeways,
railroads, extremely steep slopes, wetlands, or other bodies of water where a
connection cannot reasonably be provided. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984; amd. Ord. 947,
5-12-2008)
         b.   Buildings or other existing development on adjacent lands
physically preclude a connection now or in the future, considering potential
for redevelopment.
         c.   Where accessways would violate provisions of leases, easements,
covenants, restrictions, or other agreements existing as of May 1, 1995, that
preclude a required accessway connection.
   I.   Blocks:
      1.   The maximum perimeter lengths for blocks shall be one thousand six
hundred feet (1,600').
      2.   The maximum length of any block shall be four hundred feet (400').
(Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
CHAPTER 6
OFF STREET PARKING
SECTION:
10-6-1: Application Of Parking Provisions
10-6-2: Required Off Street Parking
10-6-3: Design And Construction Standards
10-6-4: Off Street Loading
10-6-5: Bicycle Parking
10-6-1: APPLICATION OF PARKING PROVISIONS:
The off street parking requirements which follow apply to development of all
new buildings and uses, expansion of the area or intensity of an existing use,
and to conversion of a building or site from one type of use to another type of
use.
These provisions do not apply to placement of a retail commercial use in an
existing but vacant commercial building in the downtown main street areas of
the Milton and Freewater town sites. In these areas where full development of
common wall construction effectively precludes these parking standards,
existing buildings may be used for retail commercial use without providing
additional parking. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-6-2: REQUIRED OFF STREET PARKING:
 
A.   Residential Uses:
                                                                               1 per
   1.   Single-family, duplex or triplex                                dwelling
                                                                               unit
                                                                               3 spaces
   2.   Multi-family dwellings containing 4 or more units               per each 2
                                                                               units
                                                                               Spaces
                                                                               equal to 80
                                                                               percent of
   3.   Rooming/boarding house                                          guest
                                                                               capacity
                                                                               plus
                                                                               management
B.    Hotel, Motel                                                         1 for each
                                                                               guestroom
C.    Commercial:                                                           
                                                                               1 for every
   1.   Retail store (except as in subsection C2 of this section)       400 square
                                                                               feet floor
                                                                               area
                                                                               1 for every
   2.   Repair shop or retail store handling bulky merchandise such as  600 square
implement dealership or furniture store                                        feet floor
                                                                               area
                                                                               1 for every
                                                                               500 square
   3.   Bank, office, except medical/dental clinic                      feet plus 1
                                                                               per 2
                                                                               employees
                                                                               1 for every
                                                                               300 square
   4.   Medical/dental clinic                                           feet plus 1
                                                                               per 2
                                                                               employees
                                                                               1 for every
   5.   Eating or drinking establishment                                200 square
                                                                               feet floor
                                                                               area
                                                                               1 for every
                                                                               500 square
                                                                               feet
   6.   Wholesale establishment                                         customer
                                                                               service
                                                                               area and 1
                                                                               for each
                                                                               employee
D.   Institutional And Community Service:                                   
   1.   Hospital                                                        2 for each
                                                                               bed
                                                                               1 space for
                                                                               each 2 beds
   2.   Nursing home, group home, residential care facility             or
                                                                               residential
                                                                               units
   3.   Preschool nursery, daycare center                               2 spaces
                                                                               per teacher
                                                                               2 spaces
   4.   Elementary or junior high school                                per
                                                                               classroom
                                                                               6 spaces
   5.   High school                                                     per
                                                                               classroom
                                                                               1 for each
   6.   College (commercial or business)                                5 classroom
                                                                               seats
E.   Places Of Assembly:                                                    
   1.   Auditorium, assembly hall                                       1 for each
                                                                               8 seats
                                                                               1 space per
   2.   Stadium, arena                                                  10 seats or
                                                                               30 feet of
                                                                               bench
                                                                               1 for each
   3.   Church, lodges, clubs                                           5 seats or
                                                                               10 feet of
                                                                               bench
F.   Industrial Uses                                                       1 space per
                                                                               employee
 
   G.   Additional Provisions:
      1.   Additional parking spaces may be required through review by the site
plan committee to accommodate employees of a commercial or industrial use.
      2.   For uses not listed in this section, parking shall be provided on
the same basis as required for the most similar listed use.
      3.   Recreational vehicles (campers, fifth wheelers, trailers, buses,
conversions, etc.) shall be parked off street in all residential districts at
all times.
      4.   Owners of two (2) or more uses, structures, or parcels of land may
agree to utilize jointly the same parking and loading spaces when the hours of
operation do not overlap provided that satisfactory evidence is presented to
the planning director in the form of deeds, leases or contracts to establish
the joint use.
      5.   Off street parking for residential uses shall be on the same lot as
the residential structure.
      6.   Off street parking for uses other than residential may be located on
the same lot as the subject use or may be on another property under the same
ownership as the subject use provided that the separate lot is within four
hundred feet (400') of the subject use.
When provided on a separate parcel, an agreement with the city must be recorded
which dedicates the needed portion of that parcel to parking for the subject
establishment.
      7.   When mixing uses occupy a structure, the total requirements for off
street parking shall be the sum of the various uses.
      8.   Required parking spaces shall be available for the parking of
operable passenger automobiles of residents, customers, patrons and employees
only, and shall not be used for storage of vehicles or materials or for the
parking of trucks used in conducting the business use.
      9.   Parking shall not be provided in areas which are required open space
areas. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-6-3: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
Plans for parking lots shall be submitted as provided in section
10-3-4 of this title. When part of an application for a new use, a parking lot
shall be considered as part of the overall application. When proposed to
provide parking for an existing use, the application shall be processed by
level I procedures and shall conform to the following standards:
   A.   Surfacing:
      1.   Surfaces of required parking or maneuvering areas for all uses,
other than industrial uses in industrial zones, shall have paved surfaces of
asphalt cement or concrete cement. Construction shall be as follows:
         a.   Asphalt Cement: Two inches (2") of asphalt cement over a four
inch (4") select rock base on a stable substrate.
         b.   Concrete Cement: Four inches (4") of concrete cement over a two
inch (2") gravel base on a stable substrate.
      2.   Industrial uses in industrial zones shall have designated areas for
employee parking, and specified routes for employee and industrial vehicle
access and maneuvering. The access routes and parking areas are to be
constructed of an all weather gravel surface on a stable substrate.
   B.   Drainage: Sumps, collectors, storm sewers and other facilities shall be
designed and placed to dispose of storm water runoff within the boundaries of
the facilities to adjacent property if proper easements are acquired and if no
storm flood potential results.
   C.   Fencing: Except for parking to serve residential uses, parking and
loading areas adjacent to or within residential zones or adjacent to
residential uses shall be designed to minimize disturbance of residents by the
erection between the uses of a sight obscuring fence of not less than five (5)
nor more than six feet (6') in height except where vision clearance is
required.
   D.   Bumper Strips: Parking spaces along the outer boundaries of a parking
lot shall include a wheel stop at least six inches (6") high, or by a bumper
rail.
   E.   Lighting: Artificial lighting which may be provided shall not create or
reflect substantial glare in a residential zone or on any adjacent dwelling.
   F.   Access:
      1.   Groups of two (2) or more parking spaces shall be served by a
service drive so that no backward movement or other maneuvering of a vehicle
within a street other than an alley will be required.
      2.   Access locations (driveway) to collector and arterial streets shall
be determined by the director of public works.
      3.   Service drives to off street parking areas shall be designed and
constructed to facilitate the flow of traffic, provide maximum safety of
traffic access and maximum safety of pedestrians and vehicular traffic on the
site. The number of service drives shall be limited to the minimum that will
allow the property to accommodate and service the traffic to be anticipated.
Service drives shall be clearly and permanently marked and defined through use
of rails, fences, walls, or other barriers or markers on frontage not occupied
by service drives.
      4.   Service drives shall have a minimum vision clearance area formed by
the intersection of the driveway centerline, the street right of way, and a
straight line joining said lines through points twenty feet (20') from their
intersection.
      5.   All off street parking, whether residential, commercial, or
industrial, shall be accessible directly from an approved street, unless
special conditions have been determined to exist for the property by the
planning commission.
   G.   Compact Car Spaces: Compact car spaces will be allowed in any parking
area with four (4) or more required spaces. One compact space may be allowed in
lieu of one required standard space for each four (4) spaces provided,
representing twenty five percent (25%) of the total spaces required.
   H.   Designated Handicapped Spaces: In lieu of one required standard space,
one parking space for the handicapped shall be required and one for every fifty
(50) spaces thereafter.
   I.   Parking Diagram: A parking diagram on file with the city provides the
minimum dimensions for public and private parking area construction. (Ord. 667,
9-24-1984)
10-6-4: OFF STREET LOADING:
   A.   Schools: A driveway designed for continuous forward flow of passenger
vehicles for the purpose of loading and unloading children shall be located on
the site of any school having a capacity greater than twenty five (25)
students.
   B.   Merchandise And Supplies: Buildings or structures to be built or
substantially altered to receive or distribute material or merchandise by truck
shall provide and maintain off street loading berths in sufficient numbers and
size to adequately handle the needs of the particular use. If loading space has
been provided in connection with an existing use or is added to an existing
use, the loading space shall not be eliminated if elimination would result in
less space than is required to adequately handle the needs of the particular
use. Off street parking areas used to fulfill the requirements of this chapter
shall not be used for loading or unloading operations except during periods of
the day when not required to take care of parking needs. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-6-5: BICYCLE PARKING:
   A.   A minimum of two (2) bicycle parking spaces per use (1 sheltered and 1
unsheltered) shall be required.
   B.   The following special minimum standards shall be considered as
supplemental requirements for the number of required bicycle parking spaces:
      1.   Multi-Family Residences: Every residential use of four (4) or more
dwelling units shall provide at least one sheltered bicycle parking space for
each unit. Sheltered bicycle parking spaces may be located within a garage,
storage shed, basement, utility room or similar area. In those instances in
which the residential complex has no garage or other easily accessible storage
unit, the required bicycle parking spaces shall be sheltered under an eave,
overhang, an independent structure, or similar cover.
      2.   Parking Lots: All public and commercial parking lots and parking
structures shall provide a minimum of one bicycle parking space for every ten
(10) motor vehicle parking spaces.
      3.   Schools: Elementary and middle schools, both private and public,
shall provide one bicycle parking space for every ten (10) students and
employees. High schools shall provide one bicycle parking space for every five
(5) students and employees. All spaces shall be sheltered under an eave,
overhang, independent structure, or similar cover.
      4.   Colleges: Colleges, universities, and trade schools shall provide
one bicycle parking space for every ten (10) motor vehicle spaces plus one
space for every dormitory unit. Fifty percent (50%) of the bicycle parking
spaces shall be sheltered under an eave, overhang, independent structure, or
similar cover.
      5.   Downtown Areas: In downtown areas with on street parking, bicycle
parking for customers shall be provided along the street at a rate of at least
one space per use. Spaces may be clustered to serve up to six (6) bicycles; at
least one cluster per block shall be provided. Bicycle parking spaces shall be
located in front of the stores along the street either on the sidewalks in
specially constructed areas such as pedestrian curb extensions. Inverted "U"
style racks are recommended. Bicycle parking shall not interfere with
pedestrian passage, leaving a clear area of at least five feet (5'). Customer
spaces are not required to be sheltered. Sheltered parking (within a building,
or under an eave, overhang, or similar structure) shall be provided at a rate
of one space per ten (10) employees, with a minimum of one space per store.
      6.   Multiple Uses: For facilities with multiple uses (such as commercial
centers), the bicycle parking requirements shall be calculated by using the
total number of motor vehicle parking spaces required for the entire
development. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
CHAPTER 7
SIGNS
SECTION:
10-7-1: Description And Purpose
10-7-2: Exempt Signs
10-7-3: General Sign Provisions
10-7-4: Permit Not Required
10-7-5: Permit Required
10-7-6: Permit Procedures
10-7-7: R-1 Zone
10-7-8: R-2 Zone
10-7-9: R-3 Zone
10-7-10: MSR Zone
10-7-11: C-1, C-2, DB And R-M (For Office And Commercial Type Uses In R-M Zone)
Zones
10-7-12: I-M Zone
10-7-13: BP Zone
10-7-14: Signs Or Advertising Devices Prohibited
10-7-15: Appearance Incentive
10-7-16: Temporary Sign Permit Procedure
10-7-17: Abatement Of Signs
10-7-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
The provisions of this chapter regulate the location, construction, size and
number of signs and related matters. The purpose of these provisions is to
maintain and improve the aesthetic and safety characteristics of signs within
the city. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-7-2: EXEMPT SIGNS:
The following signs are exempt from this chapter, and do not require permits
for placement or modification. These signs are permitted in any zone.
   A.   Traffic: Traffic control signs and instruments of the state, county or
municipality provided for public safety, information or assistance.
   B.   Utility: Signs of public utility companies or railroads which aid
public safety, or which show the location of underground facilities or of
public telephone. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-7-3: GENERAL SIGN PROVISIONS:
   A.   Project Over Property: Signs may not project out over public property
beyond ten feet (10') nor closer than two feet (2') from the vertical extension
of the curb line, whichever is less.
No sign shall project over state highway right of way. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
   B.   Vertical Clearance: All signs shall have a vertical clearance of ten
feet (10') above public property. After review by the planning department,
awnings or marquees may be allowed within eight feet (8') above public
property. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
   C.   Public Property: No sign shall stand or be based on public property.
   D.   Nonconforming Signs: All nonconforming signs advertising a business
that has been discontinued from active use for a period of one year shall
comply with this chapter prior to resumption of business.
   E.   Building Code: All signs must be structurally in conformance with the
building code.
   F.   Regulatory Equipment: Regulatory equipment shall be installed in all
electric signs to preclude interference with radio and television.
   G.   Sign Faces And Measurements:
      1.   Single Face Sign: A single face sign is one with advertising on only
one surface of the sign.
      2.   Double Face Sign: A double face sign is one with advertising on two
(2) surfaces back to back.
      3.   Multi-Face Sign: A multi-face sign is one with more than one section
or module. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
      4.   Size: The size of a sign shall be the entire area within any type or
perimeter or border which encloses the outer limits of any writing,
representation, emblem, figure or character. The area of the sign having no
such perimeter or border shall be computed by enclosing the entire area within
a parallelogram or a triangle of the smallest size sufficient to cover the
entire area of the sign and computing the area of the parallelogram or
triangle. The area of a sign for awnings or marquees shall be computed in this
manner. Where a sign has two (2) or more faces, the area of all faces shall be
included in determining the area of the sign. Conforming and/or nonconforming
signs in existence at the time of the enactment of this chapter shall be
counted in establishing the permitted area or size of all new signs to be
allowed on the property. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
   H.   Repair And Maintenance: All signs, together with all of their supports,
braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in good repair and be maintained in a
safe, neat, clean and attractive condition, free from rust, corrosion, peeling
paint or other surface deterioration. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-7-4: PERMIT NOT REQUIRED:
No permit is required for placement of the following signs, but such signs
shall conform to the regulations of this chapter. These signs are permitted in
any zone.
   A.   Construction Project Sign: A sign erected in conjunction with
construction projects and used to inform the public of the architects,
engineers and construction organizations participating in the project and
indicating "future home of" information. One such sign may be erected after
appropriate building permits have been obtained. No such sign shall exceed
sixty four (64) square feet total and thirty two (32) square feet per face; no
freestanding signs shall exceed eight feet (8') in height. The sign shall be
removed at the time final occupancy is approved by the state building
inspector.
   B.   Garage Sale Sign: A sign advertising garage sales or similar events.
Such signs are allowed in residential zones. They shall not exceed a size per
face of two (2) square feet and shall not exceed four feet (4') in height. Such
signs shall not be erected prior to one week before this event and shall be
removed no later than the day after the event. They shall not be placed in the
public right of way or vision clearance areas. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
   C.   Gas Station Price Sign: Up to three (3) changeable copy signs may be
allowed for the purpose of advertising gasoline prices. Each sign shall be a
one or two (2) face sign with a maximum of four (4) square feet in area per
face and shall be permanently affixed to the building or freestanding sign.
This may be in addition to any other signs allowed for the property. (Ord. 764,
5-26-1992)
   D.   Nameplate: A sign identifying the name, street address, occupation and/
or profession of the occupant of the premises; graphic information on all
nameplates shall be limited to the identification of the business name as
registered with the state of Oregon. One nameplate, not exceeding two (2)
square feet total shall be allowed for each occupant; the nameplate shall be
affixed to the building wall.
   E.   Opening Banner: A banner announcing the opening of a new business. One
banner shall be permitted for a period of three (3) weeks prior to and three
(3) weeks after the actual opening. Such banner shall not exceed sixty four
(64) square feet total and thirty two (32) square feet per face. This section
does not apply to announcing the availability of office space or residential
units.
   F.   Private Real Estate Sign: A sign placed by persons not employing a real
estate broker, agent or salesperson to sell or rent structures or real
property.
      1.   In all residential zones, such signs shall not exceed three (3)
square feet per face, six (6) square feet per sign.
      2.   In the commercial zones (C-1 and C-2) and in the I-M zone, such
signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet per face, thirty two (32)
square feet per sign.
   G.   Public Safety And Convenience: A sign used to serve the public safety
or convenience, such as "entrance" signs, "parking" signs. Such signs shall not
exceed three (3) square feet per face, per sign.
   H.   Commercial Real Estate Sign: A sign for the purpose of rent, lease,
sale, etc., of real property, building opportunities or building space.
      1.   In all residential zones, the sign shall not exceed three (3) square
feet per face, six (6) square feet per sign. One such sign is permitted per
parcel, or per each one hundred fifty feet (150') of street frontage.
      2.   In the commercial zones (C-1 and C-2) and in the I-M zone, such
signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet per face, thirty two (32)
square feet per sign. One such sign is permitted per parcel, or per each one
hundred fifty feet (150') of street frontage.
   I.   Special Event Sign: A sign advertising or pertaining to any special
community event sanctioned or sponsored by the city council taking place within
the city.
   J.   Window Sign: A sign not exceeding twenty percent (20%) of interior
window area per window.
   K.   Political Campaign Sign: Political campaign signs shall be placed on
private property, not in a street right of way. They shall not exceed thirty
two (32) square feet per face, sixty four (64) square feet per sign. All such
signs shall be removed within five (5) days after the election which they
advertise. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-7-5: PERMIT REQUIRED:
The following types of signs are permitted only after review and issuance of a
permit by the planning department. Signs in C-1 and C-2 zones may be subject to
review by a design review committee, whose recommendations are presented to the
planning department for outright issuance of permit, or modification of sign
design prior thereto. Each type of sign listed below is separate and exclusive
from every other type, i.e., a projecting sign shall not include moving parts
unless a moving sign is applied for. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
   A.   Billboard: Signs advertising merchandise or services other than those
available for sale on the premises.
   B.   Changeable Copy Sign: A sign which contains numbers, letters or symbols
capable of being changed.
   C.   Fence Sign: A sign attached to or painted on a fence. Fence signs shall
be subject to the same requirements as a freestanding sign and shall not exceed
the height of the fence.
   D.   Flashing Sign: A sign with flashing lights or which changes brightness
of illumination.
   E.   Freestanding Sign: A sign supported by one or more uprights, poles or
braces placed in or upon the ground, or a sign supported by any structure
primarily for the display and support of the sign.
   F.   Moving Sign: A sign which revolves, rotates or has moving parts.
   G.   Projecting Sign: A sign which projects up to eight feet (8') beyond a
building wall surface, or within two feet (2') of the curb, or up to two-thirds
(2/3) of the width of the sidewalk, whichever is less.
   H.   Wall Sign: A sign attached to, erected against or painted on a wall of
a building or structure, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane
approximately parallel to the face of said wall and not projecting more than
twelve inches (12"). A sign projecting more than twelve inches (12") is a
projecting sign. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
   I.   Hanging Sign: A sign that is mounted to hang, without other supports,
from an awning, porch or structure. (Ord. 925, 6-13-2005)
10-7-6: PERMIT PROCEDURES:
For all signs listed in section
10-7-5 of this chapter, a permit is required. No person shall construct, erect,
attach or alter any such sign without a permit.
When applying for a new use, a sign or signs if desired, shall be included in
the application, and shall be reviewed as part of the overall proposal.
When applying for a sign to advertise an existing use, the application shall be
processed by level I procedures, except that all applications for moving or
flashing signs shall be conditional and shall be processed by level III
procedures including subsection
10-9-7H of this title. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-7-7: R-1 ZONE:
Signs allowed:
   A.   Signs listed in sections
10-7-2 and
10-7-4 of this chapter.
   B.   One temporary freestanding or wall sign not exceeding sixty four (64)
square feet of total display area per subdivision advertising the sale of the
tract or the lots. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
   C.   One freestanding sign, illuminated by a spotlight if desired and not to
exceed thirty two (32) square feet per display surface and one wall sign, not
to exceed twenty percent (20%) of the wall area, to identify places of worship.
(Ord. 887, 10-23-2000)
10-7-8: R-2 ZONE:
Signs allowed:
   A.   Signs listed in sections
10-7-2 and
10-7-4 of this chapter.
   B.   One nonilluminated freestanding or wall sign, not to exceed two (2)
square feet total display surface, for the purpose of advertising approved home
occupations.
   C.   One temporary freestanding sign, not exceeding sixty four (64) square
feet of total display area, per subdivision, advertising the sale of the tract
or the lots. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
   D.   One freestanding or wall sign, illuminated by a spotlight if desired
and not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet per display surface, to advertise
multi-family dwelling developments and planned unit developments.
   E.   One freestanding sign, illuminated by a spotlight if desired and not to
exceed thirty two (32) square feet per display surface and one wall sign, not
to exceed twenty percent (20%) of the wall area, to identify places of worship.
(Ord. 887, 10-23-2000)
10-7-9: R-3 ZONE:
Signs allowed:
   A.   Signs listed in sections
10-7-2 and
10-7-4 of this chapter.
   B.   One temporary freestanding or wall sign not exceeding sixty four (64)
square feet in area per subdivision, advertising the sale of the tract or lots.
(Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
   C.   One freestanding or wall sign, illuminated by a spotlight if desired
and not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet per display surface, to advertise
manufactured home parks, multi-family dwelling developments, planned unit
developments, or nursing homes and residential care facilities. The sign shall
be natural wood finish or muted earth tone colors. (Ord. 887, 10-23-2000)
   D.   One nonilluminated freestanding or wall sign not to exceed two (2)
square feet total display surface for the purpose of advertising approved home
occupations. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
   E.   One freestanding sign, illuminated by a spotlight if desired and not to
exceed thirty two (32) square feet per display surface and one wall sign, not
to exceed twenty percent (20%) of the wall area, to identify places of worship.
(Ord. 887, 10-23-2000)
10-7-10: MSR ZONE:
Signs allowed:
   A.   Signs listed in sections
10-7-2 and
10-7-4 of this chapter.
   B.   One temporary freestanding or wall sign not exceeding sixty four (64)
square feet in area per subdivision, advertising the sale of the tract or lots.
This provision applies only to uses for parcels which meet the standards for
this use.
   C.   One freestanding or wall sign, illuminated by a spotlight, and not to
exceed thirty two (32) square feet per display surface. The sign shall be
natural wood finish or muted earth tone colors. This provision applies only to
commercial uses on parcels which are being carried out in a structure not
originally constructed for residential use.
   D.   One nonilluminated wall or hanging sign not to exceed six (6) square
feet total display surface for the purpose of advertising approved uses,
including home occupations. (Ord. 925, 6-13-2005)
10-7-11: C-1, C-2, DB AND R-M (FOR OFFICE AND COMMERCIAL TYPE USES IN R-M ZONE)
ZONES:
Signs allowed:
   A.   Allowed: Signs listed in sections
10-7-2 and
10-7-4 of this chapter.
   B.   Home Occupation: One nonilluminated freestanding or wall sign not to
exceed two (2) square feet total display surface for the purpose of advertising
approved home occupations.
   C.   Business Signs:
      1.   A place of business shall be permitted one freestanding sign and one
wall sign. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
      2.   Freestanding and projecting signs shall be no larger than 0.5 square
feet per linear foot of lot street frontage per display surface, with a maximum
of two (2) display surfaces. However, in no case shall each display surface
exceed two hundred twenty five (225) square feet. (Ord. 887, 10-23-2000)
      3.   Wall signs shall be a maximum of twenty percent (20%) of the area of
the front entry wall of the business.
      4.   Businesses which occupy buildings having two (2) or more street
frontages shall be permitted one wall sign on each wall which faces a street.
The sign on the main frontage or entry wall of the business shall be a maximum
of twenty percent (20%) of the wall area and the sign on any side wall or
secondary entry shall be a maximum of ten percent (10%) of that wall area. Each
wall shall be a separate unit for area calculations. Wall areas shall not be
combined in any way to increase the size or number of signs permitted.
      5.   All freestanding signs shall be on premises. No billboards shall be
permitted. (Ord. 695, 4-28-1986)
   D.   Residential Zone: A flashing or moving sign shall not be located within
seventy five feet (75') of a residential zone. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
   E.   Off Premises Signs:
      1.   Off premises signs shall be allowed along designated Oregon/
Washington Highway 11 within the city of Milton-Freewater, more specifically:
S. Main Street from S.E. 3rd Avenue to S.E. 14th Avenue, S. Columbia from S.E.
3rd Avenue to E. Broadway, and North Columbia from E. Broadway to the northern
city limits boundary across North Columbia Street. Off premises signs shall
only be allowed on lots with street frontage along these designated streets.
(Ord. 723, 3-14-1988)
      2.   Each lot, parcel, or tract of land shall have a sign allowance
defined by the standards set forth in subsection C of this section. This sign
allowance shall be the maximum square footage of signs allowed to be installed
on that lot. Increases in sign area standards due to sign appearance incentive
shall not be applied to sign allowance for off premises signs.
      3.   One off premises sign shall be allowed per business or service
identified. Application shall be made by landowner and proprietor of the
business or service identified. A copy of the lease agreement shall be
submitted with the application.
      4.   Size of off premises signs shall be determined by sign allowance for
the host property. Existing signs shall be subtracted from sign allowance with
the remainder to be made available for off premises signs. Maximum size shall
be forty (40) square feet per display surface with maximum of two (2) display
surfaces. (Ord. 717, 10-12-1987)
      5.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any off
premises sign in the area described in this subsection E which is allowed by
the state of Oregon off premises sign regulations may be allowed by the
planning commission as a conditional use. (Ord. 741, 7-24-1989)
10-7-12: I-M ZONE:
Signs allowed:
   A.   Signs listed in sections
10-7-1 and
10-7-4 of this chapter.
   B.   Retail businesses located in an I-M zone shall be regulated by the
provisions of section
10-7-11 of this chapter.
   C.   Industrial businesses shall be permitted one freestanding sign as
provided by subsections 10-7-11C2 and C5 of this chapter and wall signs as
provided in subsections 10-7-11C3 and C4 of this chapter. (Ord. 695, 4-28-1986)
10-7-13: BP ZONE:
Signs allowed:
   A.   Signs listed in sections
10-7-2 and
10-7-4 of this chapter.
   B.   Businesses located in this zone with a posted speed of between twenty
five (25) and fifty five (55) miles per hour shall be regulated by the
provisions of section
10-7-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
   C.   Businesses located in this zone with a posted speed of fifty five (55)
miles per hour or higher shall be no larger than 0.75 square feet per linear
foot of lot street frontage per display surface with a maximum of two (2)
display surfaces. However, in no case shall each display surface exceed two
hundred twenty five (225) square feet. (Ord. 887, 10-23-2000)
10-7-14: SIGNS OR ADVERTISING DEVICES PROHIBITED:
The following signs are prohibited:
   A.   Signs in vision clearance areas as defined in section
10-5-3 of this title.
   B.   Pennants, streamers, festoon lights and other similar devices with
parts intended to be moved by the wind. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
   C.   Signs attached to any publicly owned tree or public utility pole, other
than signs posted by public utilities. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
   D.   Signs using bare bulb illumination or lighted so that the immediate
source of illumination is visible. This is not intended to prohibit the use of
neon as a source of illumination.
   E.   Any sign which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an
official traffic sign or signal, or which bears the words "STOP", "GO", "SLOW",
"CAUTION", "DANGER", "WARNING", or similar words.
   F.   Any sign which by reason of its size, location, movement, content,
coloring or manner of illumination may be confused with or construed as a
traffic control device, or which hides from view any traffic sign or signal.
   G.   Signs designed or used for the purpose of emitting sound or dispersing
smells.
   H.   A sign or sign structure constructed so that any portion of its surface
or supports will interfere in any way with the free use of any fire escape,
exit, standpipe or the exterior of any window. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-7-15: APPEARANCE INCENTIVE:
   A.   The sign area standards contained in this chapter may be increased.
(Ord. 887, 10-23-2000; amd. Ord. 925, 6-13-2005)
   B.   Application for and consideration of modification of sign standards
shall be made in the same manner as provided in section
10-3-9 of this title for level III procedure.
   C.   In considering an application for modification of the sign standards,
the planning commission shall consider the following factors:
      1.   Increase in signage shall be allowed only for signs that are well
balanced to the scale of the property and the neighborhood, that are indirectly
illuminated or not illuminated, that are constructed of natural materials, and
where the overall aesthetic effect is more pleasing than would be the case
without planning commission action. (Ord. 709, 5-26-1987)
10-7-16: TEMPORARY SIGN PERMIT PROCEDURE:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, upon application by any
person, the planning commission may allow the placement of temporary signs of
any number, size, or character in accordance with the terms of this section.
The intent of the council in adopting this section is that signs be allowed
under this section only in exceptional or unusual situations, where a strict
interpretation of this chapter may cause a result not generally desired by the
community.
   A.   Temporary signs may be allowed for any period up to one year.
   B.   Temporary signs may be allowed by the planning commission on public
property with the consent of the owner of the public property and the consent
of the property owner immediately adjacent when the public property is street
right of way. When the property owner is the city, the city manager shall be
empowered to act for the city in consenting to the placement of the sign.
   C.   When considering an application for the placement of a sign under the
provisions of this section, the planning commission shall consider the
following:
      1.   The extent to which the sign is necessary to promote the public
welfare and community good.
      2.   The size, design, and general appearance of the sign. The sign must
be attractive in appearance and of the minimum size required to accomplish the
purpose.
      3.   The extent of general public support for the sign, as evidenced by
testimony presented to the commission.
      4.   The extent to which the sign placement is supported by residents
and/or businesses adjacent to the sign location.
   D.   The commission may establish such restrictions or conditions on the
approval of any application as appears necessary in the judgment of the
planning commission to protect the public welfare and to carry out the general
intent of this chapter.
   E.   Applications filed under the provisions of this section shall be
considered as provided in section
10-3-9 of this title. Notice shall be provided to property owners within one
hundred feet (100') of the sign location and in a newspaper of general
circulation as provided in subsection
10-3-15C2 of this title. (Ord. 729, 9-26-1988)
10-7-17: ABATEMENT OF SIGNS:
   A.   Nuisance: Signs which are placed or which exist in violation of this
chapter are declared to be a public nuisance.
   B.   Liable: No owner of property, and no lessor, tenant, or occupant
thereof, shall allow signs in violation of this chapter to exist on the subject
property. The owner of the property, and any lessor, tenant, or occupant
thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for the removal of any sign in
violation of this chapter.
   C.   Prosecution: An individual identified in subsection B of this section
who is in violation thereof shall be subject to prosecution as provided for in
sections
10-1-1 through
10-1-12 of this title.
   D.   Abatement Of Nuisances:
      1.   Enforcing Authority: The city manager shall have full authority of
law to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The city manager may delegate
any portion or all of this authority to his agents. Nothing herein shall limit
the responsibility, authority, or powers of enforcement given under the city
ordinances or other state law. The term "manager", as used in this chapter,
shall mean the city manager or his agent.
      2.   Public Hearing: The manager shall compile a list of properties in
violation of this chapter as often as needed and shall convene a public hearing
before the city council to consider abatement of signs declared herein to be a
public nuisance.
      3.   Notice:
         a.   At least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing, the manager
shall cause a notice to be posted at the site of the nuisance.
         b.   At the time of posting, the manager shall cause a copy of the
notice to be forwarded by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, to the
person or persons identified in subsection B of this section at the person's
last known address.
         c.   The notice to abate shall contain:
            (1)   A description of the real property, by street address or
otherwise, on which the nuisance exists.
            (2)   A direction to abate the nuisance within ten (10) days from
the date of the notice or to appear before the council at the public hearing to
show cause why the nuisance should not be abated.
            (3)   A description of the nuisance.
            (4)   A statement that unless the nuisance is removed the city may
abate the nuisance; and the cost of abatement will be charged to the person
responsible and will become a lien against the subject property.
            (5)   A statement that failure to abate a nuisance may warrant
imposition of a fine or jail sentence.
Upon completion of the posting and mailing, the persons posting and mailing
shall execute and file a certificate stating the date and place of the mailing
and posting, respectively.
         d.   An error in the name or address of the person responsible shall
not make the notice void, and in such case the posted notice shall be
sufficient.
      4.   Resolution: At the conclusion of the public hearing, the council may
pass a resolution authorizing the abatement of any identified nuisance at the
cost of the owner of the property responsible for the nuisance. The resolution
will include the authorization for the manager at reasonable times to enter
into or upon property to investigate or cause the removal of the nuisance.
   E.   Assessment Of Costs:
      1.   The manager shall keep an accurate record of the expenses incurred
by the city in physically abating the nuisance and shall include therein a
charge of ten dollars ($10.00) or ten percent (10%) of those expenses,
whichever is greater, for administrative overhead.
      2.   The manager, by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, shall
forward to the owner and any other person responsible a notice stating:
         a.   The total cost of abatement, including the administrative
overhead.
         b.   That the cost as indicated will be assessed to the person
responsible and become a lien against the property unless paid within thirty
(30) days from the date of the notice.
         c.   That if the owner or the person responsible objects to the cost
of the abatement as indicated, he may file a notice of objection with the
manager not more than ten (10) days from the date of the notice.
      3.   Upon the expiration of ten (10) days after the date of the notice,
the council, in the regular course of business, shall hear and determine the
objections, if any, to the costs assessed.
      4.   If the costs of the abatement are not paid within thirty (30) days
from the date of the notice, an assessment of the costs, as stated or as
determined by the council, shall be made by resolution and shall thereupon be
entered in the docket of city liens. Upon the entry being made, it shall
constitute a lien upon the property from which the nuisance was removed or
abated, and shall remain the personal obligation of the responsible person.
      5.   The lien shall be enforced in the manner as liens for street
improvements are enforced and shall bear interest at the rate of nine percent
(9%) per annum. The interest shall begin to run from the date of the entry of
the lien in the lien docket. Unless paid within one year after assessment, the
manager may foreclose the lien in accordance with Oregon Revised Statutes
223.505 to 223.670.
      6.   An error in the name of the owner or the person responsible shall
not void the assessment, nor will a failure to receive the notice of the
proposed assessment render the assessment void; but it shall remain a valid
lien against the property, and the personal obligation of the responsible
person.
   F.   Application Of Chapter To Unauthorized Signs And Graffiti: This chapter
shall apply to and regulate written and graphic material whether placed with or
without the permission of the person or persons identified in subsection B of
this section, including written or graphic material commonly considered
graffiti and/or placed on buildings or other property by vandals. That the
written or graphic material was placed upon property without the knowledge of
the person or persons identified in subsection B of this section shall be no
defense to the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 762, 12-9-1991)
CHAPTER 8
SITE PLAN REVIEW
SECTION:
10-8-1: Description And Purpose
10-8-2: Site Plan Review Committee
10-8-3: Review Procedure
10-8-4: Requirements
10-8-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
The purpose of site plan review is to determine compliance with the intent and
specific development standards of this title for types of development which can
have a particular impact on public health, safety and general welfare. Those
uses which are specifically subject to site plan review are listed in the zone
descriptions of chapter 4 of this title. A site plan review on any given land
use application may be called at the discretion of planning department staff.
(Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
10-8-2: SITE PLAN REVIEW COMMITTEE:
The city manager, the engineering and planning director, the public works
superintendent, the electric superintendent, the fire chief, the engineering
and planning secretary and the chief of police shall constitute the site plan
review committee. This committee shall have the authority to approve,
disapprove, or approve with conditions, the site plans of all proposed
development which is subject to site plan review. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
10-8-3: REVIEW PROCEDURE:
   A.   Committee Review: In review of plans and setting of conditions, the
committee shall be governed by this chapter, and the provisions of section
10-9-5 of this title. The decision of the site plan review committee may be
accepted by the applicant, and permits may be issued after that acceptance.
In approving the plan, the committee shall construct written findings which
demonstrate that pertinent provisions of this title are complied with, and that
all buildings and facilities, access points, parking and loading facilities,
signs, lighting and walls or fences, are so arranged that traffic congestion is
minimized and pedestrian and vehicular safety and welfare are protected, and
that adverse impacts on surrounding property and public services will be
minimized. When a site plan review is mandated for a level II action, public
input received from the notification procedure shall be reviewed by the
committee.
   B.   Appeal Permitted: If the applicant does not accept the decision of the
committee, he may request a review of the decision of the planning commission,
he may file an appeal to the planning commission as provided by section
10-3-12 of this title.
   C.   Appeal Procedure: The commission shall hear the appeal within thirty
(30) days of filing. The commission may approve, modify or reverse the decision
of the site plan review committee. If the applicant does not accept the
decision of the planning commission, he may file an appeal to the city council
as provided for by section
10-3-12 of this title.
The city council shall then review the decision of the planning commission
based on the existing record, within thirty (30) days of filing of the appeal.
The council may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the planning
commission within fifteen (15) days after review of the appeal. The decision of
the council shall be final. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-8-4: REQUIREMENTS:
An application for a permit subject to site plan review shall be accompanied by
a site plan which shall be drawn to scale, and shall include the following as
appropriate to the nature of the use:
   A.   Name and address of the owner, and name and address of anyone acting as
agent on behalf of the owner.
   B.   Dimensions and orientation of the parcel.
   C.   Locations of buildings and structures, both existing and proposed.
   D.   Location and layout of off street parking and loading facilities.
   E.   Location of points of entry and exit for motor vehicles, and internal
circulation pattern.
   F.   Location of walls and fences, and indication of their height, and
construction materials.
   G.   Indications of exterior lighting standards and devices.
   H.   Location and size of exterior signs and outdoor advertising.
   I.   General landscaping layout and drainage provisions.
   J.   Grading and slopes where they affect relationship of the buildings and
drainage.
   K.   Indication of the heights of buildings and structures.
   L.   Indication of the proposed use of buildings shown on the site.
   M.   Relationship to sewer, water and electric utilities.
   N.   Any other architectural or engineering data as may be required to
permit necessary findings that the proposal complies with this title.
   O.   A site plan which has been approved with level II public notification
may be modified without further public notification provided that the change
does not create a noticeably different impact on surrounding property when
compared with the original proposal.
   P.   The development shall include the number and type of bicycle parking
facilities required in the off street parking and loading section of this
title. The location and design of bicycle parking facilities shall be indicated
on the site plan.
   Q.   Internal pedestrian circulation shall be provided in new commercial,
office, and multi-family residential developments through the clustering of
buildings, construction of hard surface walkways, landscaping, accessways, or
similar techniques.
   R.   1. New commercial buildings, particularly retail shopping and offices,
shall be oriented to the street, near or at the setback line. A main entrance
shall be oriented to the street. For lots with more than two (2) front yards,
the buildings shall be oriented to the two (2) busiest streets.
      2.   Off street motor vehicle parking for new commercial developments
shall be located at the side or behind the building(s).
   S.   All site plans (industrial and commercial) shall clearly show how the
site's internal pedestrian and bicycle facilities connect with external
existing or planned facilities or systems. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
CHAPTER 9
CONDITIONAL USE
SECTION:
10-9-1: Description And Purpose
10-9-2: Procedure
10-9-3: Time Limit On Conditional Use
10-9-4: Limit On Reapplication
10-9-5: Conditions Of Approval
10-9-6: General Criteria
10-9-7: Specific Standards
10-9-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
It is recognized that certain uses, while generally appropriate to an area or
zone, require special consideration prior to their being permitted at any
particular location. Development of any use listed as a conditional use, or the
expansion or alteration of an existing use which is listed as a conditional use
by this title is subject to issuance of a conditional use permit. The purpose
of this review shall be to ensure that, if approved, the use will be reasonably
compatible with surrounding uses permitted in the area. To this end, the
planning commission may stipulate conditions of development as specified in
this chapter.
There may be situations in which the conditions necessary to proper placement
of a conditional use cannot be developed at a particular site. Nothing
contained herein shall be construed to require the commission to grant a
conditional use permit. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-9-2: PROCEDURE:
   A.   A conditional use procedure shall be initiated by a property owner or
his representative on forms provided by and filed with the planning department,
and accompanied by the appropriate administrative fee.
   B.   All conditional use applications shall be heard by the planning
commission according to level Ill procedures. Appeal of a decision on a
conditional use application is provided in section
10-3-12 of this title. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-9-3: TIME LIMIT ON CONDITIONAL USE:
A conditional use permit shall be void after one year unless terms of the
permit have been substantially completed within that time. The planning
commission may extend authorization for an additional period of six (6) months
for reasons such as health, financial or administrative problems incurred by
the applicant during the permit period. The commission must make a finding that
the delay is justified by circumstances beyond the applicant's control, and
that the six (6) month extension can reasonably be expected to remedy the
circumstances. Conditional uses granted addressing business activities to be
conducted in a zone where such is not an outright use are allowed as long as
the grantee honors the conditions of the permit, as designated by this code,
staff, and planning commission. Any such use shall be subject to annual review.
Violation of any terms of the conditional use shall be grounds for revocation
of the conditional use permit. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
10-9-4: LIMIT ON REAPPLICATION:
No application for a conditional use shall be considered by the commission
within one year of a denial of the same or similar request, unless in the
opinion of the commission, new evidence or circumstances warrant
reconsideration within that time. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-9-5: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
To ensure that a conditional use proposal meets the general and specific
criteria which follow, the commission may impose any of the following
conditions as part of a conditional use permit. Each condition imposed shall be
accompanied by a finding which supports such a condition.
   A.   Limiting the manner in which the use is conducted, including
restricting hours of operation, and restraints to minimize such environmental
effects as noise, vibration, air pollution, glare or odor.
   B.   Establishing a special yard, other open space or lot area or dimension
in excess of any specified minimum.
   C.   Limiting the height, size, or location of a building or other
structure.
   D.   Designating the size, number, location, and nature of vehicle access
points.
   E.   Increasing the required street dedication, roadway width or
improvements within the street right of way on adjacent streets.
   F.   Designating the size, location, screening, drainage, surfacing or other
improvement of a parking or loading area.
   G.   Requiring an overall drainage plan of the property and construction of
drainageways, sumps, and other drainage structures.
   H.   Limiting or otherwise designating, the number, size, location, height,
and lighting of signs.
   I.   Limiting the location and intensity of outdoor lighting and requiring
its shielding.
   J.   Requiring diking, screening, landscaping, or other methods to protect
adjacent or nearby property from noise, light, traffic or litter, and
designating standards for installation and maintenance.
   K.   Designing the size, height, location, and materials for a fence.
   L.   Protecting and preserving existing trees, vegetation, or water
resources. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-9-6: GENERAL CRITERIA:
A conditional use permit may be granted after development of findings which
show that the following general criteria, and any specific standards applicable
to the proposed use, have been met. This section will apply unless excluded
from consideration for specific uses in section
10-9-7 of this chapter.
   A.   The proposal has properly addressed traffic flow on the subject parcel,
and interaction with public streets adjacent to the property as regards width
and pavement type sufficient to carry the quantity and kind of traffic
generated by the use.
   B.   The subject parcel is of sufficient size and shape to permit proper
operation of the use including necessary landscaping to buffer parking, and any
anticipated expansion.
   C.   The overall design and operation of the use such that it is reasonably
compatible with the livability or appropriate development of adjacent property
and the neighborhood as regards public safety, traffic, noise, hours of
operation and health and safety. (Ord. 752, 2-11-1991)
10-9-7: SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
Conditional uses listed below must meet the standards which are specified for
that use, as well as the general criteria prescribed in section
10-9-6 of this chapter.
   A.   Automotive Fuel Service Station:
      1.   Access points are well marked and designated through use of bumper
rails or landscaping.
      2.   The use is to be contingent on approval of the final plans by the
state fire marshal's office, and the city fire department. (Ord. 667, 9-24-
1984)
   B.   Automobile Wrecking Or Junk Yard:
      1.   Access points shall be well marked and designated through use of
bumper rails or landscaping as required by the planning commission; such
devices to serve as traffic buffers at access points. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
      2.   The site is entirely enclosed by a sight obscuring fence, with
operable gates, high enough to block view into the premises from adjacent
public rights of way, but in any case, no lower than six feet (6'). Failure to
maintain the fence in good repair shall constitute a violation of the
conditional use permit.
   C.   Boarding, Lodging, And Rooming House:
      1.   The residential character of the building shall be maintained.
      2.   Required off street parking is provided in a manner which does not
detract from the residential nature of the property.
      3.   Suitable methods of fire escape are provided.
   D.   Church:
      1.   Sufficient area shall be provided for the building, required yards,
and off street parking. Related structures and uses such as a manse, parochial
school or community rooms are considered separate uses, and additional lot and
parking areas shall be required for these areas.
      2.   Probable growth and need for future expansion of facilities shall be
considered in size of site necessary for the use.
      3.   Bell towers, spires, or similar architectural treatments may exceed
a specified building height limitation to a maximum of fifty feet (50') from
ground level.
   E.   Commercial Amusement Facility Not Wholly Enclosed, Or Restaurant With
Outdoor Service:
      1.   All required parking shall be paved.
      2.   Lighting shall be directed away from adjacent property.
      3.   The property shall be fenced on the sides and rear.
      4.   The premises shall be kept free of litter. Accumulation of litter on
the premises or surrounding property shall be a violation of the conditional
use permit. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
   F.   Daycare Center, Childcare Facility, Private School Providing For Seven
Or More Children:
      1.   Sight obscuring fence, or chainlink (or equivalent) of at least four
feet (4') height surrounding play yards.
      2.   A sight obscuring fence may be required to ensure the privacy of
adjoining neighbors.
      3.   Minimum of two hundred (200) square feet of outdoor play area per
child for up to five (5) children, plus fifty (50) square feet for each
additional child.
      4.   At least one off street parking space reserved for loading, and
unloading of children, or as provided in section
10-6-4 of this title, if in excess of twenty five (25) students.
      5.   The physical facilities for the care of children, such as building
construction, sanitation, plumbing, heating, lighting, ventilation,
maintenance, indoor and outdoor activity areas and fire protection are approved
by inspection of such by city provided inspector(s).
   G.   Manufactured Home Park: In addition to state statutes and
administrative rules which may regulate manufactured home parks, parks shall
comply with the following standards:
      1.   Location Of Development: Each manufactured home park or travel
trailer park shall have direct access to a dedicated public street or street
highway. Minimum frontage on a public street or highway shall be sixty feet
(60').
      2.   Dimensional Standards:
         a.   Development: No manufactured home park or travel trailer park
shall be created on a parcel of less than one and one-half (11/2) acres in
area.
         b.   Spacing: Each manufactured home site shall be large enough to
accommodate the manufactured home, and maintain a minimum of ten feet (10')
side to side, and end to end between manufactured homes; five feet (5') between
a manufactured home and a property line; and ten feet (10') between a
manufactured home and awning, carport, cabana or ramada of an adjacent space.
         c.   Density: The gross density of each manufactured home park or
subdivision shall not exceed eleven (11) manufactured homes per gross acre.
         d.   Minimum Space: Manufactured home, three thousand five hundred
(3,500) area in square feet; travel trailer, one thousand two hundred (1,200).
      3.   Parking Space Requirements:
         a.   Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for each manufactured
home site, eight (8) on the site or within two hundred feet (200') thereof,
inside the development, which shall be not less than nine (9) by twenty feet
(20') in size and surfaced with at least four inches (4") of screened gravel or
crushed rock, size one and one-half inch (11/2") to zero.
         b.   Guest parking shall also be provided in every manufactured home
park based on a ratio of one parking space for each four (4) manufactured home
sites. Such parking shall be surfaced with at least four inches (4") of
screened gravel or crushed rock, size one and one-half inch (11/2") to zero and
shall be clearly defined and identified.
      4.   Signs: One sign conforming to the underlying zone may be allowed to
designate the name of the manufactured home park. The sign shall conform to all
applicable standards listed in chapter 7 of this title.
      5.   Landscaping: Open areas and buffer strips between manufactured home
lots and public streets shall be landscaped with lawn, trees, and shrubs.
      6.   Park Streets; Access: Private park streets shall connect each
manufactured home site to a public street or highway.
      7.   Additional Standards:
         a.   Recreation Areas: Two hundred (200) square feet of recreational
area shall be provided for each manufactured home site. This area may be in one
or more locations in the park and shall be suitably improved and maintained for
recreational purposes.
         b.   Accessory Structures: Structures located on a manufactured home
site, in addition to the manufactured home, shall be limited to the normal
accessories such as an awning, cabana, ramada, patio, carport, garage, or
storage building. No other structural additions shall be built onto or become
part of any manufactured home, and no manufactured home shall support any
building in any manner.
         c.   Skirting And Certification: All manufactured homes in a park
shall be skirted around their entire perimeter by a fire resistant siding and
shall have an "Insignia of Compliance" seal from the department of commerce.
         d.   Recreation Vehicle Spaces: Not more than ten percent (10%) of a
manufactured home park area may be used to accommodate persons wishing to park
their recreational vehicles overnight. No recreational vehicle shall remain in
a manufactured home park for more than thirty (30) days in any sixty (60) day
period. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
   H.   Signs, Flashing Or Moving:
      1.   Traffic Hazard:
         a.   The sign shall not glare or otherwise interfere with vision of
drivers.
         b.   Movement shall not present or appear to present a barrier or
hazard to traffic.
         c.   The sign does not bear the words "stop", "go", "slow", "caution",
"danger", "warning", or similar words or in any other way cause confusion or
doubt as to its being a traffic control device.
      2.   Lighting Standards:
         a.   The lights shall be constructed as an integral part of a sign,
and are not merely attached thereto.
         b.   The flashing impulse shall not exceed twenty five (25) flashes
per minute for single flashing segments of the sign, and two hundred fifty
(250) flashes per minute for bulbs within chasing and scintillating actions.
Only one of the above actions shall be permitted on any sign.
         c.   The brightness of bulbs within chasing or scintillating actions
shall not exceed eleven (11) watts.
         d.   The brightness of any flashing light will not exceed twenty five
(25) watts per bulb.
      3.   Additional Restrictions:
         a.   No flashing "billboards" will be allowed.
         b.   No flashing neon signs will be allowed.
         c.   No strobe lights will be allowed.
         d.   All revolving signs will be designed so as not to exceed a speed
of five (5) revolutions per minute.
         e.   All other conditions of chapter 7 of this title shall be met.
(Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
   I.   Nonconforming Agricultural Uses: lt is the intent of this section to
permit existing commercial agricultural uses to remain in any zone until they
are removed or abandoned. Nonconforming commercial agricultural uses shall be
considered abandoned if the land is allowed to lie fallow, not under
cultivation for a period of greater than seven hundred thirty (730) consecutive
days. Said use shall not be considered abandoned if weeds are annually
controlled by mechanical or chemical means. It is the intent of this title to
permit those existing nonconformities until they are removed or abandoned.
   J.   Temporary Agricultural Uses:
      1.   Commercial cultivation of annuals are allowed in any zone by
conditional use permit through a level III procedure, if in the opinion of the
planning commission, the production of the crop will have no substantial
adverse impact on adjacent properties.
      2.   In addition, by level III procedure, the planning commission may
grant a conditional use permit for commercial perennial agriculture in any zone
except I-M, if in the opinion of the planning commission, there will be no
substantial adverse impact on adjacent properties.
      3.   Perennial agriculture is not allowed in I-M zone. (Ord. 714, 8-24-
1987)
CHAPTER 10
VARIANCE
SECTION:
10-10-1: Description And Purpose
10-10-2: Minor Setback Variance
10-10-3: Findings For Minor Setback Variance
10-10-4: Referral And Appeal Of Minor Setback Variance
10-10-5: Conditions For Granting Variance
10-10-6: Time Limit On Variance
10-10-7: Limit On Reapplication
10-10-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
A variance shall be initiated by a property owner or his representative on
forms provided by and filed with the planning department and accompanied by the
appropriate administrative fee. A variance is a permission granted as a relief
from some specific and unusual hardship(s) imposed by the strict interpretation
of this title. The planning director, and the planning commission shall have
the authority to grant a variance from provisions of this title. The planning
director shall act on applications for variation of up to ten percent (10%) in
minimum yard requirements. The planning commission shall hear all other
applications for variance.
A variance shall not be granted in cases where a zone change or zone text
amendment is the appropriate administrative procedure. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-10-2: MINOR SETBACK VARIANCE:
Subject to level II processing procedures (section
10-3-8 of this title), at the discretion of the planning director, a variance
of up to ten percent (10%) of any specified minimum yard requirement may be
authorized outright by the planning director. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
10-10-3: FINDINGS FOR MINOR SETBACK VARIANCE:
In granting a minor setback variance, the applicant must show and the planning
director shall construct written findings which demonstrate that the variance
conditions listed in subsections 10-10-5A, B, C, and D of this chapter have
been met. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-10-4: REFERRAL AND APPEAL OF MINOR SETBACK VARIANCE:
Based on input from the level II notification procedures, or for other stated
cause, the planning director may defer decision on a minor setback variance,
and refer it to the planning commission. In such case, the planning
commission's decision shall substitute for the planning director's decision,
and level III time lines and appeal procedures shall be utilized.
Other provisions of the level II procedures remain in effect.
Appeal of level II decision, except in cases of referral discussed above, are
provided in section
10-3-12 of this title. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-10-5: CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING VARIANCE:
All variances other than minor setback variances shall be heard by the planning
commission in accordance with level III processing procedures.
In granting a variance, the planning commission shall find that the following
conditions have been met:
   A.   Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances apply to the property itself
such as lot size, shape, or topography, which do not apply generally to other
properties in the same zone or vicinity, and result from a situation over which
the applicant has no control.
   B.   The variance is necessary for the preservation of a property right of
the applicant substantially the same as is possessed by owners of other
property in the same zone or vicinity.
   C.   The granting of the proposed variance will not be materially
detrimental to property within the vicinity in respects such as public safety,
traffic, noise, health and sanitation, and hours of operation. The granting of
variance shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with
the limitations on other properties in the same zoning district.
   D.   It must be shown that a material hardship unwarranted within the intent
of this title will exist if the variance is not granted, and that the hardship
cannot be remedied by other means. The hardship demonstrated must not be self-
created, and must relate to the land itself, and not to problems personal to
the applicant. The variance permitted shall be the minimum variance which will
alleviate the hardship. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-10-6: TIME LIMIT ON VARIANCE:
A variance or minor setback variance permit shall be void after one year unless
terms of the permits have been substantially completed within that time. The
planning commission, or planning director, whichever granted the permit, may
extend authorization for an additional period of six (6) months for due cause
such as health, financial, or administrative problems incurred by the applicant
during the permit period. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-10-7: LIMIT ON REAPPLICATION:
No application for a variance shall be considered by the director or planning
commission within one year of a denial of the same or substantially similar
request, unless in the opinion of the director (for level II proposals) or the
planning commission (for level III proposals), new evidence or circumstances
warrant reconsideration within that time. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
CHAPTER 11
NONCONFORMING USES
SECTION:
10-11-1: Description And Purpose
10-11-2: Nonconforming Lot Of Record
10-11-3: Nonconforming Structures
10-11-4: Nonconforming Use Of Structure Or Land
10-11-5: Expansion Of Nonconforming Use Or Structure
10-11-6: Additional Provisions
10-11-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
Within the zones established by this title, there exist lots, structures, and
uses of land and structures which were lawful before adoption of this title,
but which are now restricted or prohibited by this title.
It is the intent of this chapter to permit those nonconformities until they are
removed or abandoned, but not to allow their replacement or reestablishment.
(Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-11-2: NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD:
Nonconforming lots of record are buildable lots provided that such lots in any
residential zone are limited to a single-family dwelling. Construction on
nonconforming lots shall meet all minimum yard standards required in the zone
in which the property is located. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984; amd. Ord. 925, 6-13-
2005)
   A.   Any lot in a platted subdivision, town site plat, or town addition
(such lots are designated on the county assessment map by lot and block
descriptions, and are shown with a lot number) which has legal access to a
public right of way but which is substandard in minimum area, width, depth or
street frontage, is a nonconforming lot of record.
   B.   Any unit of land not designated by lot and block description which has
legal access to a public right of way, but which is substandard in minimum
area, width, depth or street frontage, is a nonconforming lot of record
provided that all contiguous tax lots under a single ownership are combined to
come as close to the minimum standard as possible. Two (2) contiguous
substandard tax lots which together make a conforming ownership unit shall be
combined.
   C.   Contiguous tax lots not designated by lot and block descriptions which
together or individually are nonconforming may not be built on as separate
units or sold separately to create a nonconforming ownership unit. (Ord. 667,
9-24-1984)
10-11-3: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
A structure which exists at the time of adoption of this title, but which could
not be built under provisions of this title due to lot coverage, yard
requirements, height, or other characteristics is a nonconforming structure.
Such structures may continue subject to the following provisions:
   A.   A nonconforming structure may be expanded once up to an additional
twenty percent (20%) of the floor area which existed at the date of adoption of
this title. Such expansion shall be permitted in accordance with procedures
prescribed in section
10-11-5 of this chapter.
   B.   Should a nonconforming structure suffer damage exceeding fifty percent
(50%) of its replacement cost, it shall be reconstructed in conformance with
this title.
   C.   If a nonconforming structure is removed or destroyed beyond repair,
replacement structures, and their uses shall conform to this title. (Ord. 667,
9-24-1984)
10-11-4: NONCONFORMING USE OF STRUCTURE OR LAND:
A use of a structure or of land which exists at the time of adoption of this
title, but which could not commence under provisions of this title is a
nonconforming use. Such use may continue subject to the following provisions:
   A.   An existing structure or an area of land devoted to a use not permitted
by this title shall not be enlarged, extended or structurally altered except
for the purpose of changing the structure to accommodate a use permitted by
this title, or as provided by section
10-11-5 of this chapter.
   B.   A nonconforming use may be extended within a building if the building
was designed for that use prior to adoption of this title, provided that such
an expansion does not unreasonably increase the noise, traffic, parking, or
public facility characteristics of the use. Expansion of an enclosed
nonconforming use to land outside of the building is not permitted, and is not
subject to application under section
10-11-5 of this chapter.
   C.   Expansion of the land area devoted to an unenclosed nonconforming use
is permitted only in conformance with the provisions of section
10-11-5 of this chapter.
   D.   If a nonconforming use of a structure is replaced by another use, the
replacement use and all subsequent uses shall be conforming uses.
   E.   If a nonconforming use of a structure ceases for a period of three
hundred sixty five (365) days, all subsequent uses shall be conforming uses.
(Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-11-5: EXPANSION OF NONCONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE:
A nonconforming structure may be expanded one time to provide additional area
not to exceed twenty percent (20%) of the floor area or land area as it existed
at the date of adoption of this title. Application for such expansion shall be
handled by level III processing procedures according to the following
provisions.
A permit for expansion of a nonconforming use in no way removes the
nonconforming status. All provisions relating to regulations and abandonment of
a nonconforming use still apply.
   A.   Expansion of a nonconforming use shall be a conditional use. The
provisions of sections
10-9-1 through
10-9-6 of this title shall apply.
   B.   In addition to the general criteria of section
10-9-6 of this title, the following criteria shall be met:
      1.   The proposed increase does not materially increase noise, odor,
traffic, or other adverse effects on surrounding property which conforms to the
provisions of the use zone applicable to the property.
      2.   The proposed increase shall not exceed the setbacks required for the
principal use listed in the zone even though other portions of the existing
structure may exceed the required setbacks.
   C.   In addition to the conditions of approval listed in section
10-9-5 of this title, the commission may place the following conditions on the
expansion of a nonconforming structure: (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
      1.   If the nonconforming use is in a residential zone, the subject
property, the expansion, and/or the original structure, may be required to be
upgraded or modified so as to conform more closely to the residential structure
characteristics of the surrounding property. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984; amd. Ord.
925, 6-13-2005)
      2.   Increased setbacks, obscuring fencing, or other buffering may be
required on the existing use as well as the expansion to provide additional
protection to surrounding uses. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-11-6: ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Any nonconforming structure or structure containing a nonconforming use
may have routine upkeep and maintenance or repair, provided that the repair
does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the replacement cost of the structure.
Repair or construction ordered by any official charged with protecting public
safety shall be permitted in all cases on nonconforming structures.
   B.   When a zoning permit has been issued for a structure prior to adoption
of this title, said structure may be completed according to the approved plans
even though the structure, or use, or both are nonconforming. (Ord. 667, 9-24-
1984)
CHAPTER 12
AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
10-12-1: Authorization To Initiate Amendment
10-12-2: Process
10-12-3: Standards
10-12-4: Records
10-12-5: Limit On Reapplication
10-12-6: Transportation Facilities
10-12-1: AUTHORIZATION TO INITIATE AMENDMENT:
An amendment to the text of this title or to the zoning map may be initiated by
the city council, planning commission, or by application of a citizen. (Ord.
667, 9-24-1984)
10-12-2: PROCESS:
Amendments to the text of this title or to the zoning map shall be processed
under terms of the level IV procedure in section
10-3-10 of this title. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-12-3: STANDARDS:
In the planning commission report to the city council, and in the city
council's action after review of the planning commission's report, the
following standards shall be addressed:
   A.   The proposal is in conformance with all applicable provisions of the
comprehensive plan text and map of land use designations.
   B.   The proposal addresses a need which was improperly or inadequately
addressed by the present zoning text or map. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-12-4: RECORDS:
The city recorder shall maintain records of text and map amendments. (Ord. 667,
9-24-1984)
10-12-5: LIMIT ON REAPPLICATION:
No application of a property owner for a text or map amendment shall be
considered within one year of denial of the same or similar request, unless in
the opinion of the commission, new evidence or circumstances warrant
reconsideration within that time. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-12-6: TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES:
   A.   A plan or land use regulation amendment significantly affects a
transportation facility if it:
      1.   Changes the functional classification of an existing or planned
transportation facility;
      2.   Changes standards implementing a functional classification system;
      3.   Allows types or levels of land use that would result in levels of
travel or access that are inconsistent with the functional classification of a
transportation facility; or
      4.   Would reduce the level of service of the facility below the minimum
acceptable level identified in the transportation system plan.
   B.   Amendments to the comprehensive plan and land use regulations which
significantly affect a transportation facility shall assure that allowed land
uses are consistent with the function, capacity, and level of service of the
facility identified in the transportation system plan. This shall be
accomplished by one of the following:
      1.   Limiting allowed land uses to be consistent with the planned
function of the transportation facility;
      2.   Amending the transportation system plan to ensure that existing,
improved, or new transportation facilities are adequate to support the proposed
land uses consistent with the requirement of the transportation planning rule;
or
      3.   Altering land use designations, densities, or design requirements to
reduce demand for automobile travel and meet travel needs through other modes.
(Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
CHAPTER 13
HISTORIC SITE/STRUCTURE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-13-1: Description And Purpose
10-13-2: Special Definitions
10-13-3: Application
10-13-4: Reference
10-13-5: Criteria For Review
10-13-6: Signs
10-13-7: Review And Disposition
10-13-8: Designation Of Historic Sites And Structures
10-13-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to reasonably assure that historic,
archeological, and cultural resources are conserved and protected, while
providing an expedient process for reviewing land uses that may affect these
resources when they become identified. From time to time, information will
become available to the city to help identify these sites and/or structures.
(Ord. 707, 4-27-1987)
10-13-2: SPECIAL DEFINITIONS:
ALTERATION: Any addition to, removal of, or change in the exterior part of a
structure, and shall include modification of the surface texture, material, or
architectural details of the exterior part of the structure, but shall not
include paint color.
DEMOLITION: To raze, destroy, dismantle, deface or in any other manner cause
partial or total ruin of a historic site or structure.
HISTORIC, ARCHEOLOGICAL OR CULTURAL RESOURCE: A district, site, building,
structure, object or natural feature significant in American history,
architecture, archeology and culture. It may be of value to the nation as a
whole or important only to the community in which it is located.
HISTORIC SITE OR STRUCTURE: Any historic, archeological or cultural site or
structure, or a geographic area listed on the National Register of Historic
Sites or on the Register of Milton-Freewater Historic Sites in the
comprehensive plan.
PRESERVATION: The act or process of applying measures to sustain the existing
form, integrity, and material of a historic building, structure or object, and
the existing form and vegetation cover of a site. It may include initial
stabilization work, where necessary, as well as ongoing maintenance of the
historic building materials. (Ord. 707, 4-27-1987)
10-13-3: APPLICATION:
When a development, alteration or demolition is proposed for a historic site or
structure, the planning director shall review the proposal to ensure that it
meets the requirements of this chapter. A zoning permit is required for any
alteration or demolition of a historic site or structure.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance,
or repair of any exterior architectural feature on any property covered by this
chapter that does not involve a change in design, material, or external
appearance thereof. Nor does this section prevent the construction,
reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition or removal of any such
feature when the building official with jurisdiction in the city determines
that such emergency action is required for the public safety due to an unsafe
or dangerous condition. Prior to such emergency action, notification shall be
provided to the planning director. (Ord. 707, 4-27-1987)
10-13-4: REFERENCE:
The following documents and their performance standards are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this chapter:
   A.   Register of Milton-Freewater Historic Sites.
   B.   State of Oregon uniform building code, chapter 41, "Historic
Buildings", sections 4101-4105.
   C.   The secretary of the interior's standards for historic preservation
projects with guidelines for applying the standards, U.S. department of the
interior, heritage conservation and recreation service, technical preservation
service division, Washington, D.C. 1979. (Ord. 707, 4-27-1987)
10-13-5: CRITERIA FOR REVIEW:
   A.   New Use: Upon receipt of a proposal for a new use in a historic site or
structure, the planning director shall determine whether the use is
administered by level I or II procedures (section
10-3-7 or
10-3-8 of this title) or is administered by level III procedures (section
10-3-9 of this title). Further administrative action shall be governed by the
section which applies to the request.
Decisions to issue a permit under level I, II, or III procedures shall be
accompanied by findings which address each of the following criteria:
      1.   The proposed use is compatible with the identified historical,
archeological, or cultural value identified on or near the site.
      2.   The request is in conformance with other applicable sections of this
title.
      3.   The proposed new use will take into consideration setbacks,
excavation, landscaping, scenic views and other man caused land disturbances in
relation to the identified historic site or structure.
      4.   The proposed new use will assist in preserving the significant
physical characteristics of the historic site or structure.
      5.   The physical changes necessary for the proposed new use will not
require substantial alteration, thus diminishing the historic significance of
the historic site or structure.
      6.   Conditions may be attached to the approval of a zoning or
conditional use permit to ensure the viability of the historic site or
structure, including use of the documents referenced in section
10-13-4 of this chapter. Said conditions may include, but not be limited to,
setbacks, site design, landscaping, architectural style, scale, texture and
construction materials.
      7.   New development shall not be approved if it is found to be
detrimental to the historic site or structure as unsightly or otherwise
adversely affecting the architectural significance; the integrity of historical
appearance, educational, and historical value, or is found not to be in accord
with other review criteria.
   B.   Exterior Alterations:
      1.   Upon receipt of a zoning or development permit application to change
the exterior or a historic structure, the planning director shall review the
application within thirty (30) days to determine if the application will be
harmonious and compatible with the character of the historic resource with
respect to style, scale, texture and construction materials, and/or will
enhance the historical value of the historic structure.
      2.   Conditions may be attached to the approval of a building permit to
ensure the viability of the historic structure, including use of the documents
referenced in section
10-13-4 of this chapter. Said conditions may include, but not be limited to,
setbacks, site design, landscaping, architectural style, scale, texture, and
construction materials.
      3.   Historic structure alteration review standards are as follows:
         a.   The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building,
structure or site, and its environment, shall not be destroyed. The removal or
alteration of any historic material or distinctive architectural features
should be avoided when possible.
         b.   All buildings, structures and sites shall be recognized as
products of their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and which
seek to create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged.
         c.   Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are
evidence of the history and development of a building, structure or site and
its environment. These changes may have acquired significance in their own
right, and this significance shall be recognized and respected.
         d.   Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled
craftsmanship which characterize a building, structure or site shall be treated
with sensitivity.
         e.   Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than
replaced, whenever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new
material should match the material being replaced in composition, design,
color, texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing
architectural features should be based on accurate duplications of feature,
substantiated by historic, physical or pictorial evidence rather than on
conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural elements
from other buildings or structures.
         f.   Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve
archeological resources affected by, or adjacent to, any project.
         g.   Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing
properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and additions do not
destroy significant historical, architectural or cultural material, and such
design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material, and character of
the property, neighborhood or environment.
         h.   Whenever possible, new additions or alterations to structures
shall be done in such a manner that if such additions or alterations were to be
removed in the structure, the essential form and integrity of the structure
would be unimpaired.
   C.   Demolition Or Moving:
      1.   When demolition or moving is proposed for a historic structure, the
planning director or planning commission and the historic structure owner shall
endeavor to prepare an economically feasible plan for preservation of the
historic structure. The possibilities of purchase of the historic structure by
interested persons, organizations, or government agencies shall be explored.
      2.   If a designated historic structure is to be demolished or moved, the
planning director shall require the applicant to assist the appropriate
historical organization to record the historic structure, and its setting by
means of photographs, pictures, artifacts or architectural detail salvage,
written description, measured drawings or other means of documentation. (Ord.
707, 4-27-1987)
10-13-6: SIGNS:
Types of signs allowed in historic sites or structures shall be those permitted
by the underlying zoning designation. However, the planning director or
planning commission may require additional standards as to size, scale,
material, lettering and construction to ensure that signs will be harmonious
and compatible with the character of the resource. (Ord. 707, 4-27-1987)
10-13-7: REVIEW AND DISPOSITION:
   A.   The applicant shall provide a plot plan at a scale no smaller than one
inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100'). The plot plan shall accurately show
property boundaries; natural features, i.e., trees, shrubs, rock outcropping,
etc.; the existing and proposed uses, and any other pertinent information that
would help to identify how the proposed use and the historic, archeological or
cultural use would coexist in a compatible manner. The planning director may
refer the request to other agencies or individuals for their review and
comment. If, after review, the planning director or planning commission finds
that the development meets the criteria above, the application shall be
approved and the applicant shall obtain a zoning permit prior to commencement
of any work. Any development shall conform to the plot plan submitted by the
applicant and approved by the planning director or planning commission.
   B.   In the case of a permit for the alteration of a historic site or
structure, the planning director or planning commission shall:
      1.   Approve the request as submitted;
      2.   Approve the request with modifications;
      3.   Delay the final decision on the request for sixty (60) days to allow
time for an alternative to the alteration to be developed.
At the end of the sixty (60) day period, the planning director or planning
commission shall:
      1.   Approve the request;
      2.   Approve the request with modifications; or
      3.   Deny the request.
   C.   In the case of an application for demolition of a historic site or
structure, the planning director shall order:
      1.   The immediate issuance of the permit if the planning director finds
all of the following:
         a.   The structure cannot be economically maintained or restored,
giving due consideration to all potential uses to which the structure might
reasonably be put upon restoration by the property owner;
         b.   A program or project does not exist which may result in
preservation of the structure;
         c.   Delay of the permit would result in unnecessary and substantial
hardship to the applicant;
         d.   Issuance of the permit will not act to the substantial detriment
of the public welfare considering the significance of the structure and the
economic, cultural and energy consequences of demolishing the structure; or
         e.   No other reasonable alternative to demolition exists.
      2.   The immediate issuance of the permit if the structure for which the
demolition permit has been requested has been damaged in excess of fifty
percent (50%) of its assessed value due to fire, flood, wind, or other act of
God.
      3.   Delay issuance of the permit for up to sixty (60) days. During this
period, the planning director shall attempt to determine if public or private
acquisition and preservation is feasible or if other alternatives are possible
which could be carried out to prevent demolition of the site or structure.
(Ord. 707, 4-27-1992)
10-13-8: DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC SITES AND STRUCTURES:
   A.   The planning commission shall, from time to time, designate sites and
structures within the city as being of such historic, archeological and
cultural significance that conservation and protection from conflicting land
uses is warranted.
   B.   These designations shall be made through the public hearing process
described in section
10-3-14 of this title. The commission shall seek the advise of the Milton-
Freewater Historical Society, Umatilla County Historical Society, government
agencies, and other knowledgable and interested individuals and organizations.
   C.   The commission may create ad hoc or permanent committees to assist it
with this function. (Ord. 707, 4-27-1987)
   D.   Sites and structures found to be of sufficient age and/or historical
interest may be added to the Milton-Freewater Register of Historic Sites and
Structures. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
CHAPTER 14
SITE AND DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-14-1: Purpose
10-14-2: Application Of Standards
10-14-3: Requirements For Exterior Walls
10-14-4: Landscaping
10-14-5: Off Street Parking Areas
10-14-6: Fencing
10-14-7: Dwelling Units In Conjunction With Commercial Use
10-14-8: Exterior Lighting
10-14-9: Adjustments
10-14-1: PURPOSE:
Development standards are intended to achieve the following:
   A.   Improve the quality and appearance of commercial and industrial
development in the city.
   B.   Ensure that such development is compatible with adjacent development
and is complementary to the community as a whole.
   C.   Promote streetscapes that are consistent with the desired character of
the various commercial and industrial zoning districts.
   D.   Encourage crime prevention through environmental design, decrease
opportunity for crime, and increase user perception of safety through
application of CPTED (crime prevention through environmental design)
principles.
   E.   Increase opportunities for use of alternative modes of transportation.
   F.   Regulate the intensity of use allowed on a site.
   G.   Promote safe, attractive, and functional pedestrian circulation systems
in commercial areas. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-14-2: APPLICATION OF STANDARDS:
The standards in this chapter shall apply to all new developments located in a
commercial or business park zoned site. These standards shall also apply to new
developments on any industrially zoned property located on the main street and
state highway areas of the city as follows: Highway 11–S. Main from the south
city limits to S.E. 3rd, S. Columbia from S.E. 3rd to E. Broadway, and N.
Columbia from E. Broadway to the northern city limits; S. Main from S.W. 2nd to
Broadway, Broadway between N. Main and Columbia, N. Main to N.W. 8th, 8th
Avenue between Lamb and Elizabeth; and N.E. 5th between N. Main and N.
Columbia. The guidelines shall also apply to all existing developments in these
areas if exterior remodeling or expansion of existing buildings or sites is
done. When remodeling or expansion occurs, compliance with these guidelines
must be in accordance with the same percentage as the remodeling or expansion,
e.g., if the building area is expanded twenty five percent (25%), then at least
twenty five percent (25%) of the site must be brought into conformance with the
guidelines contained in this chapter. When restoration of an older historic
building occurs, strict applications of these guidelines may be considered for
an adjustment as set forth in section
10-14-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-14-3: REQUIREMENTS FOR EXTERIOR WALLS:
At least twenty five percent (25%) of the wall area facing a street shall have
treatments consisting of any one or a combination of the following treatments,
with a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the wall area containing windows or
glass doors. Corner lots shall be required to meet this standard on both walls,
with the primary entrance wall meeting this standard for a minimum of twenty
five percent (25%) of the wall area and the secondary wall meeting this
standard for a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the wall area. Building
frontages greater than one hundred feet (100') in length shall have offsets,
projections, changes in elevation or horizontal direction, small scale
lighting, or other distinctive changes in the building facade. Suggested wall
treatments are as follows:
   A.   Windows.
   B.   Display areas or doorways which allow view into work areas or lobbies,
pedestrian entrances or display windows set in the wall.
   C.   Awnings.
   D.   Decorative brick, stone or other distinct pattern in surface area.
   E.   Landscaping in excess of the required fifteen percent (15%) as set
forth below may be substituted for one of the items above.
   F.   Rehabilitation of existing historic buildings by keeping true to their
original character and by referencing the commercial district's historic
character in new infill development. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-14-4: LANDSCAPING:
Fifteen percent (15%) of the developed site shall be landscaped with living
plant materials or a combination of living plant materials and nonliving
materials such as benches, walkways and courtyards built of brick, decorative
rock or other decorative materials. A minimum of eighty percent (80%) of
required landscaping shall consist of living plant materials, which shall be
either irrigated or certified they can be maintained and survive without
artificial irrigation. If the plantings fail to survive, the property owner
shall be required to replace them. Native plants are encouraged. A maximum of
twenty percent (20%) of landscaping may also include natural features, such as
rock or stone outcrops, or structural features including fountains, pools,
courtyards, walkways or benches. Landscaping shall be placed to afford
surveillance opportunities, i.e., the landscaping does not block entrances or
allow concealment. Where common wall construction in the main street areas of
Milton and Freewater prohibit strict application of these guidelines,
alternatives shall be explored and implemented when feasible. (Ord. 667, 9-24-
1984)
10-14-5: OFF STREET PARKING AREAS:
Off street parking areas in commercially zoned areas shall be located in
accordance with chapter
10-8-4 of this title. Perimeter site landscaping of at least four feet (4') in
width shall be provided in all parking areas. Plants, when mature, should not
interfere with surveillance opportunities. If a parking lot is being
constructed in conjunction with commercial development of a site, the parking
lot landscaping will be counted towards total landscaping requirements of the
site. Curb islands containing plantings shall be provided throughout parking
lots containing an excess of ten (10) parking spaces. Off street parking in
industrially zoned areas bordering residential zones shall provide perimeter
landscaping as described above for each side bordering a residential zone.
(Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-14-6: FENCING:
Fence height and placement shall be in accordance with chapter 5 of this title.
Barbed wire and razor wire fencing is prohibited in the commercial and business
park zones, and in industrial zones located on the main streets/state highways
of the city as set forth in section
10-14-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-14-7: DWELLING UNITS IN CONJUNCTION WITH COMMERCIAL USE:
Dwelling units which are used in conjunction with a commercial use under
section
10-4-6 of this title, located in the C-1 and C-2 zones, shall contain a minimum
of fifty percent (50%) of the building area dedicated to a permitted commercial
use. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-14-8: EXTERIOR LIGHTING:
Exterior lighting standards shall minimize adverse effects on adjacent
residential properties (e.g., lighting directed away from windows, etc.).
Exterior lighting should provide nighttime illumination of parking lots,
walkways, entrances and exits. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
10-14-9: ADJUSTMENTS:
Adjustments to the above requirements may be applied for. Adjustment requests
shall be required to show how the development would be as good or better by
using applicant's proposal rather than strict application of the above
standards while maintaining the purpose of these standards. Adjustments shall
be considered in accordance with level III application procedures as described
in section
10-3-9 of this title. (Ord. 667, 9-24-1984)
CHAPTER 15
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
10-15-1: Statement Of Purpose
10-15-2: Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
10-15-3: Definitions
10-15-4: General Provisions
10-15-5: Administration
10-15-6: Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
10-15-7: Variance And Appeal Procedures
10-15-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The objectives of this chapter are to:
   A.   Protect human life, health and property;
   B.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
purification and sewage treatment plants, water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
   C.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas;
   D.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
   E.   Minimize the need for rescue and emergency services associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   F.   Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service
during times of flood;
   G.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard;
   H.   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions; and
   I.   Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, stream channels and
shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial
functions of the floodplain. (Ord. 956, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-1-2010)
10-15-2: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
This chapter includes methods and provisions to:
   A.   Require that development that is vulnerable to floods, including
structures and facilities necessary for the general health, safety and welfare
of citizens, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   B.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and
property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights,
velocities, or erosion;
   C.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage or erosion;
   D.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or that may increase flood hazards to other
lands;
   E.   Preserve and restore natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural
protective barriers which carry and store floodwaters; and
   F.   Coordinate with and supplement provisions of Oregon building codes.
(Ord. 956, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-1-2010)
10-15-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted according to the meaning they have in common
usage.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure on the same or adjacent parcel as a principal
structure, the use of which is incidental and subordinate to the principal
structure. A separate insurable building should not be classified as an
accessory or appurtenant structure.
APPEAL: A request for review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation
of provisions of this chapter or request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet (3'),
and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be
evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
Zone designations on FIRMs include the letter A.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. (Note: Base flood depth = design flood depth. The
NFIP uses the term base flood depth for the depth in relation to highest
adjacent grade of the 1 percent annual flood. Oregon building codes use the
term design flood depth. The terms are equivalent. The building code required 1
foot of freeboard is added to design flood depth to establish the required
elevation of the lowest floor.)
BASEMENT: The portion of a structure with its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BELOW GRADE CRAWL SPACE: An enclosed area below the base flood elevation in
which the interior grade is not more than two feet (2') below the lowest
adjacent exterior grade and the height, measured from the interior grade of the
crawl space to the top of the crawl space foundation, does not exceed four feet
(4') at any point.
BUILDING: A building or structure subject to building codes.
BUILDING CODES: The combined specialty codes adopted under Oregon Revised
Statutes 446.062, 446.185, 447.020(2), 455.020(2), 455.496, 455.610, 455.680,
460.085, 460.360, 479.730(1) or 480.545, but does not include regulations
adopted by the state fire marshal pursuant to Oregon Revised Statutes chapter
476 or Oregon Revised Statutes 479.015 to 479.200 and 479.210 to 479.220.
CRITICAL FACILITY: A facility that is critical for the health and welfare of
the population and is especially important following hazard events. Critical
facilities include essential and occupancy structures, special occupancy
structures, essential facilities, transportation systems, lifeline utility
systems, high potential loss facilities and hazardous material storage
facilities.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard.
Development also means initiation or conversion of use of any structure; or the
initiation, extension, or conversion of the use of land. Development does not
include:
   A.   Signs, markers, aids, etc., placed by a public agency to serve the
public;
   B.   Driveways, parking lots, or other open space use areas where no
alteration of topography occurs;
   C.   Minor repairs or improvements to existing structures provided that the
alterations do not increase the size or intensity of use, and do not constitute
repair of "substantial damage", or "substantial improvement" as defined in this
section;
   D.   Customary dredging associated with routine channel maintenance
consistent with state or federal laws and permits;
   E.   Replacement of utility facilities necessary to serve established and
permitted uses;
   F.   Storage of equipment and material associated with residential uses;
   G.   Fences.
DIGITAL FIRM (DFIRM): Digital flood insurance rate map. It depicts flood risk
and zones and flood risk information. The DFIRM presents the flood risk
information in a format suitable for electronic mapping applications.
ELEVATED BUILDING: A nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor
raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, post, piers,
pilings, or columns.
EXISTING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A structure for which the "start of
construction" commenced before September 12, 1978.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA): The agency with the overall
responsibility for administering the national flood insurance program.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, issued by the
federal insurance administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard
and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): The official report by the federal insurance
administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles, floodway
boundaries and water surface elevations of the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from: a) the overflow of inland waters;
or b) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG): The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure.
Refer to the elevation certificate, FEMA form 81-31, for more information.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: A structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. department of the interior) or preliminarily
determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the national register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or to a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and
determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have
been approved by the secretary of the interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and
determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that
have been certified either:
  1. By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior; or
  2. Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
LATERAL ADDITION: An addition that requires a foundation to be built outside of
the foundation footprint of the existing building.
LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC): An official FEMA determination, by letter, to
amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps and flood insurance
studies. LOMCs are issued in the following category:
   A.   Letter of map amendment (LOMA): A revision based on technical data
showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood
hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and
establishes that a specific property is not located in a special flood hazard
area.
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG): The lowest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. Refer to
the elevation certificate, FEMA form 81-31, for more information.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure used solely for parking
of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is
not considered a structure's lowest floor provided that the enclosed area is
built and maintained in accordance with the applicable design requirements of
the state building code.
MANUFACTURED HOME/DWELLING: A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used for residential purposes,
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and that was constructed in accordance with federal manufactured
housing construction and safety standards regulations in effect at the time of
construction (HUD, public law 93-383). The term "manufactured dwelling" does
not include a "recreational vehicle".
NATURAL ELEVATION: The elevation of natural grade, or the grade in existence
before September 12, 1978.
POST-FIRM CONSTRUCTION: A structure for which the "start of construction"
commenced after September 12, 1978, and includes subsequent substantial
improvements to the structure.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle that is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the
permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of a building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, a manufactured dwelling, a modular or
temporary building, or a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally
aboveground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of its market value before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction"
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
"substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
market value of the structure should be:
   A.   The appraised real market value of the structure prior to the start of
the initial repair or improvement, or
   B.   In the case of damage, the appraised real market value of the structure
prior to the damage occurring. The term does not include either:
      1.   A project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications,
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
      2.   Alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief by the governing body from a requirement of this
chapter.
VERTICAL ADDITION: The addition of a room or rooms on top of an existing
building.
WATERCOURSE: A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other
topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least
periodically. (Ord. 956, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-1-2010)
10-15-4: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Lands To Which This Chapter Applies: This chapter shall apply to all
special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the city of Milton-
Freewater. Nothing in this chapter is intended to allow uses or structures that
are otherwise prohibited by the zoning ordinance or building codes. (Ord. 956,
8-23-2010, eff. 9-1-2010)
   B.   Basis For Area Of Special Flood Hazard: The area of special flood
hazard identified by the federal emergency management agency in its "Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) For Umatilla County, Oregon And Incorporated Areas",
dated September 3, 2010, along with flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) panels
#41059C-0435G, 41059C-0445G and 41059C-0465G, or digital flood insurance rate
maps (DFIRM), and other supporting data, dated September 20, 2013, are adopted
by reference and declared a part of this chapter. The FIS and the FIRM are on
file at the planning department of the city of Milton-Freewater, 722 S. Main
Street, Milton-Freewater, OR 97862. (Ord. 966, 6-10-2013)
   C.   Coordination With Building Codes: The city of Milton-Freewater of
Umatilla County does hereby acknowledge that the state building codes contain
certain provisions that apply to the design and construction of buildings and
structures located in areas of special flood hazard. Therefore, this chapter is
intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the state building
codes.
   D.   Establishment Of Floodplain Development Permit: A floodplain
development permit shall be required prior to initiating development activities
in any areas of special flood hazard established in subsection B of this
section.
Any floodplain development permit that requires an engineering certification or
engineering analysis, calculations or modeling to process shall be considered a
land use action requiring an opportunity for a quasi- judicial land use
hearing.
   E.   Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter
all provisions shall be:
      1.   Considered as minimum requirements;
      2.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
      3.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes, including state building codes.
   F.   Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and
will occur. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This
chapter does not imply that land outside areas of special flood hazard or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of Milton-Freewater
or by any officer or employee thereof for flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or an administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. 956, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-1-2010)
10-15-5: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Designation Of Floodplain Ordinance Administrator: The city planner is
hereby appointed as the floodplain administrator who is responsible for
administering and implementing the provisions of this chapter. Duties of the
floodplain administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to:
      1.   Review all development permit applications to determine whether
proposed new development will be located in areas of special flood hazard;
      2.   Review applications for modifications of any existing development in
areas of special flood hazard for compliance with the requirements of this
chapter;
      3.   Interpret flood hazard area boundaries, provide available flood
hazard information, and provide base flood depth, where they exist;
      4.   Applicant will be responsible for obtaining all necessary permits
from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state
law, including, but not limited to, section 404 of the federal water pollution
control act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334; the endangered species act of
1973, 16 USC 1531-1544; and state of Oregon division of state lands
regulations;
      5.   Where interpretation is needed of the exact location of boundaries
of the areas of special flood hazard the floodplain administrator shall make
the interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in
subsection
10-15-7D of this chapter;
      6.   Issue floodplain development permits when the provisions of this
chapter have been met, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance;
      7.   Coordinate with the building official to assure that applications
for building permits comply with the requirements of this chapter;
      8.   Obtain, verify and record the actual height in relation to highest
adjacent grade of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new construction
or substantially improved buildings and structures;
      9.   Obtain, verify and record the actual height, in relation to highest
adjacent grade to which any new or substantially improved buildings or
structures have been floodproofed. When floodproofing is utilized for a
structure, the floodplain administrator shall obtain certification of design
criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect;
      10.   Ensure that all records pertaining to the provisions of this
chapter are permanently maintained in the office of the city planner or his/her
designee and shall be open for public inspection;
      11.   Make inspections in areas of special flood hazard to determine
whether development has been undertaken without issuance of a floodplain
development permit, ensure that development is undertaken in accordance with
the floodplain development permit and this chapter, and verify that existing
buildings and structures maintain compliance with this chapter;
      12.   Coordinate with the building official to inspect areas where
buildings and structures in flood hazard areas have been damaged, regardless of
the cause of damage, and notify owners that permits may be required prior to
repair, rehabilitation, demolition, relocation, or reconstruction of the
building or structure;
      13.   Make substantial improvement or substantial damage determinations
based on criteria set forth in subsection C of this section.
   B.   Permit Procedures: Application for a floodplain development permit
shall be made to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by the
administrator or the administrator's designee prior to starting development
activities. Specifically, the following information is required:
      1.   Application Stage:
         a.   Plans in duplicate drawn to scale with elevations of the project
area and the nature, location, dimensions of existing and proposed structures,
earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment and drainage
facilities;
         b.   Delineation of flood hazard areas and flood depth in AO zones;
         c.   For all proposed structures, height in relation to the highest
adjacent grade of the:
            (1)   Lowest enclosed area, including crawl space or basement
floor;
            (2)   Top of the proposed garage slab, if any; and
            (3)   Next highest floor;
         d.   Locations and sizes of all flood openings in any proposed
building;
         e.   Height in relation to highest adjacent grade to which any
nonresidential structure will be floodproofed;
         f.   Certification from a registered professional engineer or
architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the
floodproofing criteria of the NFIP and building codes;
         g.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development.
      2.   Construction Stage:
         a.   For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit
holder shall provide to the floodplain administrator an as built certification
of the height in relation to highest adjacent grade of the floor or
floodproofed level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is
placed and prior to further vertical construction;
         b.   Any deficiencies identified by the floodplain administrator shall
be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to work proceeding.
Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections shall be
cause for the floodplain administrator to issue a stop work order for the
project.
      3.   Certificate Of Occupancy:
         a.   In addition to the requirements of the building codes pertaining
to certificate of occupancy, prior to the final inspection the owner or
authorized agent shall submit the following documentation:
            (1)   For elevated buildings and structures the as built height in
relation to highest adjacent grade of the lowest floor, including basement;
            (2)   For buildings and structures that have been floodproofed, the
as built height in relation to highest adjacent grade to which the building or
structure was floodproofed that has been prepared and sealed by a registered
engineer.
         b.   Failure to submit certification or failure to correct violations
shall be cause for the floodplain administrator to request withholding a
certificate of occupancy until such deficiencies are corrected.
      4.   Expiration Of Floodplain Development Permit:
         a.   A floodplain development permit shall expire one hundred eighty
(180) days after issuance unless the permitted activity has been substantially
begun and thereafter is pursued to completion.
         b.   Commencement of work includes start of construction, when the
permitted work requires a building permit.
   C.   Substantial Damage And Substantial Improvement Determination: For
applications for permits to improve buildings and structures, including
additions, repairs, renovations, and alterations, the floodplain administrator
shall:
      1.   Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain a
professional appraisal of the market value, of the building or structure before
the proposed work is performed; when repair of damage is proposed, the market
value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage
occurred.
      2.   Compare the cost of improvement, the cost to repair the damaged
building to its predamaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and
repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure.
         a.   Except as indicated in subsections C2b through C2d of this
section, all costs to repair substantial damage, including emergency repairs,
including the costs of complying with any county, state, federal or other
regulation must be included;
         b.   The costs associated with the correction of preexisting
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
that were identified by the building official, the director of environmental
health, or any other local code enforcement official prior to the improvement
or repair and that are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions
shall not be included;
         c.   Costs associated with the following items are not included:
            (1)   The preparation and approval of all required plans,
calculations, certifications, and specifications;
            (2)   The performance of surveys or other geotechnical or
engineering studies and resulting reports;
            (3)   Permit and review fees; and
            (4)   The construction, demolition, repair, or modification of
outdoor improvements, including landscaping, fences, swimming pools, detached
garages and sheds, etc.;
         d.   Proposed alterations of a designated historic building or
structure is not to be considered substantial improvement unless the alteration
causes a loss of said designation.
      3.   The city of Milton-Freewater staff shall make the final
determination of whether the proposed improvement and/or repair constitutes a
substantial improvement or substantial damage.
      4.   The city of Milton-Freewater staff shall notify the applicant of the
results of the determination by letter.
      5.   Applicant has the right to appeal the determination pursuant to
section
10-3-12 of this title. (Ord. 956, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-1-2010)
10-15-6: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
   A.   Site Improvements And Subdivisions:
      1.   All proposed new development and subdivisions shall be consistent
with the need to minimize flood damage and ensure that building sites will be
reasonably safe from flooding.
      2.   New development proposals and subdivision development plans shall
include the mapped flood hazard zones from the effective FIRM.
      3.   New development and subdivisions shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electric and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
      4.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid functional impairment, or contamination from them, during flooding.
      5.   Subdivisions shall have adequate drainage paths provided to guide
floodwater around and away from all proposed and existing structures.
   B.   Zones Without Base Flood Elevations Or Flood Depths: Development is
prohibited in riverine areas of special flood hazard where no base flood
elevation or flood depths have been provided by FEMA (approximate A zones).
   C.   Building Design And Construction: Buildings and structures, including
manufactured dwellings, within the scope of the building codes, including
repair of substantial damage and substantial improvement of such existing
buildings and structures, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the flood resistant construction provisions of these codes, including, but not
limited to, section R324 of the residential specialty code and section 1612 of
the structural specialty code.
   D.   Manufactured Dwellings:
      1.   New and replacement manufactured dwellings are within the scope of
the building codes; and
      2.   All new manufactured dwellings and replacement manufactured
dwellings shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood
damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring
include, but are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground
anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
   E.   Below Grade Crawl Spaces: Below grade crawl space foundations are
allowed, unless no base flood depths are available, provided that they conform
to guidelines in FEMA TB 11-01, crawl space construction for structures located
in special flood hazard areas and building codes.
   F.   Recreational Vehicles: In areas of special flood hazard, recreational
vehicles that are an allowed use or structure under the zoning ordinance must
either:
      1.   Be placed on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days;
      2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or
jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices, and have no permanently attached structures or addition;
or
      3.   Meet all the requirements of subsection D, "Manufactured Dwellings",
of this section, including the anchoring and elevation requirements.
   G.   Critical Facilities: Construction of new critical facilities shall be,
to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the area of special flood
hazard. Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the
area of special flood hazard if no feasible alternative site is available.
Critical facilities constructed within the areas of special flood hazard shall
have the lowest floor elevated three feet (3') above the depth number in AO
zones. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood depth
shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.
   H.   Tanks:
      1.   Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty, during conditions
of the design flood.
      2.   Aboveground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be:
         a.   Attached to and elevated to or above the depth number (in the AO
zone) on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement during conditions of the base flood; or
         b.   Anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is
empty, during conditions of the design flood.
   I.   Other Development In Areas Of Special Flood Hazard:
      1.   Relief from the elevation or dry floodproofing standards may be
granted for an accessory structure containing no more than two hundred (200)
square feet. Such a structure must meet the following standards:
         a.   It shall not be subject to building codes;
         b.   The accessory structure shall be located on a property, or an
adjacent property with same owner, as a dwelling.
      2.   Accessory structures no greater than two hundred (200) square feet
and all other development in the AO zone for which specific provisions are not
specified in this chapter or building codes shall:
         a.   Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
         b.   Be designed so as not to impede flow of floodwaters under base
flood conditions;
         c.   Be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral movement resulting
from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of
the design flood;
         d.   Be constructed of flood damage resistant materials; and
         e.   Have electric service and/or mechanical equipment elevated above
the depth number, except for minimum electric service required to address life
safety and electric code requirements;
         f.   Not be used for human habitation and may be used solely for
parking of vehicles or storage of items having low damage potential when
submerged;
         g.   Toxic material, oil or gasoline, or any priority persistent
pollutant identified by the Oregon department of environmental quality shall
not be stored below two feet (2') above highest adjacent grade unless confined
in a tank installed in compliance with this chapter;
         h.   Be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for
complying with this requirement must be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or architect or:
            (1)   Provide a minimum of two (2) openings with a total net area
of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject
to flooding;
            (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
(1') above the higher of the exterior or interior grade or floor immediately
below the opening;
            (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of
floodwater in both directions without manual intervention.
   J.   Watercourse Alterations: A watercourse is considered altered when any
change occurs within its banks, including installation of new culverts and
bridges, or size modifications to existing culverts and bridges (as shown on
effective FIRM).
      1.   Adjacent communities, the U.S. army corps of engineers, Oregon
department of state lands, and Oregon department of land conservation and
development must be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse. Evidence of notification must be submitted to the floodplain
administrator and to the federal emergency management agency.
      2.   The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary
maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the
flood carrying capacity will not be diminished.
   K.   Periodic Floodplain Inspections And Enforcement Actions: Within thirty
(30) days of discovery of a violation of this chapter, the floodplain
administrator shall submit a report to the city council which shall include all
information available to the floodplain administrator which is pertinent to
said violation. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of this report, the city
council shall:
      1.   Take any necessary action to effect the abatement of such violation;
or
      2.   Issue a variance to this chapter in accordance with the provisions
of section
10-15-7, "Variance And Appeal Procedures", of this chapter; or
      3.   Order the owner of the property upon which the violation exists to
provide whatever additional information may be required for their
determination. Such information must be provided to the floodplain
administrator within thirty (30) days of such order, and he shall submit an
amended report to the city council within twenty (20) days. At their next
regularly scheduled public meeting, the governing body shall either order the
abatement of said violation or they shall grant a variance in accordance with
the provisions of section
10-15-7, "Variance And Appeal Procedures", of this chapter. (Ord. 956, 8-23-
2010, eff. 9-1-2010)
10-15-7: VARIANCE AND APPEAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   Variance:
      1.   An application for a variance must be submitted to the city of
Milton-Freewater planning department on the form provided by the city and
include at a minimum the same information required for a development permit and
an explanation for the basis for the variance request.
      2.   Upon receipt of a completed application for a variance, the variance
request will be set for public hearing at the next city council meeting in
which time is available for the matter to be heard.
      3.   Prior to the public hearing, notice of the hearing will be published
in the official newspaper of the city at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
hearing. In addition to the newspaper publication, written notice shall be
provided to all adjoining property owners.
      4.   The burden to show that the variance is warranted and meets the
criteria set out herein is on the applicant.
      5.   In passing upon such applications, the city council shall consider
all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and the:
         a.   Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury
of others;
         b.   Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
         c.   Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         d.   Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
         e.   Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         f.   Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
         g.   Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
         h.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
         i.   Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
         j.   Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site; and
         k.   Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
      6.   Upon consideration of the above factors of and the purposes of this
chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
      7.   The floodplain administrator shall maintain a permanent record of
all variances and report any variances to the federal emergency management
agency upon request.
   B.   Criteria For Variances:
      1.   Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the
elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, providing subsections A5a through A5k of this section
have been fully considered. As the lot size increases the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
      2.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      3.   Variances shall only be issued upon a:
         a.   Showing of good and sufficient cause;
         b.   Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         c.   Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood depths, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      4.   Variances may be issued for a water dependent use provided that the:
         a.   Criteria of subsections B1 through B3 of this section are met;
and
         b.   Structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety.
      5.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or
restoration of structures listed on the national register of historic places or
the statewide inventory of historic properties, without regard to the
procedures set forth in this section.
      6.   Variances as interpreted in the national flood insurance program are
based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece
of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the
structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. They primarily
address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such,
variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare.
   C.   Variance Decision: The decision to either grant or deny a variance
shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons for such approval and
denial. If the variance is granted, the property owner shall be put on notice
along with the written decision that the permitted building will have its
lowest floor below the base flood depth and that the cost of flood insurance
likely will be commensurate with the increased flood damage risk.
   D.   Appeals: Appeals shall be administered in accordance with section
10-3-12 of this title. (Ord. 956, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-1-2010)
CHAPTER 16
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS
SECTION:
10-16-1: Description And Purpose
10-16-2: Development Standards
10-16-3: Park Maintenance
10-16-4: Review Process
10-16-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
The provisions in this chapter are intended to ensure a safe and healthful
living environment in recreational vehicle parks, to protect the general public
health, safety and welfare, and to provide reasonable standards for the
development of recreational vehicle parks. (Ord. 986, 4-10-2017)
10-16-2: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Laws And Regulations: All the requirements of Federal, State, and Local
laws and regulations shall be met.
   B.   Area Requirements:
      1.   Park Size: RV parks shall be a minimum of five (5) acres.
      2.   Space Area: The minimum width for each space shall be twelve feet
(12'). The minimum length for a back-in space shall be fifty six feet (56')
long and for each pull through space seventy feet (70') long, and the space
shall not include any common areas, roadways, general use structures, walkways,
parking areas for vehicles other than RVs, or landscape areas. In addition,
each space shall have at least one (1) 10' x 20' parking space. There shall be
a minimum width of fifteen feet (15') between RV spaces. Parking and driveway
areas shall be paved with asphalt or concrete or similar surface.
   C.   Setbacks:
      1.   There shall be an average twenty foot (20') setback between the park
and any public streets, but in no case shall the setback be less than ten feet
(10').
      2.   Side and rear setbacks shall be the same as, or greater, than the
setbacks required by the zone district of abutting property(ies), but in no
case shall the setback be less than five feet (5').
   D.   Streets: Park streets shall have a minimum twelve foot (12') wide paved
surface for one way travel, and a minimum twenty four foot (24') wide paved
surface for two way travel. Where on-street parking will be allowed, add eight
feet (8') of pavement width for each side of street where parking is proposed.
Streets shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, or similar impervious surface
and designed to permit easy access to each RV space. No dead end streets are
allowed.
   E.   Screening: Except for the access roadway into the park, the park shall
be screened on all sides if the park abuts residentially zoned property with a
sight-obscuring fence, wall, evergreen hedge, or other suitable combination of
screening/planting. This may be modified by the Planning Commission during the
conditional use permit process.
      1.   Perimeter screening shall not be placed in any required setbacks.
      2.   Suitable landscaping shall be provided in the required setback
areas, and shall be used to reinforce perimeter screening.
      3.   Walls or fences shall be minimum six feet (6') in height. Evergreen
hedge plantings shall be at least five feet (5') in height.
      4.   All plant material shall reach their required height within two (2)
years of planting, and be maintained in a healthy, living condition as long as
the park is in operation.
   F.   Certificate Of Sanitation: Evidence shall be provided prior to
development approval that the park will be eligible for a certificate of
sanitation as required by Oregon State law.
   G.   Surfacing: All spaces for RVs shall be paved with asphalt, concrete or
similar material and be designed to provide for the control of runoff or
surface water. The part of the space which is not occupied by the RV, not
intended as an accessway to the RV or is part of an outdoor patio, need not be
paved or covered with gravel provided the area is landscaped or otherwise
treated to prevent dust or mud.
   H.   Water, Sewer, And Electrical Service: All RV spaces shall be provided
with City water, sewer and electric service.
   I.   Disposal Station And Trash Receptacles: At least one (1) sanitary
disposal station for removing and disposing of wastes from holding tanks shall
be provided. Trash receptacles for the disposal of solid waste materials shall
be provided in convenient locations throughout the park for the use of guests.
The number and capacity of trash receptacles shall be sufficient to insure
there is no uncovered accumulation of trash at any time in the park.
   J.   Non-Recreational Vehicle Parking Requirement: In addition to the number
of parking spaces required for park administration, there shall be a minimum of
one (1) parking space per every ten (10) RV spaces. This number may be
increased at the Planning Commission level if a particular development warrants
the increase.
   K.   Toilets, Lavatories, And Showers: The park shall provide toilets,
lavatories, and showers as required by State law.
   L.   Standards For Buildings: The building spaces required by subsections I
and K of this section shall be lighted at all times of day and night, shall be
ventilated, shall be provided with heating and cooling facilities, shall have
floors of waterproof material, shall have sanitary ceiling, floor and wall
surfaces, and shall be provided with floor drains adequate to permit easy
cleaning.
   M.   Landscaping: Each RV space shall have grass and ornamental landscaping,
fifteen feet (15') in width, together with adequate water supply to maintain
the landscaping. (Ord. 986, 4-10-2017)
10-16-3: PARK MAINTENANCE:
Each RV park shall at all times keep a neat appearance. Except for the allowed
vehicles, there shall be no outside storage of materials or equipment belonging
to the park or to any of the guests. No permanent additions of any kind shall
be built onto, or become part of any RV. An on-site manager shall be present
during regular business hours. (Ord. 986, 4-10-2017)
10-16-4: REVIEW PROCESS:
Recreational vehicle parks shall be reviewed as conditional uses per the
provisions of chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 986, 4-10-2017)
TITLE 11
LAND DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Title Reference
11-1-2: Purpose
11-1-3: Interpretation
11-1-4: Severability
11-1-5: Inspection And Right Of Entry
11-1-6: Acceptance Of Application
11-1-7: Development Permits Required
11-1-8: Nuisance
11-1-9: Notice Of Violation
11-1-10: Enforcement
11-1-11: Penalties
11-1-1: TITLE REFERENCE:
This title shall be known as the DEVELOPMENT CODE OF THE CITY OF MILTON-
FREEWATER.
The text of this title may be amended from time to time. Persons contemplating
a decision involving this title should consult with the planning department to
verify the provisions which relate to their situation. (1978 Code)
11-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the development code is to enhance the quality of life and
protect the health and safety and enhance the general welfare of the citizens
of the city of Milton-Freewater. The development code intends to accomplish
this purpose by implementing the requirements of Oregon Revised Statutes
chapters 92, 94, and 227 and the goals and policies of the Milton-Freewater
comprehensive plan. To this end, the development code is intended to:
   A.   Accomplish the orderly development of land within the city through
regulations and standards governing subdivisions, partitions, and other land
development processes.
   B.   Coordinate development with public facilities and services and provide
standards for construction of new services.
   C.   Improve land records and boundary monumentation.
   D.   Safeguard the interest of the public, the applicant and future property
owners. (1978 Code)
No person may subdivide or partition land within the city of Milton-Freewater
except in accordance with Oregon Revised Statutes chapters 92, 94 and 227 and
the provisions of this title. Where there is any inconsistency between this
title and any applicable state laws, such state laws shall be controlling
except when such laws allow for local control in the particular circumstance,
or when such laws allow local regulations to be more restrictive than state
requirements, in which instances the provisions of this title shall control.
(Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
11-1-3: INTERPRETATION:
The planning director shall have the responsibility of interpreting all terms
and provisions of this title.  Formal interpretation shall be requested in
writing on forms provided by the director. Issuance of a formal interpretation
shall be considered an administrative decision, with appeal as provided by
chapter 13 of this title. (1978 Code)
11-1-4: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this title are severable. If any section, sentence, clause,
or phrase of this title is adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid, the decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
of this title. (1978 Code)
11-1-5: INSPECTION AND RIGHT OF ENTRY:
Whenever the planning director has reasonable cause to suspect a violation of
this title, or when necessary to investigate matters pertinent to an
application made pursuant to this title, the director or his designee may enter
any property in a reasonable manner to exercise his responsibilities. (1978
Code)
11-1-6: ACCEPTANCE OF APPLICATION:
No application for a permit required by this title shall be accepted for
administration by the city until it is determined by the planning director to
be complete, and until all appropriate administrative fees are paid. All
administrative timelines listed in this title shall run from the date of
acceptance by the director which shall be placed on the application and signed
by the director or his designee. (1978 Code)
11-1-7: DEVELOPMENT PERMITS REQUIRED:
No development or land division covered by this title shall be undertaken or
enacted without first obtaining a development permit as prescribed by this
title. Chapter 13 of this title presents the administrative provisions which
shall be used to decide on issuance of development permits. (1978 Code)
11-1-8: NUISANCE:
Any land division or development enacted contrary to provisions of this title
is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. (1978 Code)
11-1-9: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Notice of a violation of a provision of this title shall be in the form of a
certified return receipt letter, or a letter delivered in person to the
property owner.
The letter shall identify the property on which the violation is located, a
description of the violation, and a brief statement on the action necessary to
gain compliance with requirements of this development code.
Notice shall be complete and deemed received upon any of the following:
   A.   Actual receipt.
   B.   Refusal of the certified letter.
   C.   Passage of two (2) weeks from the date of mailing of the certified
letter.
The owner shall be given ten (10) days from the date of receipt of the letter
to remedy the violation. If not remedied, enforcement will commence on the
eleventh day after receipt of notice.
By mutual agreement of the property owner and the city, a reasonable period in
excess of ten (10) days may be granted for remedy of the violation. If not
remedied by the established date, enforcement will commence on the following
day. (1978 Code)
11-1-10: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Primary Enforcement: The planning director is authorized to and charged
with primary enforcement of the provisions of this title. The director shall
issue the notice of violation prescribed above.
   B.   Judicial Enforcement: Upon request from the city manager, the city
attorney shall institute any legal proceedings necessary to enforce the
provisions of this title. (1978 Code)
11-1-11: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision(s) of this title shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed ten (10) days,
or both a fine and imprisonment, as well as abatement of the public nuisance by
the owner, or by the city at the owner's expense.
Each day of a continuing violation constitutes a separate violation.
In addition to enforcement of the above penalties, the city may seek civil
remedies including, but not limited to, claims for injunctive relief, damages,
or any other remedies provided by law. (1978 Code)
CHAPTER 2
CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Construction
11-2-2: Definitions
11-2-1: CONSTRUCTION:
The following rules of construction shall apply unless inconsistent with the
obvious meaning in the context of the provision:
   A.   Tense: Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
   B.   Number: Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and words
used in the plural shall include the singular.
   C.   Shall, May, Should: The word "shall" is mandatory. The words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
   D.   Gender: The masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
   E.   Headings: In the event that there is any conflict or inconsistency
between the heading of a chapter, section, or paragraph of this title, and the
content thereof, the said heading shall not affect the scope, meaning, or
intent of the content. (1978 Code)
11-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, the following words and phrases shall mean:
ACCESS: The right to cross between public and private property allowing
pedestrians and vehicles to enter and leave property.
ADJACENT: Having a common boundary and not to be construed as that which is
across a street or alley.
AGENT: Any person who represents, or acts for or on behalf of, a developer in
disposing of interests in a land development, and includes a real estate broker
as defined in subsection (8) Oregon Revised Statutes 696.010.
ALLEY: A narrow serviceway through a block primarily for access by service
vehicles. Alleys may be used as a secondary means of access to abutting
property, but are not considered as part of the general traffic circulation
system.
APPROVING AUTHORITY: The planning director, planning commission,  or city
council of the city of Milton-Freewater.
BLOCK: An area of land within a subdivision which area may be entirely bounded
on all sides by streets or highways (except alleys), railroad right of way,
unsubdivided land, or watercourses.
BUILDING LINE: A line on a plat indicating the limit beyond which building or
structures may be erected. If no line is shown on the plat, the building line
shall be as set forth in the city zoning code.
BUILDING SITE: A parcel of land which meets area requirements, setbacks and
access standards, is serviceable by utilities, and meets the provisions of the
zone in which the parcel is located.
CHANGE OF USE: Alteration of the purpose for which land or a structure is
designated, arranged, or intended from an existing use, or an actual use in the
last six (6) months, to a different use which is allowable by the zoning code
(title 10 of this code) for the location in question.
CITY: The city of Milton-Freewater, Oregon.
CITY COUNCIL OR COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Milton-Freewater.
COMMON OPEN SPACE: An area or areas within a development designed and intended
for the use and enjoyment of all residents of the development or for the use
and enjoyment of the public in general.
COMMUNITY CENTER: A structure owned and operated by a nonprofit public or
private corporation and used as a public meeting place for recreation,
education, and the general good of all residents of a development, or of the
public in general.
CONDOMINIUM: A building, or group of buildings, in which dwelling units are
owned individually, and the structure, common areas, and facilities are owned
by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis.
CONTIGUOUS LAND: Two (2) or more parcels or units of land under a single
ownership which are not separated by an intervening parcel of land under a
separate ownership including limited access right of way which would deny
access between the two (2) parcels under single ownership.
CURB LINE: The line at the face of the curb nearest to the street or roadway.
In the absence of a curb, the curb line shall be established by the public
works department.
DEVELOPER: Any person, corporation, partnership or other legal entity who
creates or proposes to create a land development and includes any agent of a
developer.
DEVELOPMENT: Construction, reconstruction, relocation, enlargement of any
structure; initiation of use or the conversion of use of any structure; or the
initiation of use, extension of use, or conversion of the use of land.
DEVELOPMENT, MAJOR: For purposes of certain public improvements required in
chapter 8 of this title, major development shall mean any of the following: a
subdivision, a minor partition fronting on an unimproved street, a major
partition, a planned unit development, a manufactured home park, a condominium
or a multi-family development of five (5) or more units.
EASEMENT: A grant of the right to use a parcel of land or portion thereof for
specific purposes where ownership of the land is not transferred.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA: The area which has been or may be covered by a 100-year
flood as defined by the federal emergency management agency flood hazard
boundary map.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP: An official map of the community furnished by the
federal insurance administration labeled as flood hazard boundary map and
delineating the boundaries of the special hazard areas.
FRONTAGE: All property fronting on one side of a street and measured along the
street line between intersecting and intercepting streets or between a street
and a right of way, waterway, end of a dead end, or city boundary.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An enclosed accessory building or portion of a main building
used for the parking or temporary storage of vehicles owned or used by
occupants of the main building and accessible only from a street unless the
planning commission permits access via an alley due to unique circumstances
involving the property. No residential use is permitted in garages.
GRADE (GROUND LEVEL): The average of the finished ground level at the center of
each exterior wall of the building.
LOT: A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat,
subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit. See figure 2 at the end of this section.
LOT AREA: The total area within the lot lines of a lot excluding any street
rights of way.
LOT, CORNER: A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two (2) or more streets at
their intersection or upon two (2) parts of the same street forming an interior
angle of less than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°). See figure 1 at the
end of this section.
LOT DEPTH: The distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot line.
See figure 1 at the end of this section.
For lots where the front and rear lot lines are not parallel, the lot depth
shall be measured by drawing lines from the front to rear lot lines, at right
angles to the front lot lines, every ten feet (10') and averaging the length of
these lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: See definition of Lot, Through.
LOT, FLAG: A parcel of land which includes a narrow projection to a public
street for access to the main portion of the parcel. See figure 1 at the end of
this section.
LOT FRONTAGE: The length of the front lot line measured at the street right of
way line. See figure 1 at the end of this section.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot. See figure 1 at the end of this
section.
LOT, LANDLOCKED: A lot which has no deed access to a public street. See figure
1 at the end of this section.
LOT LINE: A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from another
lot or from a public or private street or any other public space. See figure 2
at the end of this section.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The lot line separating a lot from a street right of way, or
in the case of a flag lot, the line closest to a street right of way excluding
the flagpole portion of the property. See figure 2 at the end of this section.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line;
or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a line ten
feet (10') in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum
distance from the front lot line. See figure 2 at the end of this section.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. See figure 2
at the end of this section.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot which fronts upon two (2) parallel streets or which fronts
upon two (2) streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. See
figure 2 at the end of this section.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured at
right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the front lot line
at the minimum required building setback line. See figure 2 at the end of this
section.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure constructed for movement on the public highways
that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human
occupancy, that is being or will be used for residential purposes and that was
constructed in accordance with federal manufactured housing construction and
safety standards regulations in effect at the time of construction (HUD, public
law 93-383).
MAP: A final diagram, drawing or other writing concerning a partition or
planned unit development.
MOBILE HOME: A structure constructed for movement on the public highways that
has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human
occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes and that was constructed
between January 1, 1962 and June 15, 1976, and met the construction
requirements of Oregon mobile home law in effect at the time of construction.
NEGOTIATE: Any activity preliminary to the execution of a binding agreement for
the sale of land in a subdivision or partition, including, but not limited to,
advertising, solicitation and promotion of the sale of such land.
OFFER: Includes every inducement, solicitation, or encouragement of a person to
acquire a lot, unit, parcel or interest in land.
OPEN: A land area exclusive of any buildings, driveways and parking lots.
Intended to be retained in a natural or a landscaped state.
OWNER: The owner of the title to real property, or the authorized agent
thereof, or the contract purchaser of real property of record as shown on the
last available complete tax assessment roll or county recorder's records.
PARCEL: A unit of land that is created by a partitioning of land.
PARK DEDICATION FEES: Funds paid by a developer to assist the city in providing
new and upgraded public parks and recreation facilities. Funds shall be
deposited in a land acquisition and development fund. These funds may be
expended only on order of the city council for the purpose of acquiring or
developing land for park and recreation purposes.
PARKING SPACE: A clear, off street area for the temporary parking or storage of
one automobile. A parking space shall be directly accessible from public
streets and separate from required loading areas or other required uses.
PARTITION LAND: To divide an area or tract of land into two (2) or three (3)
parcels within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit
of contiguous units of land under single ownership at the start of the year.
"Partition land" does not include any adjustment of a lot line by the
relocation of a common boundary where an additional parcel is not created and
where the existing parcel reduced in size by the adjustment is not reduced
below the minimum lot size established by any applicable zoning ordinance; does
not include divisions of land resulting from the creation of cemetery lots;
does not include the sale of a lot in a recorded subdivision even though the
lot may have been acquired prior to the sale with other contiguous lots or
property by a single owner, and does not include division from liens or highway
or road taking.
PERSON: A natural person, firm, partnership, association, social or fraternal
organization, corporation, trust, estate, receiver, syndicate, branch of
government, or any group or combination acting as a unit.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: An area designed as a unified combination of land
uses generally with a mixture of residential, single- and multi-family types,
open space or recreation areas, and community facilities for the direct use and
benefit of all the lot owners within the development. A planned development
includes a "planned unit", a "homes association" and "common property".
PLANNING COMMISSION: The planning commission of the city of Milton-Freewater.
PLANNING DIRECTOR: The person designated by the city manager as head of the
planning department.
PLAT: A final map, diagram, drawing, replat or other writing containing all of
the descriptions, locations, specifications, dedications, provisions and
information concerning a subdivision or partition.
PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENT: Modification of a common property line of two (2)
adjacent parcels outside of a recorded partition or subdivision plat, where an
additional parcel is not created, and where the existing parcel which is being
reduced in size is not reduced below the minimum lot size established by the
zone which applies to the property, and which may require a survey.
REPLAT: The act of platting the lots, parcels and easements in a recorded
subdivision or partition plat to achieve a reconfiguration of the existing
subdivision or partition plat or to increase or decrease the number of lots in
the subdivision.
RESERVE STRIP: A strip of land, usually one foot (1') in width, across the end
of, or along, the edge of a street, roadway or alley which is reserved or held
by the city for the purpose of controlling access, or for future street,
roadway or alley extension, or widening.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced
dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied or
occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or
gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer and other similar uses.
SITE PLAN: The development plan for one or more lots on which is shown the
existing and proposed conditions of the lot including: topography, vegetation,
drainage, floodplains, marshes and waterways, open spaces, walkways, means of
ingress and egress, utility services, landscaping, structures and signs,
lighting and screening devices and any other information that reasonably may be
required in order that an informed decision can be made by the approving
authority.
STREET: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way which provides
for public use for the purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and
including the terms "road", "highway", "lane", "place", "avenue" or other
similar designations. Nothing may be placed or located in this area except
public utilities.
  Alley: A narrow street through a block primarily for vehicular service access
to the back or side properties abutting on another street.
  Arterial: A street of considerable continuity which is primarily a traffic
artery for intercommunication among large areas.
  Bicycle Route: A right of way for bicycle traffic.
  Collector: A street supplementary to the arterial street system and a means
of intercommunication between this system and smaller areas; used to some
extent for through traffic and to some extent for access to abutting
properties.
  Cul-De-Sac (Dead End Street): A short street having one end open to traffic
and being terminated by a vehicle turnaround.
  Half Street: A portion of the width of a street, usually along the edge of a
subdivision, where the remaining portion of the street will be provided in
another subdivision.
  Local Street: A street intended primarily for access to abutting properties.
  Marginal Access Street: A minor street parallel and adjacent to a major
arterial street providing access to abutting properties, but protected from
through traffic.
  Stubbed Street: A street having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and
which is intended to be extended or continued to serve future subdivisions or
developments on adjacent lands.
SUBDIVIDE LAND: To divide an area or tract of land into four (4) or more lots
within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or
contiguous units of land under a single ownership at the time of adoption of
this title.
SUBDIVIDED LANDS AND SUBDIVISIONS: Improved or unimproved land or lands
divided, or created into interests or sold under an agreement to be
subsequently divided or created into interests, for the purpose of sale or
lease, whether immediate or future, into eleven (11) or more undivided
interests or four (4) or more divided interests. "Subdivide land" does not
include the sale of a lot in a recorded subdivision or an approved partition
even though the seller of the lot may have owned other contiguous lots or
property prior to the sale; said lot, however, must be sold as platted and
recorded.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE: A structure without any foundation or footings and which
is removed when the designated time period, activity or use for which the
temporary structure was erected has ceased.
TEMPORARY USE: A use established for a period of time fixed in the permit which
authorizes the use.
USE: The purpose for which land or a structure is designated, arranged,
intended, occupied or maintained.
VISION CLEARANCE AREA: A triangular area on a lot at the intersection of two
(2) streets, a street and an alley, or a street and a railroad, two (2) sides
of which are lot lines measured from the corner intersection of the lot lines
to a distance specified in these regulations. The third side of the triangle is
a line across the corner of the lot joining the ends of the other two (2) sides
(see section
10-5-3 of this code).
YARD: An open space on a lot which is unobstructed from the ground upward by a
principal structure.
YARD, FRONT: The front yard of any given property is defined as that side of
the property which faces a street. With regard to corner lots, the front yard
is that side of the property that faces a street and contains the main entrance
to the structure. (Planning director may modify strict application of this
definition based on facts existing at the time.)
YARD, REAR: A space extending across the full width of the lot between the
principal building and the rear lot line and measured perpendicular to the
building to the closest point of the rear lot line. See figure 2 at the end of
this section.
YARD, SIDE: A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the
principal building and the side lot line measured perpendicular from the side
lot line to the closest point of the principal building. See figure 2 at the
end of this section.
(1978 Code; amd. Ord. 764, 5-26-1992; Ord. 841)
FIGURE 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9fce89613db33abafc9763fa7174eb0da9638a04/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1689.gif]
 
FIGURE 2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9fce89613db33abafc9763fa7174eb0da9638a04/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1691.gif]
 
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS AND TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE
SECTION:
11-3-1: Scope Of Regulations
11-3-2: Minimum Standards
11-3-3: Technical Review Committee
11-3-4: Action Of Technical Review Committee
11-3-5: Technical Review Committee Factors
11-3-6: Development Review Criteria
11-3-1: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
   A.   Regulation Mandatory: Any map, subdivision, plat, replat, partition, or
plan hereafter made of any subdivision, partition, planned unit development, or
condominium shall be presented for approval and recorded as prescribed by this
title. No such subdivision, plat, map, partition or plan shall be recorded or
have validity unless and until it shall have the approval of the planning
commission or such other approvals as required by this title. (1978 Code)
11-3-2: MINIMUM STANDARDS:
No proposed development shall be approved unless said development complies with
the Milton-Freewater comprehensive plan, the zoning code (title 10 of this
code), and the requirements and standards set forth in this development code
and Oregon Revised Statutes chapter 92. (1978 Code)
11-3-3: TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE:
   A.   Committee Members: There is hereby established a technical review
committee to review all major developments (see definition of "Development,
Major", section
11-2-2 of this title) and make recommendations, when necessary, to the planning
commission. The committee shall consist of the following members:
      1.   City manager.
      2.   Engineering and planning director.
      3.   Public works superintendent.
      4.   Electric superintendent.
      5.   Chief of police.
      6.   Fire chief.
      7.   Engineering and planning secretary. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
   B.   Nonstaff Advisory Members: In addition to the committee members listed
above, the director shall encourage involvement by such other agencies and
utilities as may have an interest in the proposed development. These shall
include, but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   Natural gas company.
      2.   Telephone company.
      3.   Postmaster.
      4.   Cable TV company.
      5.   Soil conservation service. (1978 Code)
11-3-4: ACTION OF TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE:
   A.   Meetings: Technical review committee shall be convened by the director
whenever required by provisions of chapter 13 of this title.
   B.   Level II Action: Reports of committee members on level II proposals
shall be submitted to the director who shall consider the report when making
decisions on level II application.
   C.   Level III Action: Reports of committee members on level III proposals
shall be submitted to the director who shall transmit the information to the
planning commission in the form of a summary report. This report shall be
entered into the record of the proceeding and shall be considered as part of
the staff report on the proposal.
   D.   Attendance At Meetings: While it is expected that committee members or
their designees will be at committee meetings, the absence of one or more
committee members shall not invalidate the meeting or recommendation resulting
therefrom. In the absence of a committee member, the director shall have the
authority to proceed with processing of the application. (1978 Code)
11-3-5: TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE FACTORS:
In review of proposed subdivision or major partition, the technical review
committee shall confirm that requirements for the following factors have been
met:
   A.   Preliminary plat requirements.
   B.   Conformance to zoning and comprehensive plan provisions with particular
emphasis on the public facilities plan.
   C.   Quantity and quality of existing or proposed water supply, adequacy of
the existing or proposed sewage disposal system to support the projected
population; or in the event that subsurface sewage disposal is proposed for any
of the parcels of the development, the capability of the soil for the proper
long term support of such a system or systems.
   D.   Relationship to the existing road network.
   E.   Avoidance or remedy of possible adverse effects on the development by
natural hazards. Land which is found to be technically unsuitable for
development due to flooding, steep slopes, rock formations, or other features
likely to be harmful to the safety and general health of the future residents,
shall not be developed for building purposes unless adequate methods for
overcoming these conditions are submitted by an appropriate state licensed
engineer, and approved by all agencies which regulate the technical
unsuitability.
   F.   Recognition and remedy of unusual conditions of the property involved
such as high water table, slope, bedrock, or other topographic or geologic
conditions which might limit the capability to build on the land using ordinary
and reasonable construction techniques.
   G.   Marketable title or other interest contracted for.
   H.   Evidence that each and every parcel can be used for the purpose for
which they are intended.
   I.   Agreement or bylaws to provide for management, construction,
maintenance, or other services pertaining to common facilities or elements in
the development.
   J.   Protective covenants or deed restrictions. (1978 Code)
11-3-6: DEVELOPMENT REVIEW CRITERIA:
In conducting a public hearing for review of any development or any development
proposal subject to level III procedure, the planning commission shall review
the proposal for conformance with the following items:
   A.   Reports from members of the technical review committee and such other
agencies as have responded to the factors listed in section
11-3-5 of this chapter.
   B.   Tentative subdivision plan presentation as prescribed by chapter 7 of
this title.
   C.   Statement to accompany tentative plan as required by chapter 7 of this
title.
   D.   Public comments received by the planning department which related only
to the compliance of the proposal with subsections A through C of this section
and the review factors of section
11-3-5 of this chapter. Comments which do not address these items will not be
considered in reaching a decision on the proposal. (1978 Code)
CHAPTER 4
PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE
SECTION:
11-4-1: Preapplication Conference
11-4-2: Filing Procedure
11-4-3: Information On Preliminary Plat
11-4-4: Administrative Procedures
11-4-5: Preliminary Plat Approval Limitations
11-4-6: Termination Of Tentative Approval
11-4-7: Subdivision Standards
11-4-1: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE:
Prior to submitting a preliminary plat for a subdivision or major partition,
the developer is encouraged to submit a sketch plan to the planning department
and discuss the property to be developed with respect to the standards of this
title, the requirements of state law, existing private and public development,
relationships to the comprehensive plan and any special problems that may be
encountered. Changes or modifications in the preliminary plat shall be
discussed if the plan, as submitted, does not meet the objective of these
regulations. (1978 Code)
11-4-2: FILING PROCEDURE:
   A.   The developer shall prepare a preliminary plat of a subdivision in
accordance with the provisions of this title which shall be filed with the
planning department at least forty five (45) days prior to the commission
meeting at which a subdivision review is desired. Such filing shall be made
prior to the initialization of any construction work within the proposed
development.
   B.   The time of filing shall be construed to be the time when the
preliminary plat is filed with and officially received by the planning
department as provided in section
11-1-6 of this title. (1978 Code)
   C.   The developer shall file a Mylar copy or suitably reproducible copy
together with ten (10) copies of the preliminary plat which includes all
information as required per this chapter and section
11-7-1 of this title. Items with an (X) mark shall be submitted as written
material or drawings accompanying the map or plat but need not be shown on the
map or plat itself. Application fee for filing of the preliminary plat for a
subdivision review by the planning commission shall be in an amount to be
established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
11-4-3: INFORMATION ON PRELIMINARY PLAT:
Plats and accompanying written material shall be provided as required by
chapter 7 of this title. All signatures must be in permanent India ink. No
information such as building setbacks, drain field areas, landscape areas or
other such requirements that are subject to administrative change or variance
may be shown on the plats. In addition, plats shall also be surveyed and
monumented in compliance with Oregon Revised Statutes 92.050, 92.060, 92.065
and with all other applicable provisions of Oregon Revised Statutes chapter 92.
   A.   The purpose of all recorded and proposed easements shall be stated.
Water line easements shall specifically exclude all structures. Sewer line
easements shall specifically exclude all trees, bushes and structures.
   B.   Water rights statement together with water rights certificate number,
if applicable. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
11-4-4: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES:
Preliminary plats of subdivisions shall be processed according to level III
procedures specified in section
11-13-4 of this title and in conformance with the requirements of chapter 3 of
this title. (Ord. 814, 4-24-1995)
11-4-5: PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL LIMITATIONS:
Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute final acceptance of the
same for recordings however, approval of such tentative plat shall be binding
upon the city for purposes of the preparation of the final plat, and the city
may require only such changes in the final plat as are necessary for compliance
with the terms of its approval of the preliminary plat and with applicable
laws. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
11-4-6: TERMINATION OF TENTATIVE APPROVAL:
Failure by the developer to submit a final plat within twelve (12) calendar
months of the date of approval or conditional approval of the tentative plat by
the planning commission shall terminate all proceedings; provided, however that
upon application of the developer in writing, an extension of time not
exceeding six (6) calendar months may be granted by the planning commission. In
the event the planning commission denies a developer's application for
extension, the developer may appeal to the city council. Where proceedings have
terminated because of failure to receive extension by the planning commission a
new preliminary plat shall be filed in accordance with the provisions of this
title. (1978 Code)
11-4-7: SUBDIVISION STANDARDS:
   A.   A subdivision shall conform to the following standards:
      1.   Each proposed lot must be buildable in conformance with the
requirements of this title and all other applicable regulations.
      2.   Each lot shall abut a public or private street for the required
minimum lot frontage for the zoning district where the lots are located.
      3.   If any lot abuts a street right of way that does not conform to the
design specifications of this title, the owner may be required to dedicate up
to one-half (1/2) of the total right of way width required by this title.
   B.   Further subdivision of the property shall be prohibited unless the
applicant submits a plat or development plan in accordance with requirements in
this title. (Ord. 871)
CHAPTER 5
FINAL SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE
SECTION:
11-5-1: Administrative Procedures
11-5-2: Filing Procedure
11-5-3: Review By County Surveyor
11-5-4: Final Plat Standards
11-5-5: Final Plat Certificate Of Survey
11-5-6: Improvements
11-5-7: Recording Of Final Plat
11-5-8: Park Dedication Fees
11-5-9: Replatting
11-5-10: Amendments
11-5-1: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES:
Within twelve (12) months from the date of approval of a preliminary plat, the
developer shall submit a final plat which conforms to the preliminary plat, any
conditions placed by the planning commission or council, and conforming to this
chapter and chapters 7, 8, and 14 of this title, and all applicable state laws.
(Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
11-5-2: FILING PROCEDURE:
The developer shall file with the planning department one complete set of
original Mylar or a suitably reproducible copy of the plat and the public
facilities plan, three (3) copies from the Mylar, and one copy of deed, deed
restrictions, covenants, homeowners' association agreements, bonding agreements
for improvements and any other relevant documents and information. Concurrent
with this filing, and when required by Oregon Revised Statutes 92.044, 92.120,
or any other state law, developer shall also file a statement of water rights
pertaining to the subject property, and any parts thereof, which information
shall include the water rights certificate number, or numbers, and a statement
of the portion, or portions, of the property to which the water right is
appurtenant. The developer shall at the same time provide to the city copies of
all water right permits and any documents amending or modifying such permits,
such as permits allowing a change of use and change in point of diversion.
(Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
11-5-3: REVIEW BY COUNTY SURVEYOR:
The county surveyor shall examine the plat for compliance with requirements for
accuracy and completeness and shall collect such fees as are provided by state
law. He may make checks in the field to verify that the map is sufficiently
correct on the ground and he may enter the property for this purpose. If he
determines that there has not been full conformity, he shall advise the
developer of the changes or additions that must be made and afford him an
opportunity to make such changes or additions. When the county surveyor
determines that full conformity has been made, he shall so verify and return
the plat to the planning department. All final approved plats shall be filed
and recorded in compliance with Oregon Revised Statutes 92.120. (Ord. 764, 5-
26-1992)
11-5-4: FINAL PLAT STANDARDS:
The final plat shall be surveyed and monumented in compliance with Oregon
Revised Statutes 92.050, 92.060 and 92.065 and with all other applicable
provisions of Oregon Revised Statutes chapter 92. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
11-5-5: FINAL PLAT CERTIFICATE OF SURVEY:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all final plats shall have
attached thereon a certificate of the surveyor having surveyed the land
represented on the plat, to the effect that the surveyor has correctly surveyed
and marked with proper monuments the lands as represented, and that the
surveyor marked all proper monuments as provided in section
11-5-4 of this chapter (indicating the initial point of the development and its
location with reference to some known corner established by the United States
survey, or giving 2 or more objects for identifying its location and accurately
describing the tract of land upon which the lot and blocks are laid out). The
certificates shall include all information required by Oregon Revised Statutes
92.070. In the event that Oregon Revised Statutes 92.070(2) applies, the
surveyor shall also comply with Oregon Revised Statutes 90.070(3) by filing
appropriate affidavits. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
11-5-6: IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   The developer shall improve all land dedicated for streets, alleys,
pedestrianways, drainage channel, easements, and other rights of way; all
parks, lawns, and recreation areas; as a condition precedent to acceptance of
the dedication thereof, and approval of the final plat.
   B.   The developer shall place or bear the cost of placement of all public
facilities listed in section
11-8-6 of this title. Such utilities shall be stubbed to each lot line to be
serviced before the streets are constructed. All utilities shall be installed
underground.
   C.   Improvements shall conform with the specifications of design and
materials prescribed by chapter 8 of this title and standards of the public
works department.
   D.   The city shall have the right to enter upon the sites of improvement
for the purpose of inspecting them.
   E.   Any required improvements, plan and profiles and specifications of
proposed road, water, and sewage improvements shall be submitted to the
appropriate city department for approval at the time the final plat is
submitted for checking if this had not previously been done. Such plans and
profiles shall show the full details of the proposed improvements. In the event
that the developer wishes to construct improvements prior to the filing of the
final plat, the city manager may authorize initiation of such construction upon
submission by the developer of plans and profiles giving full details of the
proposed improvements which conform substantially to the preliminary plat.
   F.   Any performance agreement required plus four (4) copies of the same
shall be submitted to the director on forms provided by the planning
department. The city manager shall determine that the security amount proposed
pursuant to section
11-8-2 of this title is adequate to cover the cost of all required improvements
and related work. Where improvement plans are required, approval of such plans
shall include a performance agreement. (1978 Code)
11-5-7: RECORDING OF FINAL PLAT:
   A.   No plat shall have any force or effect until the same has been finally
approved by the city and county. No title to any property described in any
offer of dedication shall pass until the final plat has been recorded.
   B.   No final plat shall be recorded unless all ad valorem tax and all
special assessments fees or other charges required by law to be placed upon the
tax roll, which have become a lien upon the subdivision or which will become a
lien during the calendar year, have been paid.
   C.   The final plat shall be recorded by the county clerk in conformance
with state and county requirements. An exact copy of the recorded final plat or
reproducible Mylar shall be provided to the city within three (3) days of
recording. (1978 Code)
11-5-8: PARK DEDICATION FEES:
Prior to recording of the final plat of any subdivision, condominium, or
planned unit development, the developer shall pay park dedication fees in an
amount prescribed by resolution of the city council for each lot or dwelling
unit. (1978 Code)
11-5-9: REPLATTING:
Replatting shall be accomplished in accordance with all of the provisions of
this title for the subdivision of land and with Oregon Revised Statutes 92.180
through 92.190. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
11-5-10: AMENDMENTS:
Any plat of a subdivision or partition filed and recorded may be amended
through the filing of an affidavit of correction provided that the requirements
of Oregon Revised Statutes 92.170 are met. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
CHAPTER 6
LAND PARTITIONING
SECTION:
11-6-1: Application Requirements
11-6-2: Property Line Adjustment And Minor Partition On Improved Street
11-6-3: Minor Partition On Unimproved Street
11-6-4: Findings For Approval Of A Minor Partition Or Property Line Adjustment
11-6-5: Major Partition Tentative Plan
11-6-6: Partition Final Plat
11-6-7: Administrative Record Of Partitioning
11-6-8: Approval Requirements For Creation Of A Fourth Parcel By Partitioning
11-6-9: Notice To Partition Purchasers
11-6-10: Park Dedication Fees
11-6-1: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
An application for a land partition shall be submitted on forms provided by the
planning department and shall include such information as required by chapter 7
of this title, for that particular type of partition. The application shall be
accompanied by an administrative fee established by the council. (1978 Code)
11-6-2: PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENT AND MINOR PARTITION ON IMPROVED STREET:
   A.   Property line adjustments and minor partitions fronting on improved
streets shall be processed under level I procedures (section
11-13-2 of this title). The proposed partition shall be submitted on a
partition plat, showing proposed lines of division, and shall be prepared by a
registered professional land surveyor and filed with the county surveyor's
office. The partition plat shall contain all the necessary information
specified in chapter 7 of this title. If the property line to be adjusted is
located within a recorded partition or subdivision plat, a replat will be
required.
   B.   The partition plat shall be a survey of the tract to be partitioned. In
preparing an application for a minor partition, a Mylar or suitable
reproducible copy of the proposal shall be submitted together with five (5)
prints of the plan.
   C.   In support of a decision on a property line adjustment or minor
partition fronting on an improved street, the director shall develop written
findings which address the requirements of section
11-6-4 of this chapter.
   D.   Except as provided below, a boundary adjustment shall be surveyed and
monumented such that all lot and parcel corners are marked with either
galvanized iron pipe of not less than one-half inch (1/2") inside the diameter,
or iron or steel rods not less than five-eighths inch (5/8") in least
dimension, and not less than twenty four inches (24") long. The county surveyor
may authorize the setting of another type of monument in circumstances when
setting the required monument is impractical. A survey complying with Oregon
Revised Statutes 249.250 shall be filed with the county surveyor.
   E.   Subsection D of this section shall not apply to the adjustment of a
line an even distance along a common boundary, nor shall it apply to an
adjusted boundary line when both parcels affected are greater than ten (10)
acres. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
11-6-3: MINOR PARTITION ON UNIMPROVED STREET:
   A.   A minor partition fronting on an unimproved street shall be processed
under level II procedures (section
11-13-3 of this title). The proposed partition shall be submitted on a
partition plat, showing proposed lines of division and shall be prepared by a
registered professional land surveyor and filed with the county surveyor's
office. In preparing an application for a partition, a Mylar or suitable
reproducible copy of the proposal shall be submitted together with five (5)
prints of the plan. The map shall also contain the information contained in
chapter 7 and section
11-4-3 of this title. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
   B.   In review of a minor partition fronting on an unimproved street the
technical review committee shall address the requirements of section
11-6-4 of this chapter, and may require any public improvements listed in
chapter 8 of this title which are necessary for the proper use and development
of the properties involved in the partition proposal. Such improvements may be
temporarily delayed if agreements are executed and recorded which commit to
completion of the improvements at some future date.
   C.   The director shall develop written findings which address the
requirements of section
11-6-4 of this chapter and which explain why public improvements were or were
not required of the developer. (1978 Code)
11-6-4: FINDINGS FOR APPROVAL OF A MINOR PARTITION OR PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENT:
Approval of a minor partition or property line adjustment shall be accompanied
by affirmative findings for each of the following criteria. If such findings
cannot be made, that application shall be denied. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
   A.   The tentative plan is consistent with all applicable policies,
standards and provisions of the Milton-Freewater zoning code (title 10 of this
code) and this title.
   B.   Approval will not impede or adversely affect the safe and healthy
development of any adjoining land or access thereto.
   C.   Any required dedications of land to the public have been properly
prepared and executed by the partitioner, accepted by the city, and recorded
with the county.
   D.   All public facilities serving the partition site are fully improved and
adequate according to chapter 8 of this title, or full improvement of such
public facilities can be provided or guaranteed prior to issuance of any permit
for further development or any parcel in the partition, in accordance with the
provisions of section
11-8-2 of this title. (1978 Code)
11-6-5: MAJOR PARTITION TENTATIVE PLAN:
   A.   A major partition tentative plan shall be processed according to level
III procedures (section
11-13-4 of this title).
   B.   A developer proposing a land partition which necessitates the creation
of a road or street to gain public access shall prepare a tentative plan and
accompanying material as provided by chapters 7, 8, and 14 of this title.
   C.   The procedure and requirements of section
11-3-5 and chapter 4 of this title shall apply to major partition tentative map
application. (1978 Code)
11-6-6: PARTITION FINAL PLAT:
   A.   For all major and minor partitions, a final plat shall be prepared in
compliance with the survey and monument standards of Oregon Revised Statutes
92.050, 92.060 and 92.065, and with all other applicable provisions of Oregon
Revised Statutes chapter 92. However, any parcels greater than ten (10) acres
that are created by partition are exempt from the survey and monument
requirements.
   B.   Approval by the city of the final plat for any partition shall be in
accordance with level II application procedures (section
11-13-3 of this title).
   C.   When a final plat for a major partition is submitted to the city for
approval, the developer shall also submit to the city accompanying materials
provided for in chapters 7, 8 and 14 of this title. The procedural requirements
of section
11-3-5 and chapter 5 of this title, shall apply to all major partition
applications.
   D.   All final partition plats shall be submitted to the city within twelve
(12) calendar months of the approval of the tentative plan for the partition.
   E.   When the final partition plat for any partition is submitted to the
city for approval, the developer shall also submit to the city the water rights
information described in section
11-5-2 of this title.
   F.   Once the final plat has been approved by the city and the county
surveyor, it shall be recorded and filed in accordance with Oregon Revised
Statutes 92.120 (2), (3) and (4) and with all other applicable provisions of
Oregon Revised Statutes chapter 92. An exact copy of the final plat shall be
provided by the developer to the city within three (3) days of recording by the
county. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
11-6-7: ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD OF PARTITIONING:
The planning department shall keep a current record of all partitioning
approved in the city. This record shall be based on the ownership boundaries
which exist at the date of adoption of this title. (1978 Code)
11-6-8: APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CREATION OF A FOURTH PARCEL BY PARTITIONING:
   A.   When any property which exists as a unit of ownership on October 2,
1985 (regardless of intervening ownership changes of the entire property or new
parcels) is partitioned into three (3) parcels, the application for creation of
a fourth parcel whether by major or minor partition procedures on the property
shall be administered in conformance with the requirements and standards for a
partition specified in sections
11-6-5 and
11-6-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
   B.   The developer shall submit a partition master plan which shows future
development of the property. The partition master plan shall be kept on file in
the planning department. All future land divisions on the property shall
conform to the approved partition master plan and may be approved according to
level I procedures.
   C.   All public improvements required in chapter 8 of this title shall be
provided, except that said improvements need only be provided to lots as they
are created by individual partition approvals. (1978 Code)
11-6-9: NOTICE TO PARTITION PURCHASERS:
To provide notice of the provisions of section
11-6-8 of this chapter to property owners and purchasers of partitioned
parcels, the director shall file a document with the county clerk which
explains the provisions of section
11-6-8 of this chapter. This document shall be filed when a partition first
occurs on a parcel which exists as a unit of ownership on October 2, 1985. It
shall describe the entire parcel and shall run with the land regardless of
intervening changes of ownership or further land divisions until such time as
the parcel has been divided to its maximum potential and all necessary
improvements have been completed. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
11-6-10: PARK DEDICATION FEES:
Prior to recording of final map of a major partition or prior to creation of
any lot pursuant to a minor partition master plan as provided in section
11-6-8 of this chapter, the developer shall pay park dedication fees in an
amount prescribed by resolution of the city council. (1978 Code)
CHAPTER 7
PLANS FOR LAND DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
11-7-1: Information Required
11-7-1: INFORMATION REQUIRED:
In addition to all requirements of Oregon Revised Statutes chapter 92, the
following items shall be included on land development proposal maps or plats
when the "X" mark appears next to a particular item under the heading of a
certain land development proposal. Items with an "X" mark shall be submitted as
written material or shown on the map or plat itself. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
 
  Subdivision, Major
  PUD, Condo   Partition   Minor Partition
  Pre. Final   Tent. Final
       Scale: All pertinent information shall be shown normally at a scale of 1
       inch equals 100 feet; however, the scale may be increased or decreased to
1.     fit standard size sheets of 18 inches by 24 inches, except for major and     X     X     X   X   X
       minor partitions. In all cases the scale shall be a standard drafting scale,
       being 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, or 60 feet to the inch or multiples of 10 for any
       one of these scales.
       Proposed name of the development: This name shall not duplicate or resemble
       the name of any other subdivision in the county, unless the subject
       subdivision is contiguous to and platted by the same developer who platted
2.     the preceding subdivision bearing that name or by a subdivider having        X     X            
       written authorization from the original developer to continue an existing
       subdivision under the same name. All such subdivisions shall continue the
       block numbers of the subdivision of the same name last filed.
3.     Appropriate identification of the drawing as a partition, subdivision,       X     X     X   X   X
       preliminary, final, etc.
4.     The names and addresses of the owner and surveyor.                           X     X     X   X   X
5.     The date, north point, and scale of the drawing.                             X     X     X   X   X
6.     A full legal description and survey plan of the boundaries and location of   (X)   X     (X) X   X
       the entire proposed development.
       The locations, widths, and names of both improved and unimproved streets and
7.     alleys within or adjacent to the proposed development together with all      X     X     X   X   X
       existing easements and other important features such as section lines,
       section corners, city boundary lines, and monuments.
       The locations and layouts of existing lots or parcels which are adjacent to
       or across contiguous right of way from the proposed subdivision or partition
8.     labeled as to the current owner of record. This information may be provided  X          X       
       on a separate current tax lot map reproduction, as furnished by the county
       assessor, with the outline of the proposed development superimposed thereon.
9.     The location and approximate dimensions of lots, proposed lot and block      X          X       
       numbers.
10.    The location, approximate acreage and approximate dimensions of areas        X          X       
       proposed for public use.
11.    The land use zone applicable to the subject property and adjacent            X          X       
       properties.
       Existing contour lines and elevations related to some established benchmark  X           X
12.  or other datum approved by the public works director and having minimum                       
       intervals as follows:
   a.   For slopes of less than 5 percent: 1 foot, together with at least 4 sp                 
elevations per acre, evenly distributed.
   b.   For slopes of 5 percent: 5 foot intervals.                                             
13.    The location of at least one temporary bench mark within the development     X          X       
       boundaries or within a distance approved by the public works director.
       The locations and sizes of existing public and private sanitary sewers,
14.    water mains, and public storm drains, culverts, fire hydrants, and           X          X      X
       electrical lines within and adjacent to the proposed development.
15.    The approximate curve radii of any existing public street or road within the X          X       
       proposed development.
       Existing uses of the property and locations of all existing buildings and
16.    designating which existing buildings are to remain after completion of the   X          X      X
       proposed development.
       The location of areas subject to inundation, storm water overflow, and/or
17.    within a designated 100-year floodplain, all areas covered by water, and the X     X     X   X   X
       location, width, and direction of flow of all watercourses.
       Locations of existing natural features such as rock outcroppings, marshes,
18.    wooded areas, and trees with a diameter of 6 inches dbh or larger. All such  X          X       
       trees shall be preserved whenever possible.
       A vicinity map showing the location of the proposed land division in
       relation to the rest of the city and showing how proposed streets and
19.    utilities within the development may be extended to connect with existing    X          X       
       streets and utilities or to projected streets as shown on the street plan
       contained in the comprehensive plan.
       The approximate location, width, names, and street profile plans including
       grades and curve radii for all proposed streets. Said streets and roads
20.    shall be laid out so as to conform to subdivisions and major partitions      X          X       
       previously approved for adjoining property as to width, general direction
       and in other respects, including conformance with street projections as
       shown on the street plan contained in the comprehensive plan.
       The locations and dimensions of proposed lots and parcels and the proposed
       lot and block numbers. Numbers shall designate each block and lot or parcel.
       Lot or parcel numbers shall begin with the number 1 and continue
21.    consecutively without omission throughout the development; provided that     X     X     X   X   X
       where a plat is an addition to a plat previously recorded, numbers of blocks
       and lots or parcels shall be in consecutive continuation from a previous
       plat.
22.    A preliminary public facilities plan for the location and construction of    X          X       
       proposed water service facilities to serve the development.
23.    A preliminary public facilities plan and profile, for the location and       X          X       
       construction of proposed sanitary sewer facilities to serve the development.
       A plan for storm drainage, erosion, and sedimentation control as required in
24.    section                                                                      X          X       
       11-8-11 of this title.
25.    Locations and widths of streets and roads to be held for private use and all X     X     X   X   X
       reservations or restrictions relating to such private roads and streets.
26.    Finished contour lines and elevations at intervals of 1 foot or 5 feet as         X        X    
       provided by the planning department.
27.    All public areas proposed to be dedicated by the owner and the proposed uses X          X       
       thereof.
28.    The following survey data:                                                                    
      a.   Tract, block, and lot or parcel boundary lines with dimensions.           X        X    
      b.   Street rights of way centerline.                                          X        X    
      c.   The radius, length, central angle, long chord distance and bearing, a     X        X    
       tangent of all curves.
      d.   Ties to boundary lines and section or quarter section corners             X        X    
       immediately surrounding the development.
      e.   The location of all permanent monuments within the development            X        X   X
       including initial point, boundary monuments, and lot corners.
       f.   Development boundaries and street bearings shall be shown to the
      nearest 30 seconds with basis of bearings. Distances shall be shown to            X        X    
       nearest 0.01 foot.
29.    The area in square feet of proposed lots and parcels.                             X        X   X
30.    Designation of proposed portions of subdivisions to be platted in phases, if X     X            
       any, indicating proposed sequence of platting.
31.    Designation of proposed sites, if any, allocated for purposes other than     X     X     X   X   X
       detached single-family dwellings.
32.    All proposals for flood control and easements or deeds for drainage land          X        X    
       including profiles of proposed drainageways.
33.    Proposed deed restrictions or covenants, if any, in outline form.            X          X       
       Partial development: If the proposed development pertains to only part of
34.    the property owned or controlled by the subdivider, the planning director or X          X      X
       his designee may require a sketch of a tentative layout for streets in the
       portion not to be developed at the present time.
35.    Reference points of existing surveys identified, related to the plat by                       
       distance and bearings, and referenced to a field book or map as follows:
      a.   Stakes, monuments, or other evidence found on the ground and used to X     X     X   X   X
       determine the boundaries of the land division.
      b.   Adjoining corners of adjoining subdivisions.                         X     X        X   X
       c.   Monuments to be established marking all street intersections and the
      centerlines of all streets at every point of curvature and the point of           X        X    
       tangent.
       d.   Other monuments found or established in making the survey of the
      subdivision or partition or required to be installed by provisions of this        X        X   X
       title and state law.
36.    The location and width of streets and easements intercepting the boundary of      X        X   X
       the development.
       Existing and proposed easement clearly identified and denoted by dashed
37.    lines and, if already of record, their recorded reference. The width of the       X        X   X
       easement, its length and bearing, and sufficient ties to locate the easement
       with respect to the development shall be shown.
       Identification of all land or improvements to be dedicated or donated for
38.    any public purpose or private use in common to distinguish such land or           X        X    
       improvements from lots intended for private sale or use.
39.    The following certificates which may be combined where appropriate:                           
       a.   A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record
      title interest in the land, consenting to the preparation and recording of        X        X    
       the plat.
      b.   A certificate signed and acknowledged as above, dedicating to the         X        X    
       public all land intended for public use.
      c.   A certificate for execution by the chairman of the planning commissio     X        X    
      d.   A certificate for execution by the planning director.                     X        X   X
      e.   A certificate for execution by the public works director.                 X        X    
      f.   A certificate for execution by the county surveyor.                       X        X   X
      g.   A certificate for execution by the county tax collector.                  X        X    
      h.   A certificate for execution by the county assessor.                       X        X    
       i.   A certificate for execution by the irrigation district or company which
      operates ditches or distributes water to water rights holders within the          X        X   X
       development.
      j.   A certificate for execution by the Umatilla County commissioner.          X        X    
      k.   A certificate with the seal and signature of the surveyor responsible     X        X   X
       for the survey and final plat.
40.    A subdivision guarantee prepared under provisions of the Oregon real estate       X        X    
       commission.
41.    Sheets and drawings showing the following:                                                    
      a.   Coordinates of the boundary of the development and ties to section        X        X    
       corners and donation land claim corners.
      b.   Ties to existing monuments, proposed monuments, adjacent subdivisions     X        X    
       street corners and state highway stationing.
42.    A final public facilities plan as required by chapters 8 and 14 of this           X        X    
       title.
43.    A final copy of any deed restrictions and/or protective covenants being           (X)      (X)  
       proposed.
44.    A copy of any dedication requiring separate documents.                            (X)      (X) (X)
45.    Proposed locations of joint mailbox facilities and postmaster approval of         X        X    
       those locations.
       Such additional information pertaining to the subdivision or partition site,
46.    the immediate vicinity, and the proposed land division as may be required by X     X     X   X   X
       the planning director for the review of the proposal.
       Appropriate architectural and site development plans which shall show
       proposed building location; specific landscaping; prominent existing trees;
47.    ground treatment; sight obscuring fences and hedges; off street parking;     X     X            
       vehicular and pedestrian circulation; major exterior elevations of           (PUD) (PUD)
       buildings, design of advertising structures in conformance with sign
       standards in title 10, chapter 7 of this code.
 
(1978 Code)
CHAPTER 8
STANDARDS FOR DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
11-8-1: General Provisions And Policy
11-8-2: Guarantee Of Completion And Maintenance
11-8-3: Approved Plans
11-8-4: Acceptance Of Public Improvements
11-8-5: Public Utility Easements
11-8-6: Public Improvements
11-8-7: Streets
11-8-8: Street Design Standards
11-8-9: Water Supply System
11-8-10: Sanitary Sewer Systems
11-8-11: Storm Drainage
11-8-12: Street And Traffic Control Sign Standards
11-8-13: Street Lighting And Electrical
11-8-14: Pedestrianways
11-8-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS AND POLICY:
Development of land shall be contingent upon provision of all public facilities
necessary to support the proposed development.
Access, drainage, water, and sewer facilities shall be constructed by the
developer in conformance with this chapter and chapter 14 of this title. Said
facilities shall be constructed at the developer's expense and shall not be
funded through local improvement districts or other public financing mechanisms
which could transfer liability away from the developer.
In addition to those improvements necessary to provide service directly to the
subject development, a developer may also be required to provide for
continuation of public facilities by off site improvement and/or by sizing on
site improvements to accommodate service grids presented in the comprehensive
plan. (1978 Code)
11-8-2: GUARANTEE OF COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Prior to construction of any required improvement, a guarantee of
completion in the form of a performance bond or an irrevocable letter of credit
shall be submitted by the developer. The amount of the guarantee shall be set
by the city manager so as to be one hundred ten percent (110%) of the cost of
the improvements.
   B.   Prior to execution of a document accepting public improvements for
operation and maintenance by the city, a maintenance guarantee in the form of a
maintenance bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall be submitted by the
developer. The guarantee shall run for a period of one year from the date of
acceptance of the improvements by the city as provided in section
11-8-4 of this chapter. The amount of the guarantee shall be set by the city
manager so as to be ten percent (10%) of the cost of the improvements. (1978
Code)
11-8-3: APPROVED PLANS:
Prior to any construction of any public improvement, construction drawings for
that improvement must be approved by the public works director. These drawings
shall meet the following minimum requirements:
   A.   Sheets shall be twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36").
   B.   Public and private improvements shall be shown on separate sheets.
   C.   The plans shall be stamped and signed by a registered professional
engineer.
   D.   Plans shall include profiles, elevations, curve descriptions, material
descriptions, capacities, flow rates, and other design information necessary to
determine performance and durability of the system. (1978 Code)
11-8-4: ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
Prior to city acceptance of the completed improvements for operation and
maintenance, Mylar as built drawings of the improvements with all
specifications shall be submitted to and approved by the public works director.
The improvements shall be accepted upon execution of a document by the city
which states that all standards and conditions have been met and all guarantees
of completion have been released. (1978 Code)
11-8-5: PUBLIC UTILITY EASEMENTS:
Prior to construction of public utilities outside the public right of way or
prior to the approval of a final plat or final map on a development for which
off site utilities are required, the applicant shall provide the city with
easement documents for the construction, operation and maintenance of those
facilities.
For utilities serving lots within a subdivision, the location, width, purpose,
and grantee of the easement shall be shown on the plat map. Descriptions or
conditions of the easement shall be shown.
If the utility is outside the plat boundaries or serves areas outside the plat
boundary, a separate instrument for the easement shall be required.
Size of the easements shall be appropriate for the operation and maintenance as
well as initial placement of the utility. (1978 Code)
11-8-6: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
In all major land development (see definition of "Development, Major", section
11-2-2 of this title) approved under this title, the following improvements
shall be provided at the developer's expense in accordance with the
specifications of chapter 14 of this title and the requirements of the public
works director:
   A.   Public streets including curbs and gutters.
   B.   Water system including fire hydrants.
   C.   Sanitary sewer system.
   D.   Storm drainage system.
   E.   Street name and traffic control signs.
   F.   Streetlights.
   G.   Pedestrianways.
Specific provisions relating to each of these improvements are provided in
sections
11-8-7 through
11-8-14 of this chapter. (1978 Code)
11-8-7: STREETS:
   A.   Development Permit: No development permit shall be issued under
provisions of this title unless the proposed development has frontage on, or
creates within itself, approved public streets. (1978 Code)
   B.   Manufactured Home Park Or PUD: In manufactured home parks or certain
planned unit developments where streets are intended to remain in private
ownership, the private streets shall connect directly to a public street, but
need not meet public street construction standards. These standards are
specified in title 10, chapter 9 of this code. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
   C.   Traffic: No development will be permitted where it will generate
traffic beyond the carrying capacity of the street which serves the property.
No development will be permitted when it will create hazardous traffic
conditions.
   D.   Special Traffic Generators: All streets shall be properly related to
special traffic generators such as industries, business districts, schools and
shopping centers and to the pattern of existing and proposed uses.
   E.   Access To Arterials: When a residential development abuts an existing
or proposed arterial, access to such streets shall be limited by one of the
following means:
      1.   The lots of the development back onto the arterial and front onto a
parallel local street.
      2.   A series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets, or short loops entered
from and designed generally at right angles to the arterial street such that no
lots derive direct access to the arterial street.
   F.   Cul-De-Sac: A cul-de-sac turnaround shall be provided at the end of a
permanent dead end street. For more effective police and fire protection, dead
end streets shall be limited to serving no more than eighteen (18) dwellings,
and shall not exceed four hundred feet (400') in length.
   G.   Curb Radius: All local and neighborhood collector streets shall have a
minimum curb radius (at intersections) of twenty feet (20'). When a local or
neighborhood collector street enters onto a collector or arterial street, the
curb radius shall be a minimum of twenty seven feet (27').
Streets serving commercial or industrial developments may be required to
install curb radius up to a maximum of forty feet (40') as required for vehicle
movements.
   H.   Arterial Or Collector Route: In any area, if the city requires a
subdivider or partitioner to install a street with pavement width greater than
forty feet (40') to provide an arterial or collector traffic route, the city
may pay that portion of the cost in excess of the cost of a forty foot (40')
street. The city may allow staging of the arterial or collector street
improvement requiring a less pavement width than is called for in section
11-8-8 of this chapter while reserving adequate right of way for the future
widening to full street standard. If staging is permitted, setbacks for
adjoining developments shall be determined by the right of way requirements for
the full street standards.
   I.   Intersections: Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly
as possible at right angles. In no case shall a proposed intersection of two
(2) new streets be at an angle of less than seventy five degrees (75°). Not
more than two (2) streets shall intersect at any one point.
   J.   Half Streets: Half streets, while generally not acceptable, may be
approved where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision or
partition, when in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations,
and when the approval authority finds it will be practical to require
dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided, the
other half of the street shall be platted within such tract.
A future street plan will be required with a half street proposal. The half
street right of way will be a minimum of thirty feet (30') wide.
   K.   Additional Right Of Way And Street Improvements: Whenever existing
streets adjacent to or within a development do not meet the city standards,
they shall be improved (including dedication) to the standards of section
11-8-8 of this chapter. Immediate improvement may be deferred by the city
manager where physical conditions and scale of development make it impractical.
If improvements are deferred, an agreement to participate in future street
improvements will be required. The form of the agreement must be acceptable to
the city manager.
   L.   Street Names: Street names shall conform to provisions of section
5-3-1 of this code. No street name shall duplicate or be easily confused with
the name of an existing street.
Street numbers shall be assigned by the city. All structures shall bear their
assigned number in characters easily visible from the street. (1978 Code)
11-8-8: STREET DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Width: Right of way and pavement width for new development of public
streets shall not be less than those set forth in this section. These minimum
standards may be increased upon development of findings by the technical review
committee which show that the minimum specifications do not address public
safety concerns of the particular development.
 
              Minimum      Minimum
Type Of Street Right Of Way Roadway
Major arterials                                       100 Varies
Secondary arterials                                   80  42
Service and industrial streets                        80  42
Collector streets and  continuing residential streets60  40
Minor streets                                         50  30
Radius for turnaround at end  of cul-de-sac          50  40
Alley                                                 20  20
 
   B.   Alignment: As far as practical, streets other than minor streets shall
be in alignment with existing streets by continuations of the centerlines
thereof. Staggered street alignment resulting in "T" intersections shall
wherever practical leave a minimum distance of two hundred feet (200') between
the centerlines of streets having approximately the same direction and
otherwise shall not be less than one hundred twenty five feet (125').
   C.   Grades And Curves: Grades shall not exceed six percent (6%) on
arterials, ten percent (10%) on collector streets, or twelve percent (12%) on
any other street. Centerline radii of curves shall not be less than three
hundred feet (300') on major arterials, two hundred feet (200') on secondary
arterials, and other streets.
   D.   Alleys: Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial
districts, unless other permanent provisions for access to off street parking
and loading facilities are approved by the planning commission. The corners of
alley intersections shall have a radius of not less than twelve feet (12').
   E.   Improvements: That portion of any existing substandard local street
which is adjacent to a proposed subdivision and which will directly serve the
proposed subdivision shall be improved according to the standards of this
section in conjunction with development of the subdivision. However, where the
existing, adjacent, substandard local street has established dimensions greater
than those required by this section, the street shall be improved and completed
adjacent to the subdivision in accordance with those existing dimensions and in
such a way that those same dimensions may be continued in both directions to
the nearest intersection.
   F.   Reserve Strips: The planning director may require the developer to
create on the plat a reserve strip controlling the access to a street when it
is determined that such a reserve strip is necessary:
      1.   To prevent access to abutting land at the end of a street in order
to assure the proper extension of the street pattern and the orderly
development of land lying beyond the street;
      2.   To prevent access to the side of a street which is adjacent to the
subdivision or major partition where additional width is required to meet the
right of way standards provided in the table in subsection A of this section or
to prevent direct access from abutting lots or parcels to an adjacent collector
or lateral;
      3.   To prevent access to land which is abutting a street of the
subdivision or major partition, but which is not within the subdivision or
major partition itself; and
      4.   To prevent access to land unsuitable for building development.
   G.   Construction: Streets shall be constructed in conformance with chapter
14 of this title and the Oregon state "Standard Specifications For Highway
Construction" manual, 1984 edition, when not addressed by chapter 14 of this
title.
   H.   Additional Provisions: Additional provisions on streets are found in
title 5, chapters 2 and 3 of this code. (1978 Code)
11-8-9: WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM:
   A.   The applicant shall install water distribution and fire protection
facilities necessary to directly serve the proposed development. The facilities
shall be connected to approved existing water systems. The applicant must
demonstrate that adequate facilities shall be available to properly serve the
development.
   B.   Design of systems shall take into account future extensions beyond the
development and shall be consistent with the long term development plans for
the water system. The system shall have a minimum pressure of twenty five (25)
pounds per square inch to assure adequate fire protection and fulfill consumer
demand. In any case, fire flow demand shall provide the minimum flows and
pressures required.
   C.   Systems shall be engineered and constructed in conformance with
standards specified in chapter 14 of this title and the standards of the Oregon
chapter of the American Public Works Association when not addressed in chapter
14 of this title.
   D.   All individual lots shall have separate connections to water mains.
   E.   Water mains shall be a minimum of eight inch (8") diameter, constructed
of ductile iron or polyvinyl chloride (AWWA C 900). Pipe bedding and utility
line separation shall conform to the details of chapter 14 of this title.
   F.   Fire hydrants for residential developments shall be spaced to provide a
maximum of two hundred fifty foot (250') radius for total coverage and shall be
spaced not more than four hundred feet (400') between hydrants on a street.
   G.   Minimum water pressure at the point of delivery shall be twenty five
(25) psi and fire hydrant flows shall provide a minimum of one thousand (1,000)
gallons per minute at twenty (20) psi residual.
   H.   Additional provisions on water service are contained in title 5,
chapter 5 of this code. (1978 Code)
11-8-10: SANITARY SEWER SYSTEMS:
   A.   Sanitary sewer facilities shall be installed in conformance with
chapter 14 of this title and the requirements of Oregon administrative rule
chapter 240 division 52 and the Oregon chapter of the American Public Works
Association when not addressed in chapter 14 of this title.
   B.   Development shall not be permitted in areas where the trunk and feeder
lines of the city system do not have sufficient capacity to accommodate the
proposed development, except as provided in section
5-4-12 of this code.
   C.   All individual lots shall have separate connections to the sewer mains.
   D.   System location, capacity, and grade shall allow for extension for
future development. Sewer capacities within a subdivision or partition shall be
adequate to handle the sewage contributed by that subdivision or partition.
Sewer lines through a subdivision or partition shall be a minimum of eight inch
(8") diameter and sized to be adequate in capacity for ultimate tributary areas
outside of the subdivision or partition.
   E.   Additional provisions on sewer systems are found in title 5, chapter 4
of this code. (1978 Code)
11-8-11: STORM DRAINAGE:
   A.   Multi-family (in excess of 4 units), commercial and industrial
development shall provide for collection and disposal of storm water so that
runoff from impervious surfaces does not enter a public right of way or other
private property.
Residential subdivisions shall contain runoff within the boundaries of the
subdivision.
   B.   Until development of a public storm drainage system, storm drainage
control will be by installation of private on site facilities which may
include, but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   Temporary ponding.
      2.   Infiltration galleries.
      3.   Leach fields.
   C.   Once constructed, on site private systems shall be operated and
maintained by the property owner to contain runoff from impervious surfaces
within the property boundaries.
   D.   Upon adoption of a storm drainage master plan and completion of initial
segments of the public system, this section shall be amended to provide for
construction of and connection to additional portions of the public system.
(1978 Code)
11-8-12: STREET AND TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGN STANDARDS:
The city shall install all street and traffic control signs in new developments
at the developer's expense. Required signing shall be in accordance with the
"Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices For Streets And Highways" published
by the federal highway administration, U.S. department of transportation, and
as designated by the city manager.
Signing shall also include street name signs which conform to the standard
practices of the city. (1978 Code)
11-8-13: STREET LIGHTING AND ELECTRICAL:
A complete lighting system (including, but not limited to: conduits, wiring,
bases, poles, arms, and fixtures) shall be the financial responsibility of the
developer on all streets upon which the development has frontage in conformance
with the master street lighting plan. The system shall be installed by the city
at the developer's expense.
Specifications of the equipment shall be provided by the electric
superintendent, but shall not exceed the specifications for standard lighting
installed by the city.
In all major developments the electrical facilities shall be installed
underground. The city will install the primary conductors, the transformers and
secondary conductors, and the property owner will pay the cost of the service
conductors to the house. Additional provisions on electrical service are found
in title 5, chapter 6 of this code. (1978 Code)
11-8-14: PEDESTRIANWAYS:
A sidewalk of not less than four feet (4') in width shall be installed adjacent
to the curb and gutter in pedestrianways on at least one side of each public
street created for or improved for a major development when such installation
is required by the master sidewalk plan.
Wheelchair ramps shall be installed at sidewalk-street intersections according
to specifications of chapter 14 of this title. Additional provisions on
sidewalks are found in title 5, chapter 2 of this code. (1978 Code)
CHAPTER 9
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
11-9-1: Purpose
11-9-2: Applicability
11-9-3: Review And Approvals Process
11-9-4: Allowed Uses
11-9-5: Applicability Of The Land Use District Standards
11-9-6: Overlay Zone And Concept Plan Submission
11-9-7: Overlay Zone And Concept Plan Approval Criteria
11-9-8: Administrative Procedures
11-9-9: Detailed Development Plan Submission Requirements
11-9-10: Detailed Development Plan Approval Criteria
11-9-11: Building Permit Approvals
11-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to:
   A.   Implement a means for master planning large development sites;
   B.   Encourage innovative planning that results in more mixed use
development, improved protection of open spaces, and greater housing and
transportation options;
   C.   Encourage developments that recognize the relationship between
buildings, their use, open space, and transportation options, providing varied
opportunities for innovative and diversified living environments;
   D.   Facilitate the efficient use of land;
   E.   Promote an economic arrangement of land use, buildings, circulation
systems, open space, and utilities;
   F.   Preserve to the greatest extent possible the existing landscape
features and amenities, that may not otherwise be protected through
conventional development;
   G.   Encourage energy conservation and improved air and water quality. (Ord.
928, 6-27-2005)
11-9-2: APPLICABILITY:
The master planned development designation is an overlay zone which may be
applied over any of the city's land use districts. An applicant may elect to
develop a project as a master planned development in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter. In addition, the city may require that the
following types of development be processed using the provisions of this
chapter: subdivisions required to conform to title 10, chapter 14, "Site And
Design Standards", of this code and chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 928, 6-27-
2005)
11-9-3: REVIEW AND APPROVALS PROCESS:
   A.   Review Steps: There are three (3) required steps to planned development
approval:
      1.   The approval of a planned development overlay zone and concept plan
governed by section
10-9-6 of this code.
      2.   The approval of a detailed development plan.
      3.   The approval of a preliminary subdivision plat(s) and/or site design
review application(s).
   B.   Approval Process: The master planned unit development (PUD) overlay
zone and concept plan shall be reviewed together using the level III procedure
in chapter 13 of this title, the submission requirements in section
10-8-4 of this code, and the approval criteria in section
10-9-6 of this code. The detailed development plan shall be reviewed using the
level III procedure in title 10, chapter 14 of this code to ensure substantial
compliance with the approved concept plan.
   C.   Preliminary Subdivision Plats And Site Design Review Applications:
Preliminary subdivision plats and site design review applications for approved
planned developments shall be reviewed using a level II procedure, as governed
by section
11-13-3 of this title.
   D.   Combination Of Steps: Steps 1 through 3, above, may be combined in any
manner, so long as the decision making sequence follows that in subsection A of
this section. Notification and hearings may be combined. (Ord. 928, 6-27-2005)
11-9-4: ALLOWED USES:
   A.   Residential District(s): In the residential districts the following
uses are allowed outright when they are included in an approved master planned
development:
All uses allowed outright in the underlying land use district.
Duplex and triplex residential units.
Indoor recreation facility, athletic club, fitness center, racquetball court,
swimming pool, tennis court or similar use.
Manufactured homes.
Multi-family residential units.
Outdoor recreation facility, golf course, golf driving range, swimming pool,
tennis court, or similar use.
Public uses, as determined during master plan review.
Recreational vehicle storage area.
Single-family detached and attached residential units.
Conditional uses shall require a conditional use permit, in accordance with
title 10, chapter 9 of this code. "Conditional uses" may be permitted by right
when approved as part of the master planned development.
   B.   Industrial, Commercial, Business Park Districts: In the industrial,
commercial, and business park districts, a planned development shall contain
only those uses allowed outright in the underlying district. (Ord. 928, 6-27-
2005)
11-9-5: APPLICABILITY OF THE LAND USE DISTRICT STANDARDS:
   A.   Land Use District Standards: Master planned developments shall conform
to the provisions of the underlying land use district, as follows:
      1.   Density And Floor Area: The density and floor area standards of the
district shall apply.
      2.   Dimensional Standards: The lot area and dimensional standards of the
district shall not apply. The lot coverage standards of the district shall
apply.
      3.   Building Height: The maximum building height standard shall apply.
      4.   Setbacks:
         a.   Front yard and rear yard setbacks for structures on the perimeter
of the project shall be the same as that required by the underlying district,
unless increased through the master plan review;
         b.   The side yard setback provisions shall not apply except that all
detached structures shall meet uniform building code requirements for fire
walls; and
         c.   Front yard and rear yard setback requirements of the underlying
district shall not apply to structures on the interior of the project except
that:
            (1)   A minimum front yard setback of twenty feet (20') is required
for any garage structure which opens facing a public or private street.
            (2)   Where there is no garage structure facing the street or
public right of way a minimum front yard setback of eight feet (8') is
required.
   B.   Other Provisions Of The District: All other provisions of the land use
district shall apply, except as modified by this chapter.
   C.   More Than One Overlay Zone: When more than one overlay zone applies to
the development, and standards conflict between the overlay zones, the more
restrictive standards shall apply (i.e., those which afford the greatest
protection to identified resources and amenities, compatibility between land
uses, etc.). (Ord. 928, 6-27-2005)
11-9-6: OVERLAY ZONE AND CONCEPT PLAN SUBMISSION:
   A.   General Submission Requirements: The applicant shall submit an
application containing all of the general information required for a level III
procedure, as governed by this chapter. In addition, the applicant shall submit
the following:
      1.   A statement of planning objectives to be achieved by the planned
development through the particular approach proposed by the applicant. This
statement should include a description of the character of the proposed
development and the rationale behind the assumptions and choices made by the
applicant.
      2.   A development schedule indicating the approximate dates when
construction of the planned development and its various phases are expected to
be initiated and completed.
      3.   A statement of the applicant's intentions with regard to the future
selling or leasing of all or portions of the planned development.
      4.   Narrative report or letter documenting compliance with the
applicable approval criteria contained in chapter 7 of this title.
      5.   Special studies prepared by qualified professionals may be required
by the site plan review committee, the planning commission or the city council
to determine potential traffic, geologic, noise, environmental, natural
resource and other impacts, and required mitigation.
   B.   Site Design Review Information: An application for site design review
shall include the information in section
11-7-1 of this title, as deemed applicable by the planning director. (Ord. 928,
6-27-2005)
11-9-7: OVERLAY ZONE AND CONCEPT PLAN APPROVAL CRITERIA:
The city shall make findings that all of the following criteria are satisfied
when approving or approving with conditions the overlay zone and concept plan.
The city shall make findings that all of the criteria are not satisfied when
denying an application.
   A.   Comprehensive Plan: All relevant provisions of the comprehensive plan
are met.
   B.   Land Division: All of the requirements for land divisions, as
applicable, shall be met.
   C.   Land Use And Design Standards: All of the land use and design standards
contained in title 10, chapter 4 of this code are met, except as modified in
section
11-9-5 of this chapter.
      1.   Density Bonus: The housing density standards shall be determined
based on the densities in title 10, chapter 4 of this code. When allowed by the
comprehensive plan, the city may authorize a density bonus above the density
allowed by title 10, chapter 4 of this code, as an incentive to increase or
enhance open space, protect sensitive lands, and provide unique architectural
character. The density bonus shall not result in the allowable density
exceeding one hundred ten percent (110%) of the allowable density in title 10,
chapter 4 of this code. The criteria in subsections C1a through C1d of this
section shall be used in granting density bonuses. The percentage of density
bonus granted shall be proportional to the land area used to meet the criteria
below:
         a.   For the provision of public open space, or protection of natural
features in common open space; or
         b.   For plazas, pathways or other pedestrian amenities; or
         c.   For recreation area development; or
         d.   For the protection or enhancement of community views and vistas
(e.g., by providing a public viewpoint, parkway, plaza, or open space).
   D.   Requirements For Common Open Space: Where common open space is
designated, the following standards apply:
      1.   The open space area shall be shown on the final plan and recorded
with the final plat or separate instrument; and
      2.   The open space shall be conveyed in accordance with one of the
following methods:
         a.   If dedicated to the city as publicly owned and maintained open
space, the open space proposed for dedication to the city must be acceptable to
the city council (with superintendent of public works' recommendation) with
regard to the size, shape, location, improvement, environmental condition
(i.e., the applicant may be required to provide a level I environmental
assessment), and budgetary and maintenance abilities;
         b.   By leasing or conveying title (including beneficial ownership) to
a corporation, home association or other legal entity, with the city retaining
the development rights to the property. The terms of such lease or other
instrument of conveyance must include provisions (e.g., maintenance, property
tax payment, etc.) suitable to the city. (Ord. 928, 6-27-2005)
11-9-8: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES:
   A.   Expiration: After a planned unit development concept plan has been
approved, PUD shall expire after two (2) years if the detailed development plan
is not filed.
   B.   Extension: The city shall, upon written request by the applicant and
payment of the required fee, grant an extension of the approval period not to
exceed one year provided that:
      1.   No changes have been made on the original conceptual development
plan as approved;
      2.   The applicant can show intent of applying for detailed development
plan review within the one year extension period;
      3.   There have been no changes to the applicable comprehensive plan
policies and ordinance provisions on which the approval was based; and
      4.   The extension request is made before expiration of the original
approval period. (Ord. 928, 6-27-2005)
11-9-9: DETAILED DEVELOPMENT PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
The contents of the detailed development plan shall be determined based on the
conditions of approval for the concept plan. At a minimum, the detailed
development plan shall identify the final proposed location of all lots,
tracts, parcels, open space, rights of way, building envelopes and other
features, prior to approval of a development permit site design review. The
detailed development plan shall be reviewed using a site plan review procedure.
(Ord. 928, 6-27-2005)
11-9-10: DETAILED DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVAL CRITERIA:
The city shall approve the detailed development plan upon finding that the
final plan conforms with the concept plan and required conditions of approval.
Minor changes to the approved concept plan may be approved with the detailed
plan, consistent with the following criteria:
   A.   Increased residential densities by no more than two percent (2%), when
such change conforms to the comprehensive plan;
   B.   No reduction to the amount of open space or landscaping;
   C.   An increase in lot coverage by buildings or changes in the amount of
parking by no more than ten percent (10%). Greater changes require a major
modification through level III procedures;
   D.   No change in land use shall be permitted without approval of a level
III procedure to the concept plan;
   E.   No change which places development within environmentally sensitive
areas or areas subject to a potential hazard shall be approved without
approving a major modification to the concept plan; and
   F.   The location of buildings, proposed streets, parking lot configuration,
utility easements, landscaping or other site improvements shall be as proposed
on the concept plan, or as modified through conditions of approval. Changes in
the location or alignment of these features by more than twenty five feet (25')
unless justified by extenuating circumstances, shall require approval of a
major modification, in conformance with level III approval process.
Other substantial modifications made to the approved conceptual development
plan shall require approval of either a minor modification or major
modification, as determined by site plan review committee, in conformance with
chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 928, 6-27-2005)
11-9-11: BUILDING PERMIT APPROVALS:
Upon receiving detailed development plan approval, the applicant may apply for
necessary permits (e.g., building permit, any required engineering
calculations). Building permits shall not be signed until all appeal periods
have ended. (Ord. 928, 6-27-2005)
CHAPTER 10
CONDOMINIUMS
SECTION:
11-10-1: General Provisions
11-10-2: Administrative Procedures
11-10-3: Criteria For Approval
11-10-4: Homeowner Association
11-10-5: Preliminary Plat
11-10-6: Final Approval
11-10-7: Condominium Conversion
11-10-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
This title and Oregon Revised Statutes chapter 94 shall control condominium
development and operations within the city. All documents required for
formation of a condominium under Oregon Revised Statutes 94 shall be filed with
the city prior to any on site development.
Condominiums are permissible wherever single-family dwellings are allowed by
title 10, chapter 4 of this code. Condominiums shall maintain the land area per
dwelling unit ratio which is required in the zone applied to the subject
property unless included in a planned unit development approved according to
the provisions of chapter 9 of this title. (1978 Code)
11-10-2: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES:
   A.   Condominium developments of four (4) units or less shall be processed
according to level II administrative procedures (section
11-13-3 of this title).
   B.   Condominium developments of five (5) or more units shall be processed
according to level III administrative procedures (section
11-13-4 of this title).
   C.   All condominium developments are considered as major developments (see
definition of "Development, Major", section
11-2-2 of this title) for purposes of public facility requirements of chapter 8
of this title. (1978 Code)
11-10-3: CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL:
   A.   For level II condominium applications (4 units or fewer), the technical
review committee shall review proposals for conformance with the technical
review committee factors listed in section
11-3-5 of this title, title 10, "Zoning Regulations", of this code, and
requirements of this chapter.
   B.   For level III condominium applications, (5 or more units) the planning
commission shall review proposals for conformance with the development review
criteria listed in section
11-3-6 of this title, title 10, "Zoning Regulations", of this code, and
requirements of this chapter. (1978 Code)
11-10-4: HOMEOWNER ASSOCIATION:
   A.   Drafts of the homeowner association agreements, bylaws, and declaration
as required in Oregon Revised Statutes 94 shall be included in the preliminary
submittal. These documents shall be reviewed for conformance with the statutory
requirements.
   B.   The declaration shall include provisions that the developer will
maintain control and responsibility of the development until seventy five
percent (75%) of the units are conveyed to persons other than the developer.
(1978 Code)
11-10-5: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
The preliminary submittal shall include a preliminary plat of the development
as prescribed by Oregon Revised Statutes 94 and shall show the location of all
structures, common land, and the vertical and horizontal boundaries of each
ownership unit, and other information required in chapter 7 of this title.
(1978 Code)
11-10-6: FINAL APPROVAL:
Within one year from the date of preliminary approval, the developer shall
submit the following:
   A.   Three (3) copies of the final plat.
   B.   One copy of the declaration required by Oregon Revised Statutes 94.
   C.   Improvement agreements as required by section
11-5-6 of this title. (1978 Code)
11-10-7: CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION:
Conversion of an existing development to a condominium development shall be in
accordance with provisions of Oregon Revised Statutes 94 and this title. In
addition to the requirements of this section stated above, conversion shall be
in conformance with the following requirements:
   A.   Structural Upgrading: All residential structures shall be brought to
current standards of the uniform building code adopted by the city. The
preliminary submittal shall include plans and cost estimates of all
improvements necessary to accomplish upgrading.
   B.   Open Space Provision: Amenities and open space similar to that required
of a new condominium development shall be provided. Plans and cost estimates of
such amenities shall be provided as part of the preliminary submittal. (1978
Code)
CHAPTER 11
MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISIONS
(Rep. by Ord. 841)
CHAPTER 12
VARIANCE
SECTION:
11-12-1: Authorization
11-12-2: Administrative Procedures
11-12-3: Criteria For A Variance
11-12-1: AUTHORIZATION:
Specific variances to the standards prescribed by this title may be authorized
by the planning commission in accordance with the procedures prescribed in this
chapter. (1978 Code)
11-12-2: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES:
   A.   Variance proposals shall be processed under level III administrative
procedures (section
11-13-4 of this title).
   B.   Application for a variance shall be made on forms provided by the
planning department. The developer shall state fully the grounds for the
request, the facts relied on, and shall provide proposed findings which support
the criteria for a variance listed in section
11-12-3 of this chapter.
   C.   The commission shall consider an application for a variance as a
separate request from the primary application and shall conduct a separate
public hearing on the variance. (1978 Code)
11-12-3: CRITERIA FOR A VARIANCE:
In deciding on a variance, the commission shall develop written findings which
address the following criteria. All criteria must be met before a variance
request can be approved.
   A.   There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property
that do not normally apply to other property and that such circumstances or
conditions make it impossible or impractical to comply with the requirements of
this title, and that the request is the minimum which will alleviate the
situation.
   B.   The variance is necessary for the proper design and/or function of the
development.
   C.   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to the other property in the area in which the property is
situated.
   D.   The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right because an extraordinary property related hardship,
other than financial burden or impracticality, would result from strict
compliance with the regulations of this title. (1978 Code)
CHAPTER 13
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-13-1: Application Procedure
11-13-2: Level I Procedure
11-13-3: Level II Procedure
11-13-4: Level III Procedure
11-13-5: Level IV Procedure
11-13-6: Notice Of Decision
11-13-7: Appeal, Notice, And Form
11-13-8: Procedure For Acting On An Appeal
11-13-9: Public Hearing Procedure
11-13-10: Notice Of Public Hearing
11-13-11: Notification Of Surrounding Property Owners Or Affected Parties
11-13-12: Fees
11-13-1: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
An application for a development permit shall be processed under a level I, II,
III, or IV procedure. The director shall determine which procedure is specified
for a particular application. An application shall be processed under the
highest number procedure required for any part of the proposal. (1978 Code)
11-13-2: LEVEL I PROCEDURE:
   A.   Under the level I procedure an application shall be processed without
public hearing or notification of other property owners.
The director shall issue a decision on a level I proposal within five (5) days
of acceptance of the application.
   B.   Appeal of level I decisions is provided in section
11-13-7 of this chapter.
   C.   The director shall submit a list of the past month's level I actions to
the planning commission at their regular business meetings. (1978 Code)
11-13-3: LEVEL II PROCEDURE:
   A.   Under level II procedures, an application shall be processed by the
technical review committee with decisions by the director.
   B.   The director shall convene a meeting of the technical review committee
within five (5) days of receipt of the application. The committee members shall
file written reports with the director within five (5) days of the meeting.
Reports shall address the technical committee review factors listed in section
11-3-5 of this title.
   C.   The director shall issue a decision on the proposal within fifteen (15)
days of receipt of the application.
   D.   Appeal of level II decisions is provided in section
11-13-7 of this chapter. (1978 Code)
11-13-4: LEVEL III PROCEDURE:
   A.   Under level III procedure, the proposal shall be subject to a technical
review committee meeting and a development review hearing before the planning
commission.
   B.   Within ten (10) days of receipt of the application, the director shall
convene a technical review committee meeting. The committee members shall file
written reports with the director within twenty one (21) days of receipt of the
application. Report shall address technical committee review factors listed in
section
11-3-5 of this title. (1978 Code)
   C.   Within fifty (50) days of receipt of the application, the planning
commission shall hold a development review hearing as provided by section
11-3-6 of this title. Form of notice and persons to receive notice are as
required by section
11-13-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
   D.   Within seventy (70) days of receipt of the application, the planning
commission shall approve, deny, or approve with such conditions as are
necessary to bring the proposal into conformance with the standards of this
title. Conditions of approval may include actions necessary to avoid imposition
of undue public service obligation on the city, or mitigation of detrimental
effects on other property owners. Conditions of approval shall state the
standard or policy which permits or requires such conditions.
In making a decision on an application, the commission shall develop written
findings which support the decision and any conditions placed on the approval.
   E.   By mutual agreement of the developer and the commission, action on a
level III procedure may be continued beyond seventy (70) days for good and
stated cause. In any event, commission action on a level III application shall
be completed within one hundred (100) days.
   F.   The decision of the commission may be appealed in accordance with
section
11-13-7 of this chapter.
   G.   Within five (5) business days after the date of the planning
commission's action, the planning director shall transmit the complete record
of its review and action to the city council. (1978 Code)
The decision of the planning commission shall be final unless a notice of
appeal is filed pursuant to the applicable provisions of section
11-13-7 of this chapter, or unless the city council, or a member, or members,
thereof, file a notice for review by initiative pursuant to subsection
11-13-7C of this chapter. (Ord. 814, 4-24-1995)
11-13-5: LEVEL IV PROCEDURE:
   A.   Under the level IV procedure, applications are first scheduled for a
public hearing before the planning commission pursuant to section
11-13-4 of this chapter. The planning commission then makes a recommendation to
the city council who also holds a public hearing. The purpose of the hearings
is to gather information on the proposal and its relationship to any relevant
development code criteria and to any relevant comprehensive plan policies.
(1978 Code)
   B.   The planning commission shall complete action on the proposal within
fifty five (55) days of acceptance of the application unless a delay is
approved as permitted in subsection
11-13-4E of this chapter. (Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
Upon completion of its action, the planning commission shall prepare a written
report to the city council with a recommendation to approve or deny, and
proposing any condition or modifications.
   C.   If the planning commission has recommended denial of a proposal, the
city council may review the record of the planning commission's action and
terminate action on the proposal without further review.
For actions which are not terminated or for actions which receive a
recommendation of approval from the planning commission, the city council shall
conduct a public hearing. Form of notice and persons to receive notice are as
required by section
11-13-11 of this chapter.
At the public hearing, the council shall review the report of the planning
commission and other pertinent information and persons shall be given the
opportunity to present new testimony and information relevant to the proposal
that was not heard before the planning commission and make final arguments why
the matter should or should not be approved and, if approved, the nature of the
provisions to be contained in approving action.
   D.   The city council shall make a finding of fact for each applicable
criteria and comprehensive plan policy and may uphold or reverse a finding or
recommendation of the planning commission.
The council may approve, deny, or modify a proposal. Change in the development
code text approved under the level IV procedure shall be made by ordinance.
(1978 Code)
11-13-6: NOTICE OF DECISION:
Approval or denial of an application made pursuant to this chapter shall
accompany a brief statement which explains the criteria and standards
applicable to the application and the findings which support the decision. The
findings in support of the decision shall be entered in the minutes of the
meeting during which the findings are adopted. (1978 Code)
11-13-7: APPEAL, NOTICE, AND FORM:
   A.   Authorization Of Appeal: A person may appeal a decision of the planning
director or of the technical review committee to the planning commission. A
person may appeal a decision of the planning commission to the city council.
   B.   Standing To Appeal: A person shall have standing to appeal if the
person:
      1.   Is the applicant.
      2.   Is on the affected party notification list.
      3.   Was not on the affected party notification list, but participated in
the original decision process.
   C.   Review Of Lower Decision: The city council may review de novo a
decision of the planning commission on its own initiative, or the initiative of
one or more of the councilors.
The planning commission may review de novo a decision of the planning director
on its own initiative, or upon the initiative of one of the commission members.
The notice for review by initiative shall be filed with the planning director
within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision which is being reviewed. If
no such notice is filed, absent an appeal by a person with standing, the lower
decision shall be final. (1978 Code)
The notice for review by initiative need be of no particular form but is
required to state the name of the filing person or persons and that a review of
the lower decision is being initiated identifying the decision by the author or
body making it and the date thereof. Thereafter, review shall proceed the same
as review following a notice of intent to appeal except that the person,
persons, or body invoking review by initiative shall not be viewed as a party
proponent or opponent. (Ord. 814, 4-24-1995)
   D.   Notice And Form Of Appeal: Written notice of the intent to appeal must
be filed with the planning director within five (5) days of the date of the
decision which is being appealed. If notice is not filed within this period,
the decision shall be final.
Appeals shall be filed on forms provided by the planning department. Appeals
shall state the decision or portion thereof which is being appealed, the
provision(s) of this title which was the basis of the decision and the grounds
of appeal which is alleged to invalidate the decision. (1978 Code)
11-13-8: PROCEDURE FOR ACTING ON AN APPEAL:
The planning commission or city council shall hold a hearing on the appeal
within thirty five (35) days from the date the appeal is filed.
Upon adoption of findings, the appellate body may affirm, modify, or reverse
the lower decision.
The public notice required for an appeal shall be the same as required for the
lower decision. (1978 Code)
11-13-9: PUBLIC HEARING PROCEDURE:
   A.   The city council shall adopt by resolution and publish procedures for
public hearings for quasi-judicial, legislative, and appeal hearings. These
procedures shall give opportunity to interested parties to present, oppose and
rebut testimony and evidence which relates to the published standards and
criteria of this title or other portion of this code. Testimony which is not
related to these standards and criteria cannot be considered by the commission
in its decision. Public hearings shall be conducted in a businesslike fashion.
Disruptive or abusive conduct may be grounds for immediate suspension of the
proceedings.
   B.   The city council or the planning commission may continue a hearing to a
date and time specified if the council or commission feels that additional
factual information is necessary to make a decision. Hearings may also be
continued to serve notice to persons in addition to those originally notified
when the council or commission feels that additional citizen involvement is
warranted. (1978 Code)
11-13-10: NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING:
   A.   Each notice of hearing or subdivision review authorized by this title
shall be published in the legal notice column of a newspaper of general
circulation in the area at least twenty (20) days prior to the date of hearing.
   B.   In addition, notice of hearing shall be mailed to all owners of
property within two hundred feet (200') of the subject property. The notice
shall be mailed at least twenty (20) days prior to the date of the hearing.
(Ord. 764, 5-26-1992)
   C.   Failure of a person to receive the notice prescribed in this section
shall not impair the validity of the hearing.
   D.   The notice provisions of this section shall not restrict the giving of
notice by other means, including mail, the posting of property, or the use of
radio and television. (1978 Code)
11-13-11: NOTIFICATION OF SURROUNDING PROPERTY OWNERS OR AFFECTED PARTIES:
   A.   Form Of Notice: All individual public notice provided to surrounding
property owners or affected parties required by this title to receive such
notice shall, at a minimum, contain the following:
      1.   Explain the nature of the application and the proposed use or uses
which could be authorized;
      2.   List the applicable criteria from the ordinance and the plan that
applies to the application at issue;
      3.   Set forth the street address or other easily understood geographical
reference to the subject property;
      4.   State the date, time and location of the hearing;
      5.   State that failure of an issue to be raised in a hearing, in person
or by letter, or failure to provide sufficient specificity to afford the
decision maker an opportunity to respond to the issue precludes appeal to the
board based on that issue;
      6.   Include the name of a local government representative to contact and
the telephone number where additional information may be obtained;
      7.   State that a copy of the application, all documents and evidence
relied upon by the applicant and applicable criteria are available for
inspection at no cost and will be provided at reasonable cost;
      8.   State that a copy of the staff report will be available for
inspection at no cost at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing and will be
provided at reasonable cost; and
      9.   Include a general explanation of the requirements for submission of
testimony and the procedure for conduct of hearings.
   B.   Persons To Receive Notice Of Level III Applications:
      1.   Notice of level III applications shall be given to all persons
owning property within two hundred feet (200') of the exterior boundary of the
subject parcel. Level III notice shall be mailed at least twenty (20) days
prior to the hearing date.
      2.   Notice of level III applications shall also include one notice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the area (newspaper must be published in
Oregon) at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing.
   C.   Persons To Receive Notice Of Level IV Applications:
      1.   Notice of level IV applications shall be given to all persons owning
property within two hundred feet (200') of the exterior boundary of the subject
parcel. Notice shall be mailed at least twenty (20) days prior to the hearing
date.
      2.   Notice of level IV applications shall also include two (2) notices
in a newspaper of general circulation in the area (newspaper must be published
in Oregon) for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the hearing date, with the
first date of publication to be at least twenty (20) days prior to the hearing
date.
   D.   Additional Notice: Nothing in this section shall be construed as
limiting the provisions of notice to additional persons by whatever means
consistent with the principle of gathering productive citizen input. (Ord. 764,
5-26-1992)
11-13-12: FEES:
The city council shall adopt by resolution and publish a schedule of fees for
the various permits and administrative procedures prescribed by this title.
(1978 Code)
CHAPTER 14
PUBLIC FACILITIES
SECTION:
11-14-1: Construction Details
11-14-1: CONSTRUCTION DETAILS:
The specifications, standards, and construction methods that shall apply to all
construction and development of public facilities are on file in the city.
These standards apply to replacement and upgrading of existing facilities and
to development of new facilities whether or not they are part of a land
division process. (1978 Code)
