8/10/2020 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
https://www.ci.medford.or.us/Code.asp 1/4
1 General Provisions
1.005 Code Designated
All ordinances included in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated "The
Code of the City of Medford, Oregon" and will hereafter be referred to as "Code."
1.010 Definitions and Rules of Construction
The following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the
intent of the Council or the context clearly requires otherwise.
(1) City. The City of Medford, Oregon.
(2) Computation of Time. The time within which an act is to be done is computed by excluding the
first day and including the last, unless the last day falls on a legal holiday as defined in ORS 187.010
or 187.020 or on Saturday, in which case the last day is also excluded.
(3) Computation of publication time. The time for publication, mailing, or posting of legal notices shall
be computed so as to exclude the first day of publication or the day of mailing or posting and to
include the day on which the act or event of which notice is given is to happen, or which completes
the full period required for publication.
(4) Council. City Council of the City of Medford.
(5) County. Jackson County, Oregon.
(6) Day. The period of time between any midnight and the midnight following.
(7) Daytime; Nighttime. "Daytime" is the period of time between sunrise and sunset. "Nighttime" is
the period of time between sunset and sunrise.
(8) Department; board; commission; office; officer; or employe. A department, board, commission,
office, officer or employe of the City.
(9) Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter, and the feminine includes the
masculine and neuter.
(10) Law. Applicable Federal law, the constitution and statutes of the State of Oregon, the Code and
ordinances of the City and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be
promulgated thereunder.
(11) Minor. A person under the age of 18 years, unless otherwise stated.
(12) Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular.
(13) Oath. "Oath" includes affirmation.
(14) Official time. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean the standard of time
as set out in ORS 187.110.
(15) Or; and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or", if the sense requires it.
8/10/2020 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
https://www.ci.medford.or.us/Code.asp 2/4
(16) ORS. Oregon Revised Statutes.
(17) Owner. A part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant
by the entirety of the whole or of a part of the building or land, or vendee in possession under a land
sale contract.
(18) Peace Officer. A City police officer or other officer specified in ORS 133.005.
(19) Person. Individual, corporation, association, firm, partnership, joint stock company, or similar
entity.
(20) Process. A writ or summons issued in the course of judicial proceedings of either a civil or
criminal nature.
(21) Property. Both real and personal property.
(22) Recorder. The City Recorder.
(23) Shall; may. "Shall" is mandatory, and "may" is permissive.
(24) State. The State of Oregon.
(25) Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future includes the
present.
(26) To. "To" means "to and including" when used in reference to a series of sections of this Code or
when reference is made to the Oregon Revised Statutes.
(27) Writing. "Writing" includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by
ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by
this Code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided
otherwise.
1.020 Service and Proof of Notice
(1) Except when this Code provides a specific procedure for giving notice, "notice" may be by any
means reasonably calculated to afford actual notice including, but not limited to, notice by mail.
Notice by mail shall be effective upon deposit of written notice with the United States Postal Service
addressed to the last known business or residence address of the person to be notified with postage
prepaid.
(2) Proof of giving notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employe of the city or by
affidavit of any person 18 years of age or older.
1.025 Uniform Appeal and Hearing Procedure
In this section the word "appellant" means a person appealing from an administrative decision.
Except as otherwise provided in this code, a person who is authorized to appeal from an
administrative decision under this code shall follow the procedure stated in this section.
(1) The appellant shall file with the recorder a written notice of appeal together with a written
statement listing the reason for requesting the revocation or modification of the decision within 10
8/10/2020 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
https://www.ci.medford.or.us/Code.asp 3/4
days after the day on which he is notified of the administrative decision from which appeal is
requested.
(2) The council or authorized appellate board shall hear the appeal within 30 days after the recorder
receives the notice and statement of appeal, unless the appellant consents to an extension of time.
(3) The recorder shall notify the appellant of the time and place of the hearing, along with other
persons who have an interest in the subject matter of the hearing.
(4) At the hearing the appellant or other parties interested may present witnesses and offer evidence
in support of their case and, in the discretion of the council or appellate board, evidence may be
heard to sustain the administrative decision.
(5) The council or appellate board shall make written findings, recommendations, or orders on any
matter heard by it and the recorder shall send a copy thereof to the appellant.
1.035 Construction
The provisions of this Code and all proceedings under it are to be construed with a view to effecting
its objectives and promoting justice.
1.040 Continuation of Existing Ordinances
The provisions currently appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of prior
ordinances or prior Code sections existing at the time of the effective date of the current provisions,
shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
1.045 Effect of Repeal of Ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive an ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance
repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect a punishment or penalty incurred
before the repeal took effect, nor a suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal
of an offense, violation, or violation committed under the repealed ordinance.
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-55, April 6, 2000.]
1.050 Severability
The provisions of this code are hereby declared to be severable. If any section, subsection,
paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this code is adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code.
1.055 Catchlines of Sections
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the
contents of the section and shall not be deemed as a part of the City law; nor, unless expressly so
provided, shall they be so deemed when sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted.
1.060 Code of Medford Publication
8/10/2020 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
https://www.ci.medford.or.us/Code.asp 4/4
This Code is the general and permanent law of the City. The City Attorney, under the direction of the
City Manager, shall publish and distribute the Code of Medford and all additions, changes and
supplements thereto. The City Attorney shall integrate into the Code all future ordinances of a
general and permanent nature. The City Attorney shall establish such charges as may be necessary
to recover the costs of publishing the materials sold and distributed under this section.
1.065 Powers and Duties of City Attorney in Preparing Future Additions to Code
In preparing future supplements, changes, and additions to the Code or integrating amendments into
code sections, the City Attorney shall not alter the meaning, effect or substance of any ordinance,
but within these limitations the City Attorney may renumber sections and parts of sections of the
ordinance, change the wording of section titles, rearrange sections or parts thereof, change
reference numbers to agree with renumbered sections or other parts, substitute the proper
subsection, section, or other division number, strike out figures or words which are merely
repetitious, change capitalization for the purpose of uniformity, and correct manifest clerical or
typographical errors.
1.075 Exclusions
Notwithstanding inclusion within this Code of the general subject matter, in whole or in part, this
Code does not repeal or amend: any special ordinance affecting less than the general public; any
ordinance affecting the general public on a temporary basis; any ordinance relating to or resulting
from annexation, naming of streets and public places or property acquisition or disposal of property,
vacation of streets, public places or plats; any ordinance relating to waiver of fees or Code
provisions, bids or contracts; any ordinance fixing or changing a zone classification of a property;
any ordinance relating to budget; any ordinance granting a permit; any franchise ordinance;
Ordinance No. 4041 and amendments thereto (Land Development Code); nor any uncodified
ordinance establishing fees.
1.100 Penalty
(1) Except as provided in Chapter 5, Section 5.990, and Chapter 6, Section 6.930, violation of a
provision of the Code not classified as a violation is a crime and is punishable by a fine not
exceeding $1,000 and imprisonment not exceeding one year.
(2) Except as provided in Chapter 5, Section 5.990, Chapter 7, Section 7.900(2); and Chapter 9,
Section 9.660, a violation of a provision of the Code classified as a violation is punishable by a fine
not exceeding $250. Conviction of a violation does not give rise to any disability or legal
disadvantage based on conviction of a crime.
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5660, May 1, 1986; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8115, June 20, 1996; Amd. Sec.
1, Ord. No. 2000-55, April 6, 2000; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2010-33, Feb. 18, 2010; Amd. Sec. 1,
Ord. 2019-31, May 2, 2019]

2 Government and Administration 

2.175 Fire Department Bond Fund

proceeds of the special levy for fire department purposes as authorized by section 184 of the charter shall be paid into the fund, and all costs and expenses as budgeted shall be paid out of the fund.

2.2.176 Council Goals Fund

(1)   A fund to be known as “Council Goals Fund” is established, and all money received as proceeds from the Marijuana Tax shall be paid into the fund with all costs and expenses, as budgeted, paid out of the fund.
(2)   The purpose of this fund is to receive gross revenues received from the Marijuana Tax, to provide funding restricted to expenditures required to implement goals adopted by Council. Monies in this fund shall not be used for ongoing, operational expenditures. Council shall identify and prioritize goals, with corresponding funding amounts, as part of the biennial budget process.  Except for those purposes established in this section, in no case shall revenues be transferred from the Marijuana Tax Fund to the City’s General Fund, or any other fund, for any other purpose.
 [Added, Ord. No. 2019-87, Aug. 1, 2019]

2 Council Procedures (2.005 to 2.085)

2.005 Meeting Time

Unless the council sets a different date and time for a particular meeting, the council shall meet at 6:00 p.m. on the first and third Thursdays of each month in the council chambers.  If business is not finished by 10:00 p.m., the mayor shall adjourn the meeting, unless a majority of the councilmembers present vote to continue in session. Unfinished business shall automatically be placed on the next regular council agenda, unless the council specifies a different time for consideration of such items. On holidays, the council shall meet on the Thursday next following the holiday.

[Amd. Ord. No. 7830, March 2, 1995; Amd. Ord. No. 8270, Feb. 6, 1997; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2017-75, July 6, 2017.]


2.010 Meeting Procedure

The presiding officer shall conduct all meetings of the council in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order, Revised. However, the validity of an act of the council shall not be affected by failure to observe Robert's Rules of Order, Revised.

2.015 Special Sessions Procedure

The rules of procedure for special sessions shall be the same as provided for regular sessions of the council insofar as the provisions of sections 2.010 to 2.075 are applicable.

2.020 Ordinance and Resolution Procedure

Subject to the provisions of sections 2.010 to 2.075, ordinances and resolutions shall be introduced and passed at regular or special sessions of the council. Before introduction, all proposed ordinances and resolutions shall be delivered to the recorder, who shall endorse on them the council bill number assigned to each. The number shall begin with the year in which the bill was introduced followed by the consecutive number identifying each bill, beginning each year with the number 1 for the first bill of that year (i.e., 1998-1, 1998-2, etc).* Proposed ordinances and resolutions shall from the time of numbering be referred to in the minutes or records of the recorder as council bills. The proposed ordinances and resolutions then shall be introduced in open-council meeting, and the following action may be taken:

(1) A motion that the proposed ordinance or resolution be adopted as read. When seconded, the motion may be disposed of in accordance with section 2.010.

(2) A motion that no action be taken with regard to the proposed ordinance or resolution or that consideration of the ordinance or resolution be postponed until a particular subsequent meeting or until a later time during the same meeting. The motion may contain instructions relative to the preparation or modification or referral to committee of the ordinance or resolution. When seconded, the motion may be amended to specify or change the time of future consideration of the ordinance or resolution. The motion shall not be subject to any other incidental, subsidiary or privileged motion or amendment.

(3) A motion that the proposed ordinance or resolution be adopted with changes as made by the motion. The motion shall not be acted upon until the proposed change has been reduced to writing and attached to the original draft of the ordinance or resolution. When seconded, the motion may then be disposed of in accordance with section 2.010.

(4) Every resolution of the council shall, before being put on its final passage, be read once in open council meeting. However, in the case of a resolution of intent to rezone property, if there is more than one dissenting vote on first reading, the resolution shall require a second reading on another day before final passage. All resolutions shall be read, either in full or by title, in the manner prescribed for ordinances in section 34 of the charter. *Effective 1/1/98.

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8557, Dec. 18, 1997.]


2.025 Ordinance Recording

The recorder shall record all ordinances passed by the council and approved by the mayor in a book to be kept for that purpose.

2.030 Finance Committee

(1) The finance committee shall consist of three members of the council, one of whom shall be the vice-president of the council, who shall be the chairman. Two members shall constitute a quorum of the committee for the transaction of business. The committee shall meet at such times as the committee shall determine.

(2) The Finance Director shall not approve payment of a claim submitted by the mayor and councilmembers for expenses incurred in the performance of their functions unless it has been reviewed and approved by the finance committee. A member shall not vote on his own claim.

(3) The council shall prescribe by resolution the types of expenses that may be allowed by the Finance Committee.

(4) All requests for reimbursement shall be submitted on forms approved by the finance committee and shall be accompanied by receipts if possible.

(5) If the finance committee rejects all or part of a claim, the claimant may appeal the decision to the council.

(6) The finance committee shall give public notice of its meetings, hold its meetings in public, keep written minutes of its proceedings, and file the minutes with the City Recorder.

[Amd. Ord. No. 4920, July 12, 1983; Amd. Ord. No. 5697, July 17, 1986; Amd. Ord. No. 6837, March 21, 1991.]


2.035 Quorum

The mayor, or in his absence the president or vice-president of the council, shall call the meeting to order at the hour designated for the meeting. If a quorum is not present, the recorder shall immediately inform the absent members, except those known to be unavoidably detained, that their presence is required to enable the council to proceed. If the absent member or members do not appear after the notice, the members present shall adjourn until a specific time or until the next regular meeting.

2.040 Agenda

The manager shall prepare an agenda of the business to be presented at a regular council meeting. Agenda items should be submitted at the time determined by the city manager per Administrative Regulation.  The agenda shall be prepared in accordance with section 2.050. Councilmembers and the mayor shall endeavor to have subjects they wish considered submitted in time to be placed on the agenda. 

[Amd. Ord. No. 6759, Nov. 1, 1990; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-195, Oct. 5, 2000; Amd. Ord. No. 2004-14, Feb. 5, 2004; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2013-132, Sept. 19, 2013; Amd. Sec. 2. Ord. No. 2017-75, July 6, 2017.]


2.045 Consent Calendar

In order to make more efficient use of meeting time, the manager shall place all ordinances and resolutions which are routine in nature and concerning which no debate is expected on a "consent calendar."  Any item placed on the consent calendar shall be removed at the request of the mayor or a councilmember prior to the time a vote is taken on the consent calendar items. All remaining items on the consent calendar shall be disposed of by a single motion "to adopt the consent calendar," which shall not be debatable. Adoption of the consent calendar shall be by the affirmative vote of all councilmembers present at the time the vote is taken and shall have the same effect as a separate vote for each item. If there are dissenting votes, each item on the consent calendar shall be voted upon separately in the usual manner.
[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2017-75, July 6, 2017.]

2.050 Order of Business

The order of business at council meetings shall be as follows:

(a) Roll call
(b) Recognitions, community group reports
(c) Oral request and communications from the audience
(d) Approval or correction of the minutes of the preceding meeting
(e) Consent calendar
(f) Items removed from the consent calendar, if any
(g) Ordinances and Resolutions
(h) Public Hearings
(i) Council Business (including propositions and remarks from the mayor and council members)
(j) Manager and staff reports
(k) Adjournment

[Amd. Ord. No. 4829, Apr. 21, 1983; Amd. Ord. No. 5418, Apr. 18, 1985; Amd Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2000-195, Oct. 5, 2000; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2013-132, Sept. 19, 2013; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2017-75, July 6, 2017; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2019-97, Sep. 5, 2019.]


2.055 Voting

(1) Only a member who is present shall be permitted to vote when the "ayes" and "nays" on a question are called for. Presence shall be determined by the following:

(a) When a member' name is called in the regular order, in the case of a roll call vote; or

(b) In any other case, when the question is put.

(2) The president of the council or a councilmember acting as president pro tem may vote on all questions in all cases in which he might vote if not so acting.

(3) On a motion to adopt an ordinance, or to adopt a resolution authorizing any disposition of public funds, or in the course of special assessment proceedings, there shall be a roll call vote. On all other motions it is sufficient to put the question in the following form: "All in favor say 'aye', opposed 'nay'." If the presiding officer is then uncertain of the votes cast or if a division is called for, the presiding officer shall call for a roll call vote.

(4) In order to carry an authorization to expend public funds, at least three members of the council shall vote affirmatively for the proposition.


2.060 Committee Reports

All committees shall report in writing on the subject or matter referred to them. A committee report shall:

(a) Contain the names of the persons who have appeared before or been consulted by the committee on the matter contained in the report;

(b) Contain the recommendations of the committee;

(c) Contain the recorded vote of the committee members on any recommendation; and

(d) Be signed by a majority of the committee.


2.065 Decorum

(1)  Except by permission of the presiding officer, a councilmember shall address any remarks to the council, and not to the audience. Upon recognition and with permission of the presiding officer, a person in the audience may address the council relative to any matter being considered by the council at that time.

(2)  All members shall preserve order and decorum during meetings and shall not, by conversation or other action, delay or interrupt the proceedings or refuse to obey the orders of the Presiding Officer.

(3)  All members shall:

(a)  confine themselves to questions or issues then under discussion;

(b)  not engage in personal attacks;

(c)  not impugn the motives of any speaker;

(d)  not chastise, denigrate, or criticize anyone;

(e)  set an example of good ethical conduct; and

(f)  at all times, while in session or otherwise, conduct themselves in a a manner appropriate to the dignity of their office.

[Amd. Ord. No. 2013-004, Jan. 3, 2013.]

2.070 Conflict of Interest

Each councilmember shall be entitled to vote when present at a regular or special meeting of the council, except that a councilmember shall not vote when he has a conflict of interest. A conflict of interest exists if the action to be taken can confer on him a significant economic benefit or impose a significant economic loss not shared by the public generally. If there is such a conflict of interest, the councilmember shall identify it before taking part in any discussion.

2.075 Suspension of Rules

A rule prescribed in sections 2.005 to 2.070 which relates to a particular item of business in a council meeting may be temporarily suspended by the council upon an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the councilmembers present.

2.080 Study Sessions

(1) Council public study sessions shall be held on the second Thursday when there is not a regular city council meeting at 6:00 p.m. in City Hall with the option to utilize the fourth Thursday for special and time sensitive subjects. Any study session may be canceled at the discretion of the City Manager, unless the session was specifically requested by the council. If a meeting falls on a holiday, it shall not be held.

(2) A quorum is not required for a study session and members are not under any obligation to attend.

(3) The purpose of a study session shall be for councilmembers to informally receive background information on city business and to give councilmembers an opportunity to ask questions and to express their individual views.

(4) Particular cases involving quasi-judicial decisions shall not be discussed at study sessions.

(5) No decision shall be made and no vote shall be taken at any study session, except on a point of order.

(6) The agenda for a study session shall be made up by the City Manager and distributed at least 24 hours in advance. The council may, at any regular meeting, direct the City Manager to schedule appropriate matters which the council wants discussed at study sessions. However, appropriate non-agenda items may be discussed if a majority of members present agree.

(7) Minutes of each study session shall be kept by the City Recorder or Deputy Recorder and filed in the Recorder's office. Council approval of such minutes is not required.

(8) The study session agenda shall be posted in City Hall and made available to interested persons including news media which have requested notice at least 24 hours prior to the meeting.

(9) The rules contained in this section may not be suspended.

[Added Ord. No. 5031, Dec. 15, 1983; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2017-75, July 6, 2017.]


2.085 Procedure for Filling Certain Vacancies

(1) Before filling a vacancy in an elective office, the Council shall:

(a) Cause a notice of the vacancy to be published once a week for two consecutive weeks in the newspaper published in the city that has the largest local circulation. The notice shall indicate the vacant position and state the deadline for submitting a written application for the position, which shall not be less than fourteen days after first publication.

(b) Prescribe a form of application to be used by all applicants and a form of nominating petition to be signed by 25 electors of the applicant’s ward. Until the Council directs otherwise by motion or resolution, the existing form of "Candidate Information Sheet" (CMO/101) may be used by applicants.

(c) Appoint a committee of five citizens from the applicants’ ward to interview all applicants and make recommendations to the Council as to who is most qualified.

(d) Offer all eligible persons who submitted an application and a nominating petition signed by 25 electors of his or her ward before the deadline an opportunity to appear before both the citizen’s committee and the Council for interviews.

(2) No one shall be selected to fill a vacancy in elected office unless that person applied in writing, presented a nominating petition signed by 25 electors of his or her ward and appeared in person before both the citizens committee and the Council for interviews. If the Council is not satisfied with the field of applicants, it may repeat the process as many times as it deems necessary. Once an applicant has submitted an application and has been interviewed, it is not necessary to submit a new application or appear for another interview for the same position, unless specifically requested by the Council to do so.

(3) The procedures prescribed by this section shall not be temporarily suspended.

[Added, Ord. No. 7328, March 4, 1993; Amd. Ord. No. 8537, Nov. 13, 1997.]


2 Wards (2.105 to 2.108)

2.105 [Repealed Ord. No. 4607, May 20, 1982.]


2.106 [Repealed Ord. No. 6929, July 11, 1991.]


2.107 [Repealed Ord. No. 2001-237, Dec. 20, 2001.]


2.108 City Wards

The city shall be divided into the following four wards as shown on the accompanying map for illustrative purposes. The ward boundaries extend to the Urban Growth Boundary so that annexed territory will automatically become part of the appropriate ward.

ORIGIN: For the purposes of this ordinance, the origin for each ward shall be defined as the intersection of Crater Lake Avenue and Jackson Street.

Ward 1 shall be the northeast part of Medford described by the following lines:
The western boundary: Beginning at the origin, the line shall extend north on Crater Lake Avenue to the Urban Growth Boundary.
The southern boundary: Beginning at the origin, the line shall extend east on Jackson Street to Pearl Street, north on Pearl Street to Saling Avenue, east on Saling to Oregon Avenue, east on Oregon Avenue to Sunrise Avenue, north on Sunrise Avenue to Harrison Avenue, east on Harrison Avenue to Valley View Drive, north on Valley View Drive to Spring Street, east on Spring Street to Brookdale Avenue, north on Brookdale Avenue to McAndrews Road, east on McAndrews Road to North Foothill Road, south on North Foothill Road to Hillcrest Road, east on Hillcrest Road to the west line of DLC 62, Township 37 South,  Range 1 West, north along the west line of DLC 62, Township 37 South,  Range 1 West, to the North line of Section 22, Township 37 South,  Range 1 West, east along the north line of Section 22, Township 37 South, Range 1 West to the Urban Growth Boundary.
2010 Census population 17,602.
 
Ward 2 shall be the southwest part of Medford described by the following lines:
The eastern boundary: Beginning at the origin, the line shall extend south on Crater Lake Avenue to East Main, east on East Main to Willamette Avenue, south on Willamette Avenue extended in a straight line to Bear Creek, south on Bear Creek to Barnett Road, west on Barnett Road to Interstate 5, south on Interstate 5 to the Urban Growth Boundary.
The northern boundary: Beginning at the origin the line shall extend west on Jackson Street to Fourth Street, west on Fourth Street to Oakdale Avenue, north on Oakdale Avenue to Pennsylvania Avenue, west on Pennsylvania Avenue to Columbus Avenue, north on Columbus Avenue to Sunset Avenue, west on Sunset Avenue extending in a straight line to the East line of Section 26, Township 37 South, Range 2 West, south along said East line 232 feet, west 325 feet, south 165 feet, west 205 feet, north to West McAndrews road, west on West McAndrews road to the Urban Growth Boundary.
2010 Census population 20,209.

Ward 3 shall be the northwest part of Medford and described by the following lines:  The eastern boundary shall be the same as the western boundary of Ward 1.
The southern boundary shall be the same as the northern boundary of Ward 2.
2010 Census population 19,579.

Ward 4 shall be the southeast part of Medford and described by the following lines:  The northern boundary shall be the same as the southern boundary of Ward 1.
The western boundary shall be the same as the eastern boundary of Ward 2.
2010 Census population 17,578.
NOTE:  Ward map referenced herein appears at the end of this Chapter.
 

[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2001-237, Dec. 20, 2001; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2016-58, May 19, 2016.]
 
2 Initiative Petitions (2.115 to 2.117)

2.115 Number of Signatures

The number of signatures on an initiative petition requisite to its being considered duly prepared shall be 15 percent of the number of votes cast for the office of mayor at the regular election last preceding the deposit of the petition at the office of the recorder after its circulation.

2.116 Elective Offices Nonpartisan

All city elective offices shall be nonpartisan and there shall be no primary elections or any other nominations by political parties.

[Added, Ord. No. 5147, May 17, 1984.]


2.117 Nominations

Pursuant to Section 22 of the Medford Charter of 1998, the City Recorder shall be the City Elections Officer and shall oversee the nomination process as outlined in this Section.  A qualified elector who meets the qualifications of Sections 8 and 12 of the Charter may be nominated for elective city office, pursuant to the process outlined in this Section.  For purposes of this Section, a “qualified elector” shall mean an active Oregon registered voter who has continuously resided within the City for no less than six months prior to election day, and who remains in the City for the duration of his or her term in elective office.  Nominees for City Council must live in the Ward they seek to represent at the time they are qualified for office, and must reside and remain in that ward.  A candidate is considered “qualified for office” at the time the candidate submits his or her nomination papers to the City Elections Officer, as described in subsection (3) of this Section.  If a person is a resident of an area annexed by the City less than six months prior to election, the person’s total continuous residency in the area annexed shall be counted towards the six-month requirement. 
(1)  Initiation of Nomination Process.  Nomination shall be by a petition signed by at least 25 electors of the city.   The petition shall be in a form prescribed by the Secretary of State's office, and shall specify the name and address of the nominee, the office sought, and the date of the general election.  In case of a nomination for a council position, the electors signing the petition must reside in the ward to be represented by the nominee.  All electors signing the petition shall print their names, the date signed, and their residence address by street and number.  The circulator of a nomination petition shall sign all petition forms he or she circulated, affirming that each signature appended thereto was made in his or her presence and is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. 
(2) Completion of Nomination Process. To complete the nomination process, the nominee shall sign the form(s) required by the Secretary of State’s Office and submit the completed form(s) to the City Elections Officer.  All nominating papers shall be assembled and filed with the City Elections Officer as one instrument not sooner than the 15th day after the date of the primary election nor later than the 70th day before the date of the general election. The City Elections Officer shall make a record of the time at which each petition is filed and the name and address of the person by whom it is filed.  After approving each applicant's nominating papers, the City Elections Officer shall deliver completed petitions to the Jackson County Elections Office.
(3)  Sufficiency of Nomination.  Once a potential candidate’s nomination papers are approved by the City Elections Officer and deemed sufficient by the Jackson County Elections Office, then the candidate shall be considered “qualified” for the position.  If the petition is insufficient, the Jackson County Elections Office will notify the City Elections Officer the City Elections Officer within five days after the filing, certifying in writing wherein the petition is insufficient. The deficient petition may be amended and resubmitted to the City Elections Officer.  The City Elections Officer will verify qualifications for any potential candidates prior to their name being placed on the ballot.  If the candidate does not qualify for the position, they will be rejected.
(4)  Withdrawal of Nomination.  Any person who has been nominated and has accepted the nomination may withdraw from nomination not later than the 67th day before the general election by filing a completed copy of the withdrawal form, published by the Secretary of State's Office, with the City Elections Officer. The statement shall be signed and acknowledged by the candidate.
(5) Alternative Method for Social Distancing.  Until January 1, 2021, in lieu of the      above-described signatures supporting a nomination, an individual may instead   choose to pay a fee of $25 to the City of Medford along with the above-described   form and information, provided to the City Recorder.
[Added Ord. No. 5147, May 17, 1984; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-47. May 17, 2018; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2020-46, Apr. 16, 2020.]

2 Warrants (2.125 to 2.132)

2.125 Lost, Stolen or Destroyed Warrants

Indemnification may be made for all lost, stolen or destroyed warrants in accordance with ORS 294.005 to 294.025, as now or hereafter amended, and these sections are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this code.

2.126 Finance Director

The city manager shall appoint a finance director who shall be the custodian of city funds. In the finance director's absence, the city manager may appoint another to act in his stead.

2.127 Drawing Warrants or Checks in Payment of Claims

The recorder and the finance director shall have the authority to draw warrants or checks on city funds when the finance director has determined and certified that payment is legally due and payable or when payment has been directed by the council.

2.128 Certain Demands to be Submitted to Council

All demands for expenses of litigation, damages and any doubtful or disputed claims, except as hereinafter provided, shall be examined by the finance director and submitted to the council by him with any recommendations or information he may deem pertinent thereto. When the demands are approved by the council, warrants shall be drawn in payment thereof.

2.129 Certain Demands to be Approved by the City Attorney

Notwithstanding section 2.128, demands for expenses of litigation, damages and any doubtful or disputed claims may be certified for payment or compromise and settlement by the Finance Director if the City Attorney examines the demand and certifies that the payment is proper or that the compromise and settlement is in the best interest of the City and if the total amount to be paid by the City upon such approval does not exceed $50,000.

[Amd. Ord. No. 2010-186, Aug. 19, 2010.]


2.130 [Repealed Ord. No. 4653, July 1, 1982.]


2.131 [Repealed Ord. No. 4653, July 1, 1982.]


2.132 Appropriations to be Charged for All Demands

The finance director shall charge all demands on the treasury to appropriations therefor and shall refuse any demand for which funds have not been previously appropriated.


2 Assessments [Repealed]

2.135 [Repealed Sec. 14, Ord. No. 7125, May 7, 1992.]


2.140 [Repealed Sec. 14, Ord. No. 7125, May 7, 1992.]


2.145 [Repealed Sec. 14, Ord. No. 7125, May 7, 1992.]


2.150 [Repealed Sec. 14, Ord. No. 7125, May 7, 1992.]

2 Fire Department Bond Fund (2.175)

2.155 Mechanical Check Writer Authorized

The finance director and recorder may sign warrants and check warrants by use of a mechanical device containing plates bearing the facsimile signatures of the officers. The signatures of these officers upon warrants and check warrants, when affixed with the use of this device, shall be considered to be the signatures of these officers with like effect as if signed by their autographed signatures.

[Amd. Ord. No. 4653, July 1, 1982, effective Aug. 15, 1982.]


2.160 Custody of Mechanical Check Writer

The finance director and recorder shall have the joint control and supervision of the mechanical check writing device. The device shall be used only under the joint supervision and control of these officers and shall be used for the purpose of signing checks and check warrants.

[Amd. Ord. No. 4653, July 1, 1982.]


2.175 Fire Department Bond Funds

Proceeds of the special levy for fire department purposes as authorized by section 184 of the charter shall be paid into the fund, and all costs and expenses as budgeted shall be paid out of the fund.

2.180 Credit Card Fees

A transaction fee equal to the percentage of the amount charged on a credit card by the merchant processor to the City will be assessed on all credit card payments to the City, with the exception of municipal court fines and utility bill payments, effective July 1, 2019.
[Added, Ord. No. 2019-43, June 6, 2019.]

2 Publicly Owned Property (2.185 to 2.197)

2.185 Permits for Use of Publicly Owned Property and Right-of-Way

(1) The City Manager upon application on a form prescribed by the City Manager’s Office, shall issue a special event permit to a person when the City Manager or his designee finds with input from the affected departments that the parade or event will meet the following conditions:

(a) Will not unreasonably obstruct vehicular and pedestrian traffic; or

(b) Create an unreasonable hazard to person or property; or

(c) Create a noise disturbance, breach of the peace, or any other violation of a provision of this code; or

(d) Contravene city, county, or state law, including but not limited to, restrictions of the use of streets by trucks or other vehicles or certain classes or weights unless the Public Works Department in writing has waived those restrictions for purposes of the application.

(2) Parks. The City Manager, or his designee, may, subject to Park and Recreation Department rules and regulations for park use, grant a special permit to allow the use of dedicated park lands and recreational facilities for the purpose of conducting concerts, lectures, athletic events; show, craft and art fairs; and other special events or uses as are considered compatible with normal park and recreational activities.

(3) Other Publicly Owned Property. The City Manager, or his designee, may, subject to applicable administrative rules governing use of city property, grant a special permit to allow the short-term use of publicly owned properties other than park lands and recreational facilities.

(4) Parades, and other events that obstruct the public-right-of-way, require traffic to be managed at intersections along the event route. Traffic control management often requires the use of additional City personnel on duty and/or personnel on overtime to provide traffic control services. The applicant shall be assessed any overtime traffic control personnel expenses incurred by the City. This section may be waived for parades in which in-kind funding has been approved by the City Council. Any amounts incurred for additional City personnel over those approved by the City Council will be the responsibility of the applicant.

(5) Permit Conditions. Permits may be denied, revoked, or may include the following conditions:

(a) Conditions applying to dates, hours, and/or noise levels of operation;

(b) Duration of activity, subject to revocation without prior notice;

(c) An approved traffic control plan and proper traffic markings in place;

(d) Obligation to perform any and all damage repairs of the area occupied, post bonds, deposit cash, and/or reimburse the City for any costs incurred for damage repairs, as determined by the City Manager per applicable administrative rules governing use of city property;

(e) Provision of written assurance that the City will be held harmless for any liability that is solely attributable to the permittee's conduct;

(f) Any other conditions considered necessary by the City Manager to be in the public interest.

(6) The City Manager shall prescribe fees for use of City property by administrative regulation. Payment of such fees shall be a condition of issuing a permit under this section.

(a) The fees shall bear a reasonable relationship to the costs incurred by the City to make the property available for the use authorized by the permit;

(b) Non-residents may be charged a higher fee than city residents;

(c) Temporary booths or stalls located in Alba Park and Vogel Plaza in connection with the Pear Blossom Festival are exempt from park use fees for the day of the festival only;

(d) If the applicant has been approved for an in-kind contribution toward the event, the amount incurred for additional City personnel can be applied to the in-kind contribution. Any amounts incurred for additional City personnel over those approved by the City Council will be the responsibility of the applicant.

(7) Such a permit should not be used where a lease is appropriate. Only the City Council may authorize a lease. Permits issued by the City Manager for use of public right-of-way shall not exceed a term of three (3) days and the manager should avoid any unreasonable interference with access rights of property owners and tenants.

(8) The Council may review a permit granted by the City Manager and may revoke the permit if it finds that the permit is not in the public interest. A person whose application for a permit is denied may appeal the denial in writing to the City Council no later than ten (10) days after notice of denial. Upon receipt of the applicant’s written appeal, the Council shall set the matter for hearing at its next regular meeting and give notice of the date, time, and place of same to the applicant. At the hearing, the applicant shall appear if the matter is to be heard. The Council after hearing may grant or deny a permit on such terms and conditions as it deems proper.   In deciding whether to waive fees, Council will consider financial hardship as established by factors similar to those considered by courts when deciding requests for court-appointed counsel or corporate insolvency.

(9) Except as stated herein as per the permit, this does not regulate other permits available through other chapters of the Medford Code.

(10) Temporary Mobile Food Vendors.  As per the requirements in Section 10.829B, mobile food vendors are allowed to sell food from parking stalls in the public right-of-way between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 3:00 a.m.

[Amd. Ord. No. 6772, Nov. 15, 1990.] (3) Delegation of Authority. The term "city manager" as used in Sections 2.185 and 2.190 shall include his designated representative. [Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5392, Mar. 21, 1985; Amd. Ord. No. 2008-145, Aug. 7, 2008; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2010-18, Feb. 4, 2010; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2019-104, Sep. 19, 2019.]


2.186 Prescott Park Radio Facilities

The City Manager is hereby delegated authority to issue licenses for users of Prescott Park radio facilities for periods not exceeding five years on such terms and conditions that the Manager, in his discretion, deems to be in the best interest of the City.

[Added, Ord. No. 1998-120, June 4, 1998.]


2.190 Permit Conditions

(1) Permits issued under Section 2.185 shall include the following conditions:

(a) Conditions applying to dates and hours of operation.

(b) Duration of activity, subject to revocation without prior notice.

(c) Obligation to perform any damage repair of the area occupied, post bonds, deposit cash or reimburse the City for any costs incurred for damage repair, as determined by the City Manager per applicable administrative rules governing use of city property.

(d) Payment of any fees established for the use of City property pursuant to Section 2.191 of this Code.

(e) Provision of written assurance that the City will be held harmless for any liability that is solely attributable to the permittee's conduct; 

(f) Any other conditions considered necessary by the City Manager per applicable administrative rules governing use of city property.

(2) Subsection (1) of this section does not apply to use of City Hall by the public for meetings under regulations established by the City Manager.

[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 5392, Mar. 21, 1985; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7327, March 4, 1993; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2010-18, Feb. 4, 2010.]


2.191 Fees for Use of City Property

(1) The City Manager shall prescribe fees for use of City property by administrative regulation. Payment of such fees shall be a condition of issuing a permit under 2.185 and 2.190.

(2) The fees shall bear a reasonable relationship to the costs incurred by the City to make the property available for the use authorized by the permit.

(3) Non-residents may be charged a higher fee than city residents.

(4) Temporary booths or stalls located in Alba Park and Vogel Park in connection with the Pear Blossom Festival are exempt from park use fees for the day of the festival only.

[Added, Sec. 2, Ord No. 7327, March 4, 1993; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7604, April 7, 1994.]


2.192 Purpose

This ordinance [Sections 2.192, 2.193, and 2.194] governs use of the City Hall, Service Center and Jackson Cottage meeting rooms for non-city purposes.

[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7147, June 18, 1992.]


2.193 Policy Considerations

(1) The primary purpose of City Hall and the Service Center is to provide facilities for carrying out the functions and activities of the City of Medford. Therefore, City activities shall always have priority over all other uses of these buildings.

(2) Use of City buildings by other persons and organizations should not create undue security risks, nor should it result in any significant extra expense for the City.

(3) Sharing of facilities among government agencies is a common practice which is in the public interest because it helps avoid unnecessary duplication.

(4) Use of idle City facilities by a variety of community organizations will benefit a large number of people and is one way of making public use of the facilities.

(5) City government should not subsidize individual businesses by providing facilities for use by them in carrying out their business activities.

(6) Use of City facilities by private groups does not in any way imply that the City approves the activities, policies, views or positions of such groups.

(7) Outside organizations whose members are predominantly citizens of Medford or groups which meet for the purpose of benefiting the city will be given priority should scheduling conflicts occur.

[Added Sec. 2, Ord. No. 7147, June 18, 1992.]


2.194 Use of City Meeting Rooms

(1) Availability: The City Manager shall determine which facilities and rooms are available for use by other organizations and the days, hours and conditions of availability for such use.

(2) Governmental Use: Subject to the approval of the City Manager, other government agencies and their elected officials may use the meeting rooms for activities in the pursuit of their official functions. Governmental use shall have priority over private use.

(3) Private Use: At times when the City Manager has determined that the facilities are available for private use, Private nonprofit organizations may be allowed to use meeting rooms for their organizational activities. Application shall be made to the City Manager for permission to use the facilities. No organization will be denied use of the facilities on the basis of the content of any speech, writing, or other expression protected by the constitutions of the United States and the State of Oregon.

(4) Regulations: The City Manager shall adopt administrative regulations consistent with Sections 1, 2 and 3 of this ordinance prescribing the terms and conditions of use of city meeting rooms by other organizations.

[Added, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 7147, June 18, 1992.]


2.197 Real Property

(1) This code section provides procedures and standards for the disposal of real property by the City.

(2)  Classification
Real property owned by the City is classified as stated below.  At the time of a proposed sale of real property by the City, the City Manager or the Manager’s designee shall determine the classification of the property.
A.  Substandard Undeveloped Property. Lots or parcels without structures that are not of minimum buildable size for the zone in which they are located or that cannot be developed for other reasons;
B.  Standard Undeveloped Property. Lots or parcels without structures that are of minimum or greater buildable size for the zone in which they are located and that can be developed.
C.  Developed Property. Lots or parcels of any size with structures;
D.  Special-Case Property. Any real property that, notwithstanding subsections (A), (B), and (C) of this section, was acquired by the City subject to an agreement restricting the use, transfer, or disposition of the property.

(3)  Disposal of Substandard Undeveloped Property.
The City Manager or the Manager’s designee is authorized to sell substandard undeveloped property by direct negotiation with an adjoining property owner. The City Manager or Manager’s designee may, but is not required to, use a real estate broker to assist the transaction.

(4)  Disposal of Standard Undeveloped Property and Developed Property.
A.  Any proposed sale of standard undeveloped property or developed property shall be set for a hearing before the Council. The Council may consider the sale of multiple properties at the hearing.
B.  The City Recorder shall cause notice of the hearing to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least five days prior to the hearing describing the property proposed for sale. Notice shall also be mailed to property owners within 200 feet of the subject property.
C.  Public testimony shall be solicited at the hearing to determine if a sale of the property or any portion of it is in the public interest.
D.  After the hearing, the Council shall decide whether to offer the property for sale and shall establish minimum acceptable terms. The Council may consider appraisal(s) or other evidence of market value in establishing the minimum acceptable terms. The Council may decide to offer the property for sale only if it determines that the property is surplus to the City’s needs.
E.  The City shall obtain an appraisal or other evidence of market value before concluding any sale to a private entity.  No appraisal is required for property which has a fair market value of less than $100,000, but other evidence of market value of such properties must be provided prior to sale to a private entity.
F.  If a sale is authorized by the Council, it may direct that the property be listed with the City’s real estate agent of record or direct that it be sold by bids. If sale is to be by a bidding process, a notice soliciting sealed bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least two weeks prior to the bid deadline date. The notice shall describe the property to be sold, the minimum acceptable terms of  sale, the person designated to receive bids, the last date bids will be received, and the date, time, and place that bids will be opened.
G.  The City Manager or Manager’s designee is authorized to approve the sale of the property if the minimum acceptable terms set by Council are met.
H.  If one or more bids are received at or above the minimum acceptable terms, the highest bid shall be accepted and the City Manager or Manager’s designee shall complete the sale.
I.  If no acceptable bids are received, the Council may:
1.    Accept the highest bid among those received;
2.    Direct staff to hold another sale, with the same or amended minimum terms;            
3.    Direct the property to be listed with the City’s real estate agent of record, or if the City does not have a real estate agent of record, with a local real estate broker on a multiple listing basis;
4.    Decide to keep the property.
 J.    Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the Council may adopt, after public notice and hearing, a resolution establishing a procedure for the sale of individual parcels of a class of City-owned real properties, or any interest in the properties, under a single program established within the City for the sale of that class of properties. The City may thereafter sell any parcel under that adopted procedure in lieu of the procedure established in this section, as allowed by state statute.
K.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the Council may authorize, after public notice and hearing, sale or lease of property not needed for a public purpose to certain non-profit organizations for nominal consideration.  The Council may use a Request for Proposal process to solicit proposals for sale or lease of surplus property to non-profit entities.  Properties sold or leased to such organizations must be used for the purposes of the organization and not for commercial business, trade, or manufacturing.  If the properties are used in violation of this restriction, title to the property shall revert back to the City or the lease shall be terminated.  Non-profit organizations which may acquire or lease property from the City in this manner include organizations that principally provide educational, recreational, medical, or social services to the public.  

(5)  Broker Selection.
The City may retain a real estate broker of record or retain real estate brokers on a case-by-case basis.

(6)  Transfer of an Interest Other Than Fee Title.
The transfer of an interest in real property by the City is not a sale of surplus real property if the City retains title to the property. The City may transfer an easement or other interest in real property less than fee title.

(7)  Transfer to Governmental or Non-Profit Entity.
The City Council may authorize transfer of real property of any type to another governmental entity or to a nonprofit entity, with or without consideration, for so long as the property is used for public purposes by the entity to which it is transferred. The agreement shall provide for return of the property to the City if the property is no longer used by the transferee for public purposes.

(8)   Special-Case Property.
The City shall comply with all agreements and restrictions applicable to special-case property. The City may transfer special-case property following any of the applicable procedures provided by this chapter, subject to the restrictions imposed by deed or agreement. If the deed or agreement provides a procedure for transfer by the City, the City may transfer the property as provided by the deed or agreement.

(9)  Exchange of Real Property.
A.  The City Council may authorize the trade or exchange of real property with other  
governmental entities or with private parties.
B.  The City shall exchange real property with private entities only if the City receives at least
equivalent value for the property it transfers. Payments may be made to compensate for any 
imbalance in the value of the property exchanged.
C.  For exchanges with private entities, the City shall require or obtain an appraisal or other
evidence of market value if the value of the property transferred by the City or received by
the City exceeds $100,000.
D.  In determining the relative value of the properties exchanged, in addition to the factors  
normally considered in determining the value of property, the City may consider the following
factors:
1.    Whether the property is adjacent to or otherwise enhances the value of other property the City owns.
2.    The suitability of the property for City use.
3.    Whether the transfer of the property being transferred by the City to a private party
will result in a benefit to the City or community. Potential benefits may include allowing more cohesive development of an area, providing needed housing or
employment opportunities, or increasing the City’s tax base.
 
(10)  Procedures for Specific Types of Properties.
The Council may by resolution establish procedures for the sale of specific types or categories of real property that differ from the procedures required by this chapter.
[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2017-43, April 20, 2017.]
 
2 Cemetery (2.200 to 2.216)

2.200 Cemetery Designated

The city cemetery and mausoleum acquired in 1972 from the Odd Fellows Lodge, formerly known as the "I.O.O.F. Cemetery", shall henceforth be known as "Eastwood Cemetery".

[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5811, Mar. 5, 1987.]


2.202 Cemetery Regulations

Except as otherwise provided in this Code, Eastwood Cemetery shall be administered by the city manager who shall have full authority to prescribe regulations governing the operation and maintenance thereof. The existing regulations approved by council resolution No. 2528 on December 18, 1975 shall remain in effect until modified or replaced by order of the city manager. Proposed new or modified regulations shall be submitted to the Eastwood Cemetery Commission for review at least 21 days prior to the effective date. There shall be no eligibility restrictions on purchase of burial spaces or interment of human remains therein.

[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 5811, Mar. 5, 1987.]


2.204 Cemetery Commission

(1) The Cemetery Commission is hereby established and shall be composed of seven persons, one of which shall be a student from a high school listed in Section 2.470(1),  appointed by the Parks and Recreation Commission.  The Commission members shall be appointed for terms of three years to assure that all appointments do not expire at the same time.  The youth member shall be appointed by the Mayor for a one-year term.  Three-year terms for members other than the youth member shall begin February 1 and expire January 31.  The one-year term for the youth member shall begin July 1 and expire June 30.  The Commission shall meet at least quarterly and may meet as often as necessary to carry out its functions. The chairman of the Commission may call a special meeting at any time upon 24-hours notice to the members and the public.

(2) The Cemetery Commission shall be an advisory body which shall make recommendations to the Parks and Recreation Commission regarding the funding and operation of Eastwood Cemetery. The Commission shall also work to secure donations and bequests for the Cemetery Trust Fund.

(3) The Chairperson or designee will serve as liaison to the Medford Parks and Recreation Commission.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5811, Mar. 5, 1987; Amd. Ord. No. 7773, Dec. 1, 1994; Amd. Ord. No. 2004-206, Oct. 21, 2004; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2010-81, Apr. 15, 2010; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2012-157, Oct. 4, 2012; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-71, July 5, 2018 (effective Jan. 1, 2019).]


2.205 thru 2.295 [Repealed Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985.]


2.206 Prices for Interment Spaces

Prices to be charged for interment spaces in Eastwood Cemetery shall be as follows:

Lot $250 - $500

Crypt $500 - $800

Within these limits, prices for specific spaces shall be determined by the city manager.

[Added Sec. 4, Ord. No. 5811, Mar. 5, 1987; Amd. Ord. No. 2008-261, Dec. 18, 2008.]


2.208 Procedure for Sale of Interment Spaces

All deeds for interment spaces in Eastwood Cemetery shall be signed by the city official designated by the manager to sign on behalf of the city and issued to any person upon payment of the proper consideration therefor and upon compliance with the cemetery regulations governing sales of spaces.

[Added Sec. 5, Ord. No. 5811, Mar. 5, 1987.]


2.212 Deed Form

The following shall be the form of deed to be issued by the city to the purchaser of interment spaces in Eastwood Cemetery: Cemetery Deed The City of Medford, a municipal corporation of the State of Oregon, in consideration of the sum of $______ to it paid, does hereby convey unto _______________, subject to the limitations and conditions hereinafter set forth, the following described [lot or crypt] in the Eastwood Cemetery, formerly known as the Odd Fellows Cemetery of Medford, Oregon, to-wit: as the same is designated, numbered and described on the official plat thereof, to have and to hold the above-described interment space unto the said _______________, and his or her heirs and representatives forever. Conditions 1. No transfer of the interment space described herein may be made to anyone except that it may be resold to the City of Medford at a price equal to five dollars ($5.00) per grave space less than the price paid by the grantee herein. 2. That the grantee _______________, representatives, and heirs, by the acceptance of this deed, do hereby agree to comply with any and all of the rules and regulations governing the conduct and operation of said cemeteries which may be imposed by the City of Medford. 3. The City of Medford will maintain and care for the space hereby conveyed according to the policies of the City, which may be changed from time to time, and subject to the availability of funds appropriated for that purpose. In witness whereof, the City of Medford has caused this instrument to be executed this ____ day of ______________, 19__. City of Medford By_______________________

[Added Sec. 6, Ord. No. 5811, Mar. 5, 1987.]


2.214 Records

The city manager shall designate a subordinate to keep a record and index of all deeds covering cemetery lots and crypts which have been or may hereafter be issued, which index shall be designated as the "Cemetery Deed Records"; and a plat of the Eastwood Cemetery and mausoleum showing the division of the cemetery and mausoleum into numbered spaces. The city manager is further directed to maintain, as far as practicable, a record of the names and addresses of the current owners of the various plots.

[Added Sec. 7, Ord. No. 5811, Mar. 5, 1987.]


2.216 Eastwood Cemetery Special Trust Fund

There is hereby created a special trust fund to be known as the "Cemetery Trust Fund".  The fund shall be prudently invested and the income therefrom shall be used solely for the maintenance, upkeep and improvement of Eastwood Cemetery. The fund is intended to provide a permanent endowment for Eastwood Cemetery, and restricted funds shall be $20,000.

Bequests and donations shall be deposited into either the Cemetery Trust Fund or the Medford Parks and Recreation Foundation Fund at the direction of the donor.  If no direction is provided, said funds shall be deposited into a restricted cemetery fund held by the Medford Parks and Recreation Foundation. 

Fees for cemetery services and sales of interment spaces shall be available for budgeting expenditures and shall be  used for maintenance, upkeep and improvement of Eastwood Cemetery.

[Added Sec. 8, Ord. No. 5811, Mar. 5, 1987; Amd. Ord. No. 2007-13, Jan. 18, 2007; Amd. Ord. No. 2008-260, Dec. 18, 2008.]

2 Bear Creek Playground (2.230 to 2.232)

2.230 Bear Creek Park Playground Maintenance Trust Fund

There is hereby created a special trust fund to be known as the "Bear Creek Park Playground Maintenance Trust Fund" into which shall be deposited all bequests and donations designated for the Bear Creek Park Playground Maintenance Trust Fund and all other sums which the City Council directs to be deposited therein.  The fund shall be prudently invested and the income therefrom shall be used solely for the maintenance and upkeep of the Children's Community Playground at Bear Creek Park.  The fund is intended to provide a permanent endowment for this playground facility, and the principal of the fund shall not be expended.  At the end of each fiscal year, the investment income of the fund during such year shall be determined by the finance director and the amount so determined shall then be available for expenditure for the purposes herein specified.

[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6444, Sept. 21, 1989.]


2.232 Bear Creek Park Playground Reconstruction Trust Fund

There is hereby created a special trust fund to be known as the "Bear Creek Park Playground Reconstruction Trust Fund" into which shall be deposited all bequests and donations designated for the Bear Creek Park Playground Reconstruction Trust Fund and all other sums which the City Council directs to be deposited therein.  The fund shall be prudently invested and the investment income of the fund shall be added to the principal.  No expenditure shall be made from this fund until after June 30, 1999; thereafter, the principal and income of the fund may be used only for the reconstruction of the Children's Community Playground at Bear Creek Park.

[Added Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6444, Sept. 21, 1989.]

2 Personnel (2.305 to 2.350)

2.305 Personnel Policies

(1) Employment in city government shall be based on merit and fitness, free of political considerations.

(2) Just and equitable incentives and conditions of employment shall be established and maintained to promote efficiency and economy in the operation of city government.

(3) Positions having like duties and responsibilities shall be classified and compensated on a uniform basis.

(4) High morale shall be maintained by fair administration of personnel regulations and by every consideration of the rights and interests of employees, consistent with the best interests of the public and the city.

(5) Tenure of employees shall be subject to good behavior and satisfactory performance of work, necessity for the performance of the work, and the availability of funds.


2.310 Categories of Employees and Officers Subject to Personnel Regulations

The personnel policies and regulations provided herein shall not apply to elected officials, persons appointed to serve on boards and commissions, the Municipal judge, or the employees of the Medford Water Commission. All other employees of the city are divided into the following categories:

(1) The executive-professional service shall include the city manager, supervisory and confidential employees as defined in ORS 243.650.

(2) The classified service shall include all other city employees not in the executive-professional service.


2.315 Position Classification Plan

The manager shall establish a position classification plan for all executive-professional and classified employees under his supervision and control. The classification plan shall include class specifications containing a class title, a description of work, examples of work, desirable knowledge, skills, abilities, and a statement of the desirable experience and training necessary to perform successfully the assignments of a position in a particular class. These specifications are to be descriptive and not restrictive as to work assignments or to working titles of positions.

2.320 Assignment of Position Classes

All positions under the supervision and control of the manager shall be assigned position classifications on the basis of the kind and level of duties and responsibilities and to the end that all positions of the same class shall be sufficiently alike as to permit use of a single descriptive title and the same pay scale. A position class may contain one position or more than one position.

2.325 Revision of Classification Plan

The classification plan shall be revised by the manager as changing conditions require. These provisions may consist of the addition, abolition, consolidation, division or amendment of existing classes.

2.330 Review of Classifications

In order to determine if the present classifications are commensurate with the work assignments, the duties and responsibilities of each employee position may be reviewed and revised either upward or downward in the job classification by the manager.

2.335 Personnel Rules, Classified Employees

The manager shall establish rules governing the employment, classification, transfer, promotion, demotion, discipline, discharge, and other matters affecting classified employees under his supervision and control. The rules and amendments to them shall be effective when filed in the office of the recorder and the notice posted in a conspicuous place in the city hall. The rules shall have the same force and effect as if adopted by ordinance, provided that they are not inconsistent with any other city ordinance or labor contract approved by the council. The rules shall establish a system of merit rating and rules for administration of the system.

2.340 Executive-Professional Employees

The manager shall prepare personnel rules governing the terms and conditions of employment of executive-professional employees. Rules affecting pay, benefits, discipline and discharge of such employees shall be effective upon their approval by resolution of the council. Rules governing other terms and conditions of employment of executive- professional employees shall be effective when filed in the office of the recorder and notice posted in a conspicuous place in the city hall. The rules promulgated by the manager shall establish a system of merit rating and rules for administration of the system.

2.345 Reduction in Number of Employees

If there is a lack of work or funds which requires a reduction in the number of employees in a department or division of the city government, or if activities performed by city employees are assigned to outside contractors, the manager may designate the required reduction which shall be made.

2.350 Personnel Records

(1) The manager, or his designee, shall maintain:

(a) Adequate records of the city's personnel administration; and

(b) The employment record of every employee.

(2) The manner in which these records are maintained is at the discretion of the manager.

2 City Officials, Employees and Commissions (2.405 to 2.496)

2.405 Recorder's Bond

The bond of the recorder shall be in the sum of $75,000.

2.410 Bond Contract Requirements

(1) The bond required under section 2.405 shall be in favor of the city and conditioned upon:

(a) The faithful performance of duties of the recorder; and

(b) The safekeeping and prompt delivery of all money or other property of the city, as required by the council.

(2) There shall be a corporate surety for the bond which shall be approved by the council.


2.415 Deputy Recorder

The manager may appoint a deputy recorder. The deputy recorder shall, in the name of the recorder, have authority to draw warrants upon the treasury, execute and sign deeds and other instruments, and do all acts required or authorized to be done by the recorder by law. The appointment of a deputy recorder under this section shall be considered terminated upon the revocation of the appointment by the manager.

2.420 Civil Defense

Pursuant to the Oregon Civil Defense Act of 1949, ORS 401.010 to 401.190, an organization for local defense is established in accordance with the state civil defense plan and program.

2.425 Civil Defense Director

A director of civil defense shall be appointed by the mayor and council. Subject to direction and control of the mayor and council, a director shall have responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the local organization for civil defense.

2.427 Police Advisory Committee

To achieve and meet community expectations, the Medford Police Departments strives to continuously evaluate and improve its quality of public safety services in partnership with the community. The purpose of the Police Advisory Committee is to assist the Police Department in exploring solutions to community issues and to serve as a forum for community members to receive and provide information and feedback regarding local law enforcement services.

1. Police Advisory Committee Created.

(1) The Police Advisory Committee shall consist of the following 11 members: one member from each ward (4); one (1) member representing the 549 School District; one (1) member representing the minority community; one (1) member representing the faith based community; one (1) member representing the business community; the Chief of Police; the Deputy Police Chief of Operations, and the Deputy Police Chief of the Support Bureau. All members shall be appointed to serve three-year staggered terms.

(2) All members shall meet the following qualifications: be a law abiding citizen with no felony convictions or convictions involving crimes of moral turpitude, be willing to commit to three years of services, be willing to serve as an advocate for the police department’s outreach efforts and be willing to serve as an advocate on behalf of the community.

(3) The following process will be used to select citizen members:

(a) Applications submitted to the Police Department.

(b) Criminal history background check completed.

(c) Candidates invited to an interview with the Chief, assigned councilmember and invited committee members.

(d) Candidates recommended for selection are forwarded to the City Council for approval.

(4) The Police Advisory Committee shall be co-chaired by the Chief of Police and a committee member selected by the citizen members.

(5) The Committee shall meet quarterly, in January, April, July and October each year. Members of the Police Advisory Committee shall attend all meetings unless excused by the committee co-chairs.


2. Powers and Duties of Police Advisory Committee.

(1) The powers and duties of the police advisory committee shall be as follows:

(a) Meet at least once each quarter, or by calling a special meeting, if needed.

(b) Review all comment cards.

(c) Review any departmental procedures that have resulted in repeated complaints and make recommendations to the Chief of Police regarding any potential policy changes.

(d) Compile and forward to the City Council an annual written report by January 30th.  The report shall include data concerning the status of matters reported on, comment cards, written complaints, use of force and all activities the Police Advisory Committee participated in. The report shall be in a form prescribed by the City Council. The purpose of the report shall be to summarize Police Advisory Committee activities, and not to provide policy recommendations directly to City Council.

(e) Provide a venue for citizens to interact with the Police Advisory Committee and the Police Department, with the aim of providing general advice to the Department regarding policies and overall activities of the Department.

(f) Provide recommendations to the Chief of Police on community issues brought before the committee.

(g) Serves as an engagement and and involvement body for the Police Department on issues suggested by committee members and/or the Chief of Police.

(h) Assists the Department in identifying short and long range goals.

(i) Serves as an advocate for the community to the Police Department and as an advocate for the Police Department to the community.

(2) The Committee is not empowered to investigate complaints on its own. The Committee shall neither participate in nor interfere with any internal investigation process of the Police Department. The Committee shall neither summon witnesses nor review documents exempt from public disclosure that involves an internal affairs investigation. To enable the Committee to perform its functions, the Chief of Police shall provide the Committee with a copy of each complaint and a report as to the disposition of the complaint.

 

[Added Ord. No. 8341, Apr. 17, 1997; Amd. Ord. No. 8390, June 19, 1997; Amd. Ord. No. 1998-02, Jan. 8, 1998; Amd. Ord. No. 1998-53, March 19, 1998; Amd. Ord. No. 2004-216, Nov. 4, 2004; Replaced, Ord. No. 2010-82, Apr. 15, 2010; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2012-157, Oct. 4, 2012; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2013-003, Jan. 3, 2013; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-119, Oct. 18, 2018.]


2.428 [Repealed Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-90, July 19, 2018, effective January 1, 2019]


 


2.429 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2018-90, July 19, 2018, effective January 1, 2019]


 

2.430 Boards and Commissions, Removal of Members

Except as otherwise provided by law, all members of city boards and commissions appointed for a fixed term may not be removed during that term except by vote of the council for just cause or non-performance of duty.  Non-performance of duty includes absence from three consecutive meetings or more than three meetings annually. Any person subject to removal shall first be notified of the specific cause for removal and shall have the right to a hearing before the council. This section does not apply to the Water Commission or Planning Commission.

[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2012-157, Oct. 4, 2012.] 

2.432 Boards and Commissions, Term of Office

Except as otherwise provided by ordinance or other law, all members of city boards and commissions shall be appointed for one-year terms beginning February 1 and ending January 31. Terms of all members holding office on December 31, 1987 shall be extended one month.
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6040, Jan. 7, 1988.]

2.435 Residence Requirements

All members of City boards, commissions or committees shall meet a minimum of one of the following residency requirements unless specifically addressed otherwise in the Medford Code or State Statutes:
(1)  Physical residency within the City of Medford Urban Growth Boundary.
(2)  Owner of business with a physical location within the City of Medford Urban Growth Boundary.
(3)  Owner of real property located within the City of Medford Urban Growth Boundary.

When a residence is a requirement for membership on a city board or commission, a member who ceases to meet one of the above conditions during his term of office shall forfeit the office and a new member shall be appointed to serve the unexpired portion of the term.

[Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2013-003, Jan. 3, 2013; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-70, June 21, 2018.] 

2.436 Council Liaison

(1)  At the second regular City Council session, the Council president shall appoint Council liaisons to the following  City Boards and Commissions:
Hospital Facilities Authority (2 positions)
Rogue Valley Area Commission on Transportation (RVACT)
Rogue Valley Council of Governments (RVCOG)
Rogue Valley Metropolitan Planning Organization (RVMPO)
Regional Rate Committee (2 positions)
Southern Oregon Regional Economic Development Inc. (SOREDI)
Housing Advisory Committee
Parking Committee
Parks & Recreation Commission
Police Advisory Committee
Transportation Commission
TRADCO
Chamber Board
Travel Medford Board
Medford Water Commission
The role of Council liaison shall include the following:
(i)  Secure alternate if unable to attend;
(ii) If an alternate is attending, brief alternate regarding materials for meeting and issues that could arise;
(a) Provide regular updates to the entire Council as to the concerns or issues for this board or  commission;
(b) Provide the communication link from the Council to the board or commission;
(c) Relay Council direction to board or commission to assist them in fulfilling their goals and duties as defined by the Medford Code; and
(d) Be knowledgeable regarding issues and vision of the board or commission.

(2) Council liaisons shall not be considered members of, nor count towards a quorum of, the board or commission they are appointed to.

(3) Council liaisons shall not deliberate on nor vote on any matter presented to their commission or board.  Liaisons are communicators between the volunteer commission/board and the City Council.  Liaisons should assist with problems and clarifications which develop, but should not stifle the work of the commission/board.

(4) With respect to City boards and commissions that make quasi-judicial decisions that can be appealed to the City Council, Council liaisons shall not participate in any discussion of the matter that can be appealed.  These types of Boards and Commissions include but are not limited to: Site Plan and Architectural Commission, Planning Commission, Landmarks and Historic Preservation Commission.

(5) When the City Council is sitting as the Board for the Urban Renewal Agency, no Council liaison will be appointed. 

(6) Some boards and commissions are not City of Medford boards and commissions, but instead include a member from the governing body of the City as a voting member of the board or commission.  In these instances, the council member may act as a voting member of the Board, not as a council liaison.  Those council members, when appropriate, should obtain direction from the entire council prior to voting on a matter.  Staff appointed as representatives, including alternates, to such boards and commissions shall follow the guidelines of this subsection. 

[Added, Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2012-157, Oct. 4, 2012; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2018-70, June 21, 2018; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2019-129, Dec. 5, 2019.]

2.437 Multicultural Commission

(1) The City Council establishes the Multicultural Commission to represent and reflect issues of economic, social and cultural interest for Medford's growing multicultural community.

(2) The Multicultural Commission shall consist of seven members.  The members shall be appointed by the Mayor and City Council for terms of three years, except that two of the initial members shall be appointed for terms of two years to assure that all appointments do not expire at the same time.

(3) The Multicultural Commission shall adopt rules of procedure, as necessary, and shall by resolution establish either a regular meeting date or rules of procedure under which meetings may be called.

(4) The Multicultural Commission shall act as an advisor to the City Council on all matters affecting the multicultural community of the City of Medford.

(5) The duties of the Multicultural Commission are: 

(a) Identify and voice concerns about issues which affect the multicultural community.

(b) Develop positive forums for multicultural community members.

(c) Encourage a culturally diverse and competent force of elected and appointed City officials and employees.

(d) Support channels of communication between the multicultural community and City officials.

(e) Provide the Mayor and City Council opportunities to speak with the multicultural community and hear its concerns.

(f)  Other duties as may be assigned by the Mayor and City Council. 

(6) Two years from the date of adoption of Section 2.437, the City Council shall review the performance of the Multicultural Commission.

[Added Ord. No. 2000-57, April 6, 2000; Amd. Ord. No. 2002-19, Feb. 7, 2002; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2010-81, Apr. 15, 2010; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2012-157, Oct. 4, 2012; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2013-003, Jan. 3, 2013.]


2.438 Arts Commission

(1) The Arts Commission shall consist of nine voting members and one nonvoting ex officio member, as follows:

(a) Voting members: Nine members-at-large, one of which shall be a student from a high school listed in Section 2.470(1).

(b) Nonvoting member: The Parks and Recreation Director or his/her designee.

(2) Voting members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Parks and Recreation Commission for terms of three years, except that shorter terms may be used to stagger appointments, so that the terms of three members expire each year. Three-year terms for members shall begin February 1 and expire January 31.  High-school student member term shall begin July 1 and expire June 30 annually.

(3) The Arts Commission shall adopt rules of procedure, as necessary, and shall by resolution establish either a regular meeting date or rules of procedure under which meetings may be called. A majority of voting members shall constitute a quorum.

(4) The duties of the Arts Commission shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

(a) Act on behalf of the Council on matters pertaining to the selection, acquisition, siting, restoration and preventive maintenance of public art for the enjoyment of the citizens.  This shall include the hiring of consultants to assist in the development of public art programs and procedures.

(b) Advise the Parks and Recreation Commission concerning the acceptance and disposition of gifts of art to the City.

(c) Act in conjunction with the Parks and Recreation Commission on matters pertaining to arts education and promotion, artist’s recognition and encouragement of the arts and artistic performances to help foster broad participation in and understanding of the arts and their value to the Medford community.

(d) Assist City staff in obtaining gifts and grants for the arts fund, which shall be used for support of arts programs/activities and the procurement of public art for the enjoyment of the citizens. Advise City Council of funding needs for arts to attain the desired vision for arts and culture in Medford.

(e) Assist City staff with the administration of the 1.5% for art program, which allocates funds from specific City building and remodeling projects for the incorporation within and or inclusion of public art to the project.

(f) The Chairperson or designee will serve as liaison to the Medford Parks and Recreation Commission regarding the placement of public art and scheduling of arts and cultural events in Medford public parks.

[Added Ord. No. 2002-12, Jan. 17, 2002; Amd. Ord. No. 2008-121, June 19, 2008; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2010-81, Apr. 15, 2010; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2012-157, Oct. 4, 2012; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2013-003, Jan. 3, 2013; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2013-133, Sept. 19, 2013; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2018-71, July 5, 2018 (effective Jan. 1, 2019).]


2.439 Medford Housing Advisory Commission

(1) The Medford Housing Advisory Commission shall consist of nine voting members as follows:
Two (2) members representing the construction and development community; one (1) member representing a local lending institution; two (2) members representing local realtors and multifamily housing operators; two (2) members representing affordable housing developers; one (1) member representing a tenant organization;  and one (1) member-at-large encouraging representation from throughout the whole community.  Voting members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council for terms of three years.

(2) The Medford Housing Advisory Commission shall adopt rules of procedure, as necessary, and shall by resolution establish either a regular meeting date or rules of procedure under which a meeting may be called. Five voting members shall constitute a quorum.

(3) The Medford Housing Advisory Commission shall administer the City's affordable housing program and advise the City Council on matters related to the City's housing stock and its development.

(4) The Medford Housing Advisory Commission shall act as an advisor to the City Council on matters affecting housing development pertaining to the Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Program in the city of Medford.

(5) The duties of the Medford Housing Advisory Commission shall include, but not be limited to the following:

(a) Administer annual public solicitation and selection process (for example a Request for Proposals) for Construction Excise Tax (CET) eligible housing development proposals.  Recommend selections to City Council for final approval;

(b) Identify and make recommendations to the Council regarding housing policy for housing that meets the needs of households at all income levels;

(c) Make recommendations to Council regarding the development of new programs and the enhancement of existing programs.  Advise Council on possible opportunities;

(d) Review current land use policies and zoning regulations and promote the adoption of policies and regulations supporting housing affordability;

(e) Serve in an advisory capacity on any and all housing matters pertinent to the City of Medford's CDBG entitlement program.  Review housing-related grant award recommendations made by the Community Development Grants Commission, make and communicate final CDBG housing-related grant award recommendations to City Council; and

(f) Other duties as directed by Council.

[Added, Ord. No. 2002-130, Aug. 1, 2002; Amd. Ord. No. 2003-254, Sept. 18, 2003; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2010-81, Apr. 15, 2010; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2012-157, Oct. 4, 2012; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2013-003, Jan. 3, 2013; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2013-133, Sept. 19, 2013; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-72, June 21, 2018.]


2.440 [Repealed, Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2010-81, Apr. 15, 2010.]

 


2.441 Medford Community Development Grants Commission

(1) The Medford Community Development Grants Commission shall consist of nine (9) voting members as follows:
One (1) current member of the Budget Committee; one (1) member representing healthcare; one (1) member representing social services; one (1) member representing local business; one (1) member representing workforce development; one (1) member representing an educational institution; one (1) member representing affordable housing; two (2) members-at-large encouraging representation from throughout the whole community.  Voting members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council for terms of three years.
 
(2) The Medford Community Development Grants Commission shall adopt rules of procedure, as necessary, and shall by resolution establish either a regular meeting date or rules of procedure under which a meeting may be called. Five voting members shall constitute a quorum.

(3) The Medford Community Development Grants Commission shall administer the City’s General Fund Grant program.

(4) The Medford Community Development Grants Commission shall act as an advisor to the City Council on the appropriate implementation of the City’s Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) program and related programs and statutory responsibilities including:
(a) Administering the CDBG annual grant selection process;
(b) Implementing the City’s CDBG Citizen Participation Plan;
(c) Assisting the Housing Advisory Commission to implement the City’s Consolidated Plan, Annual Action Plan, and Analysis of Impediments to Fair Housing Choice;
(d) Overseeing General Fund Grant reporting and CDBG regulatory requirements including but not limited to subrecipient reporting, risk assessment and monitoring;
(e) Advising City Council on grant opportunities; and
(f) Other duties as directed by Council.

[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-73, June 21, 2018.]

2.442 Need for Urban Renewal Agency

Blighted areas exist within the City of Medford and there is a need for an urban renewal agency to function in the City. The agency shall be known as the "Urban Renewal Agency of the City of Medford." The agency shall have all of the powers provided in Chapter 457, Oregon Revised Statutes.
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6058, Feb. 4, 1988.]

2.443 Board of Directors of Urban Renewal Agency

The powers of the Urban Renewal Agency of the City of Medford shall be exercised by a Board of Directors comprised of the City Council and Mayor of the City of Medford.  

[Added Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6058, Feb. 4, 1988; Amd. Ord. No. 7669, June 16, 1994; Amd. Ord. No. 2009-128, June 4, 2009; Amd. Ord. No. 2009-138, June 18, 2009; Amd. Ord. No. 2010-70, Apr. 1, 2010.]


2.444 Urban Renewal Agency - Procedures

The Board of Directors of the Urban Renewal Agency may appoint a citizen advisory committee and such other committees as it may require to aid in the performance of its duties. Persons so appointed need not be residents of the City. The Board of Directors shall adopt rules of procedure to govern the conduct of its meetings.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 6058, Feb. 4, 1988.]

2.445 [Repealed Ord. No. 5982, Oct. 1, 1987.]


2.446 Public Parking in the Central Business District

(a)  The City Manager of the City of Medford is authorized to promulgate regulations for the safe and proper public use and protection of public parking facilities in the central business district. Parking facilities under the Manager’s jurisdiction shall include property leased, rented or otherwise held by the city and made available for parking by the public on a free or rental basis and spaces on the public streets designated for parking by the Traffic Engineer.  The regulations shall not be inconsistent with any ordinance or resolution of the Council or any regulation of the traffic engineer or State of Oregon motor vehicle code and shall relate to opening and closing hours; parking time limits; charges and fees, if any; monthly rental parking, including monthly rentals in hardship cases; requirements for the display of parking permits; fines for violations of regulations; classes of vehicles and other objects to be excluded in the public interest; requirements that vehicles in parking lots be operated within the traffic pattern and parked in accordance with the markings established and placed by the traffic engineer; and other similar matters.  The regulations shall be effective after they are adopted at a public meeting of the City Council and filed with the recorder, but a regulation may be originated, amended or repealed by the Council.  Unless amended or repealed, the regulations shall have the effect of an ordinance and a violation of the regulations shall be punishable by the same penalties provided in Section 6.940 for overtime parking. 
(b)  There shall be a nine-member committee to advise the Transportation Commission on downtown parking matters. Seven members shall be appointed by the Mayor and City Council chosen from persons who are owners or employees of businesses in the central business district or are members-at-large.  No more than one member of the committee shall be a member resident-at-large.  One member shall be appointed by Rogue Community College as their representative; and one member shall be appointed by Southern Oregon University as their representative.
[Sections 2 and 3, Ord No. 7887, June 1, 1995.  These sections were not added to the Code by legislative action, but were codified by the City Attorney under authority granted by Sections 1.060 and 1.065; Amd. Ord. No. 2009-139, June 18, 2009; Amd. Ord. No. 2009-195, Sept. 3, 2009; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2010-27, Feb. 4, 2010; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2012-157, Oct. 4, 2012; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2013-003, Jan. 3, 2013; Ord. No. 2019-129 per MMC 1.065, Dec. 5, 2019.]
 

2.447 Parking Committee

2.447 Parking Committee.

(1) The Parking Committee is hereby established to make recommendations to the Transportation Commission on matters related to parking in the Central Business District. The duties of the Parking Committee, include but are not limited to:

(a) Establish downtown parking policies;

(b) Create plans for management of parking regulations and safety;

(c) Determine proper public use of parking;

(d) Provide protection of public structures and lots;

(e) Act as a forum to hear citizen grievances, objections and suggestions regarding parking;

(f) Consider requests for changes, additions and variances; and
(g)  Short- and long-term planning for parking as it relates to revitalization and development.

(2) The Committee shall consist of nine members.  The Transportation Commission shall appoint seven persons who are property or business owners, employees of businesses, or residents in the Central Business District or members-at-large. No more than two members may be a member-at-large.  In addition, there shall be one member who is appointed by Rogue Community College (RCC) as a representative, and one member who is appointed by Southern Oregon University (SOU) as a representative. All members shall be voting members.

(3) Term of office. Each appointed member shall serve a term of three years, with the exception of the members appointed from RCC and SOU. The RCC and SOU representatives will not serve for a specific term limit. RCC and SOU shall appoint representatives on an annual basis each February 1.
 
(4) The City Manager’s office shall provide a staff liaison or other personnel for clerical or other assistance as deemed appropriate.
(5) The minutes of the meetings of the Parking Committee shall be filed with the City Recorder’s office.
 

[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2010-27, Feb. 4. 2010; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2010-81, Apr. 15, 2010; Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2012-157, Oct. 4, 2012; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2013-003, Jan. 3, 2013; Amd. Ord. No. 2013-38, March 7, 2013; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2013-133, Sept. 19, 2013; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2019-129, Dec. 5, 2019.]


2.448 Hospital Facilities Authority Board.

(1)  The Board shall consist of five members appointed by the Mayor and City Council.  Four members of the board must be residents of Medford.  One member may not be a resident of Medford, but must be a resident of Jackson County.  All five members shall be voting members.

(2)  Term of office.  Each appointed member shall serve a term of five years, with a limit of two consecutive five-year terms.  Members of the Board shall be appointed by the Mayor and City Council for a five-year term, except that shorter terms may be used to stagger appointments so that one term expires each year.

[Added, Ord. No. 2015-110, Oct. 15, 2015.]
 

2.450 [Repealed Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7887, June 1, 1995.]


2.451 Transportation Commission

(1) The Transportation Commission is hereby established to advise the City Council and the Planning Commission on all matters affecting transportation policy in the City and the surrounding area. The duties of the Transportation Commission include:
(a)  Examine multi-modal transportation issues.
(b)   Evaluate level-of-service alternatives.
(c)   Evaluate travel demand management alternatives.
(d)   Make recommendations concerning provisions of the Comprehensive Plan and the Land Development Code that affect transportation.
(e)   Facilitate coordination of transportation issues with other governmental agencies.
(f)   Receive and consider recommendations from the Traffic Coordinating Committee, the Bicycle and Pedestrian Advisory Committee, and the Parking Committee.
(g)    Perform such other related duties assigned by the City Council.
The meetings of the Transportation Commission are not to be considered a part of any land use hearings process and the records of its proceedings shall not be a part of the record of any land use case. However, the Transportation Commission may submit testimony and evidence in a land use
matter in the same manner as any other party.

(2)   The Transportation Committee shall consist of eight voting members.  There shall be one standing representative from each of the following:

Planning Commission, Bicycle and Pedestrian Advisory Committee, Traffic Coordinating Committee, and Parking Committee.

(3)  The at-large voting members  of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council for terms of three years, except that shorter terms may be used to stagger appointments so that the terms of at least two members expire each year.  Three-year terms for members shall begin February 1 and expire January 31.

(4) The Transportation Commission shall adopt rules of procedure, as necessary, and shall by resolution establish either a regular meeting date or rules of procedure under which meetings may be called. Four voting members shall constitute a quorum.  The Transportation Commission shall select one of its members as chair and may select such other officers as it deems necessary.

(5)  The City shall provide staff members from the Public Works and Planning Departments to assist the Transportation Commission and may provide other staff assistance as deemed appropriate.

(6)  The minutes of the meetings of the Transportation Commission shall be filed with the City Recorder's office.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2018-90, July 19, 2018, effective January 1, 2019; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2019-129, Dec. 5, 2019.]

2.452 [Repealed, Section 3, Ord. No. 2019-129, December 5, 2019.]

Repealed

2.454 Bicycle and Pedestrian Advisory Committee

(1) The Medford City Council hereby creates the City of Medford Bicycle and Pedestrian Advisory Committee to advise the City Council on plans and issues related to non-motorized transportation including pedestrians, bicyclists, skateboarders and others.

(2) The Bicycle and Pedestrian Advisory Committee shall consist of seven members, including a mix of persons representing pedestrian interests, cycling interests, and other non-motorized transportation modes.  Members shall be appointed by the Mayor and City Council. Members shall be appointed to serve three-year terms, except that shorter terms may be used to stagger appointments so that the terms of two members expire each year.  The Committee shall elect a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson from among its members. The Committee shall adopt rules of procedure as necessary, and shall establish either a regular meeting date or rules of procedure under which a meeting may be called. Four members shall constitute a quorum. Members shall attend all meetings unless excused. 

(3) The duties of the Bicycle and Pedestrian Advisory Committee shall include, but not be limited to the following:
(a) Make recommendations to the Transportation Commission regarding priorities and opportunities for non-motorized transportation programs.
 
(4)  One member from the Committee will be appointed to serve as a member of the Transportation commission.

(5) The Bicycle and Pedestrian Advisory Committee shall present to the Transportation Commission a yearly written report on the committee’s activities, goals and concerns.

(6) The City Manager will provide staff support for the Bicycle and Pedestrian Advisory Committee from the Public Works and Planning Departments, with other departments providing assistance as needed.
[Add Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2018-90, July 19, 2018, effective January 1, 2019]

2.456 [Repealed, Sec.1, Ord. No. 7887, June 1, 1995.]


2.457 Traffic Coordinating Committee

(1) A Traffic Coordinating Committee is hereby established to:

(a) Make recommendations to the Transportation Commission concerning general traffic management policies;

(b) Act as a forum to hear citizen requests with regard to traffic matters; and

(c) Provide recommendations to the Public Works Department and the Police Department.

(2) The Committee shall be composed of five voting members.  Each of the listed organizations shall appoint one member and an alternate:

(a) The Medford/Jackson County Chamber of Commerce

(b) The local branch of the American Automobile Association

(c) School District 549-C

Two members shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council.

(3) The City Manager shall provide staff members from the Public Works and Police Departments to assist the Traffic Coordinating Committee and may provide other staff assistance as he deems appropriate.

(4) The minutes of the meetings of the Traffic Coordinating Committee shall be filed with the City Recorder.

[Added Ord. No. 5108, Apr. 5, 1984; Amd. Ord. No. 5963, Sept. 3, 1987; Amd. Ord. No. 1999-147, Sept. 17, 1999; Amd. Ord. No. 2005-130, July 7, 2005; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2010-81, Apr. 15, 2010; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2013-133, Sept. 19, 2013; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2018-90, July 19, 2018, effective January 1, 2019; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-111, Sept. 6, 2018, effective January 1, 2019.]


2.460 [Repealed Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5967, Sept. 17, 1987; effective 1/1/88.]


2.461 Parks and Recreation Commission

(1) The Parks and Recreation Commission shall consist of ten voting members and one nonvoting ex officio member, as follows:

(a) Voting members: Nine members-at-large, and one youth member who shall be a student from a high school listed in Section 2.470(1). The youth member shall retain membership so long as the member is in regular attendance at a high school during the school year which falls within the one-year term.

(b) Nonvoting member: the Parks and Recreation Director.

(2) Voting members of the Commission, other than the youth member, shall be appointed by the Mayor and City Council for terms of three years, except that shorter terms may be used to stagger appointments so that the terms of three members expire each year. The youth member shall be appointed by the Mayor for a one-year term. Three-year terms for members other than the youth member shall begin February 1 and expire January 31. The one-year term for the youth member shall begin July 1 and expire June 30.

(3) The Parks and Recreation Commission shall adopt rules of procedure, as necessary, and shall by resolution establish either a regular meeting date or rules of procedure under which meetings may be called. Five voting members shall constitute a quorum.

[Amd. Ord. No. 7064, February 6, 1992; Amd Ord. No. 7369, April 15, 1993; Amd. Ord. No. 2000-128, July 6, 2000; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2010-81, Apr. 15, 2010; Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2012-157, Oct. 4, 2012; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2013-003, Jan. 3, 2013; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2018-71, July 5, 2018 (effective Jan. 1, 2019).]


2.462 Function of Parks and Recreation Commission

The Parks and Recreation Commission shall:

(1) Act as advisor to the council on matters pertaining to the acquisition and development of public parks, greenways and spaces, and recreation facilities for the enjoyment of the citizens;

(2) Make recommendations and formulate and suggest policies to assist the council in developing and preserving the aesthetic and recreational facilities values which best serve the public interest;

(3) Act as advisor to the city council and city staff on matters pertaining to public recreation programs;

(4) Act as advisor to the city council and city staff on matters pertaining to promotion and encouragement of the arts and artistic performances for the enjoyment of the public; and

(5) Perform such other related duties as may from time to time be assigned by the council.

[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5967, Sept. 17, 1987; effective 1/1/88; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 7369, April 15, 1993; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2013-133, Sept. 19, 2013.]

2.464 Arts Fund

There hereby is established a special fund of the City to be known as the Arts Fund. Appropriations from this fund shall be used for support of programs and activities in the arts for the enjoyment of the public. The term "arts" includes, but is not limited to instrumental and vocal music; dance, drama, folk art, creative writing and poetry; architecture and landscaping design and the fields allied to them; painting, sculpture, photography; graphic and craft arts; industrial design; costume and fashion design; motion pictures, telecommunications, both video and audio (such as cable broadcast, television and radio); tape and sound recording; the history, criticism, theory and practice of the arts; and the arts related to the presentation, performance, execution and exhibition of such art forms All funds held in the Arts Commission Fund shall be transferred to the Arts Fund.
[Added Section 3, Ord. No. 7369, April 15, 1993.]

2.465 [Repealed Ord. No. 5966, Sept. 3, 1987.]


2.466 Neighborhood Associations and Community Coalitions Defined

(1) The City Council of the City of Medford believes there exists a need to broaden channels to communicate with its citizens on matters affecting the livability of their neighborhoods and the community in general. The City Council adopted as one of its goals for 1997-98 a desire "to develop and implement strategies for increasing the communication and feed back between the City and its citizens." As such, the City would like to enter into a joint partnership with Neighborhood Associations/Community Coalitions for the purpose of encouraging neighborhood planning processes to identify needs, establishing workable goals and objectives, and providing follow-up strategies for solutions.

The overall objective of this partnership is to obtain a commitment of neighborhood residents wishing to make a difference in their community by making their neighborhood a better, safer place to live work and play; providing an effective channel to their city government and staff, and allowing opportunities to respond together in addressing neighborhood and community challenges.

(2) A Neighborhood Association and Community Coalition is a group of people organized within the boundaries of a "community" representing a neighborhood or neighborhoods for the purpose of considering and acting upon a broad range of issues affecting their neighborhood and community livability, as well as serving as forums for communication of concerns to city government. It is anticipated that "Community Coalitions" will be formed from citizen initiated "Neighborhood Associations" and boundaries formed based on common concerns and neighborhood similarities. When a Neighborhood Association has grown to represent numerous neighborhoods, and/or other Neighborhood Associations wish to join efforts with adjoining Neighborhood Associations they may request recognition as a Community Coalition representing a broader segment of the City sharing common concerns and similar goals and objectives. It is anticipated that Community Coalitions would also have board representation from each Neighborhood Association and would assist new Community Coalitions and Neighborhood Associations in forming.

(3) Boundaries of the Neighborhood Associations and Community Coalitions shall be defined by the City and Associations/Coalitions jointly and should evolve over the course of time. Membership shall include all residents, property owners, business licensees and representatives of non-profit organizations that provide services within the defined boundaries. A good faith effort shall be made to recruit a diverse and representative board of residents, property owners, and business licensees within the defined boundaries and to maintain an up to date list of board members and officers. All boundaries shall be within the City limits of Medford.

(4) No membership fees shall bar any resident from voting. Voluntary dues, contributions, contracts and grants may be utilized by coalitions to function and meet their goals and objectives. City funding and levels of funding, if any, shall be at the discretion of City Council and the City Manager.

(5) Each Neighborhood Association and Community Coalition shall adopt by laws which will govern rules of procedure, election of officers, residency and minimum age requirements, frequency of meetings, allocation of budgets and all other matters for accomplishing stated goals and objectives. Organization by laws shall be kept on file and available for review.

(6) Each Neighborhood Association and Community Coalition may:

(a) Recommend an action, a policy, or a comprehensive plan amendment to the City and to any City agency or commission on any matter affecting the livability of the neighborhood, including, but not limited to land use, housing, community facilities, human resources, social and recreational programs, traffic and transportation, environmental quality, open space and parks and public safety;

(b) Assist city agencies in determining priority needs for the neighborhood and community;

(c) Make recommendations relating to budget items for neighborhood improvement;

(d) Undertake to manage projects as may be agreed upon or contracted with public agencies.

(7) Neighborhood Associations and Community Coalitions shall be accountable to the people of the neighborhood which they represent, as follows:

(a) They shall be responsible for notifying residents about meetings, elections, and other events with the assistance of city staff. They shall be responsible for seeking the views of the people affected by proposed policies or actions before adopting any recommendations. Officers will serve as liaison between city staff and the Neighborhood Association and Community Coalition and shall be elected by the coalition members.

(b) The consensus view of a dissenting minority or minorities on any issue considered shall be recorded and transmitted along with any recommendations made by a neighborhood organization to the city.

(c) Nothing in these provisions shall be considered as a limitation on any citizen’s right to participate directly in the decision making process of the city government.

(d) Neighborhood Associations and Community Coalitions shall provide annual reports of progress (goals and objectives attained) and specific examples of measurable successes to the City Council at a scheduled council study session. Should the City Council elect to contract services, an agreement to provide services would be mutually adopted with Neighborhood Associations and Community Coalitions.

(8) (a) All Neighborhood Associations and Community Coalitions and city agencies shall undertake to notify affected neighborhood persons through the officers of the organization on policy or administration decisions pertaining to a specific neighborhood.

(b) Neighborhood Associations, Community Coalitions and city agencies shall abide by the laws regulating open meetings and open access to all information not protected by the right of personal privacy and shall abide by the same non-discrimination laws and policies required of the City of Medford.

(9) (a) Neighborhood Associations and Community Coalitions shall provide their own liability insurance covering their staff, officers, board members and committee members acting within the scope of their employment or volunteer duties. A copy of this policy shall be delivered to the City Manager and shall provide comprehensive general liability insurance with the following minimum requirements:

 

 	
Per Person

Per Occurrence

Aggregate

Bodily Injury

200,000

500,000

500,000

Property Damage

50,000

50,000

50,000

Personal Injury

200,000

500,000

500,000

(b) Special events, workshops and other programs open to the public and provided on City owned property by the Neighborhood Associations and Community Coalitions may require the City to be named as additional insured on the liability policy.

(10) (a) The Neighborhood Association, Community Coalition and city agencies shall include each other in all planning efforts which affect neighborhood livability.

(b) Comprehensive plans recommended to the city or to a city agency shall be the subject of a public hearing within a reasonable time. Any changes which are proposed by the city, or a city agency, shall be sent to the affected Neighborhood Association and Community Coalition for consideration and for a response before final action is taken.

(c) City agencies and Neighborhood Associations and Community Coalitions shall cooperate in seeking outside sources of funding for neighborhood projects.

[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 1999-72, May 20, 1999.]


2.467 [Repealed Ord. No. 5966, Sept. 3, 1987.]


2.468 City Responsibilities

The City Manager, with the authorization of the City Council, may assign existing staff, provide employees, or contract with individuals to assist Neighborhood Associations and Community Coalitions with the following:
     (a) Notify interested persons of meetings, hearings, elections and other events;
     (b) Provide for the sharing of information and maintain a list of reports, studies, data sources and other available information;
     (c) Provide referral services to individuals, Neighborhood Associations, Community Coalitions, city agencies and other public agencies;
     (d) Keep an up-to-date list of Neighborhood Associations and Community Coalitions and their principal officers;
     (e) Assist Neighborhood Associations and Community Coalitions in applying for recognition by the City council;
     (f) Assist in reproducing and distributing newsletters to City departments;
     (g) Act as liaison between Neighborhood Associations, Community Coalitions and city agencies, and work out processes for citizen involvement;
     (h) Assist in contacts with other public agencies and non profit organizations;
     (i) Assist in educational efforts relating to citizen participation and municipal legal processes;
     (j) Assist Neighborhood Associations and Community Coalitions in securing outside funding.
[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 1999072, May 20, 1999.]

2.469 [Repealed Ord. No. 5966, Sept. 3, 1987.]


2.470 Mayor's Youth Advisory Commission

(1) There is hereby established a Mayor's Youth Advisory Commission consisting of fifteen to seventeen representatives chosen from students of the following schools:

(a) South Medford High School
(b) North Medford High School
(c) Cascade Christian High School
(d) St. Mary's High School
(e) Central Medford High School
(f) Public Charter High Schools

Residence in the city is a requirement for appointment.

(2) The Youth Commission responsibilities are as follows:

(a) Serving as an advisory body to the Medford City Council on matters concerning youth and youth activities.

(b) Helping to find constructive activities for teens and aiding in solving problems concerning teens.

(c) Finding ways to get students involved in the community.

(d) Benefiting the City of Medford by utilizing the above-mentioned ways.

(3) Representatives on the Youth Commission will be chosen by the following steps:

(a) Submittal of an application to the Mayor's office.

(b) Submittal of one letter of recommendation from a faculty member within the student's school, or if new to the school, their previous school.

(c) Submittal of one letter of recommendation from a member of the community other than a relative.

(d) Screening of applications by a committee appointed by the Mayor. All application materials shall be submitted by June 15.

(e) Final decision will be made by the Mayor based on the student's application and possible interview.

(4) Members of the Youth Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor in May and shall serve a one-year term beginning July 1 and ending June 30.

(5) The Mayor's Youth Commission shall adopt such rules of procedure as they may see fit and shall establish either a regular meeting date or rules of procedure under which meetings may be called. Meetings shall be guided by Robert's Rules of Order.

[Added Ord. 5797, Feb. 5, 1987; Amd. Ord. No. 6205, Oct. 20, 1988; Amd. Ord. No. 7536, Dec. 9, 1993; Amd. Sec. 2003-139, May 1, 2003; Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2010-81, Apr. 15, 2010; Amd. Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2012-157, Oct. 4, 2012; Amd. Ord. No. 2013-005, Jan. 3, 2013; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2018-71, July 5, 2018 (effective Jan. 1, 2019).]


2.472 [Repealed, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2014-118, Sept. 4, 2014.]

Repealed

2.475 Unified Appeal Board; Membership

Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this code, all functions of boards of appeal described in Section 2.479 shall be performed by a board composed as follows:

(1) The Director of Building Safety, who shall serve as an ex officio nonvoting member, shall be the secretary of the board, and in that capacity shall be responsible for issuing and serving notices of meetings and hearings, notices of board action, maintaining a record of the proceedings of the board, and delivering all official records and documents of the board to the Recorder for maintenance as public records.

(2) The Fire Marshal, who shall serve as a nonvoting ex officio member and shall be notified of all meetings.

(3) Five members appointed for two-year terms by the Mayor and City Council. These five members shall elect a chairman. There must be one member from each of the following categories:

(a) A licensed general contractor.

(b) A licensed engineer.

(c) A licensed architect.

(d) A member of the business community of the city.

(e) A representative of the public not belonging to any of the foregoing categories.

(4) In addition, a panel of six members for a two-year term, each of whom shall have special knowledge in one of the following fields:

(a) Building construction.

(b) Heating and air conditioning.

(c) Substandard and dangerous housing.

(d) The sign business.

(e) Electrical installations.

(f) Plumbing installations. One member of the panel shall receive a call to attend each meeting at which matters dealing with his identified specialty are pending.

[Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2010-81, Apr. 15, 2010; Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2013-003, Jan. 3, 2013.]


2.477 Meetings

All meetings of the board shall be public, and a quorum for business shall consist of five members, one of whom may be an ex officio member.

2.479 Duties

The board established by section 2.475 shall perform the functions of those boards specified in:
(1) All specialty codes administered and enforced under Chapter 9 of the Medford Code.
(2) Section 2.303 of the 1991 Uniform Fire Code.
[Amd. Ord. No. 5237, Aug. 16, 1984; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 5419, Apr. 18, 1985; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7730, Oct. 6, 1994.]

2.481 Notice of Appeal

When notice of appeal is required to be filed in any of the matters governed by the codes mentioned in Section 2.479, it shall be filed with the recorder and maintained thereafter as a public record. A copy shall be furnished by the recorder to the director of building safety, who shall give notice and take such action as may be needed to cause the board to hear and consider the matter within the time prescribed by law.

2.485 Building Keys

The Finance Director shall deduct ten dollars from the salary or wages of any terminating or retiring city employee who fails to return any key to any city building entrusted to him during his employment.

[Added Ord. No. 4644, July 1, 1982.]

2.486 [Repealed, Section 4, Ord. No. 7369, April 15, 1993.]


2.487 [Repealed, Section 5, Ord. No. 7369, April 15, 1993.]


2.489 [Repealed, Section 6, Ord. No. 7369, April 15, 1993.]


2.490 [Repealed, Section 7, Ord. No. 7369, April 15, 1993.]


2.495 [Repealed, Section 1, Ord. No. 2002-91, June 6, 2002.]


2.496 Municipal Judge Termination for Cause

(1) The municipal judge and judges pro tem shall be subject to removal by a two-thirds vote of the whole council for cause. Cause is defined as follows:

(a) Death of judge;

(b) Adjudicated incompetence;

(c) Absence from the City for over 30 days without the Mayor’s consent;

(d) Conviction of any offense defined as a crime in the jurisdiction where committed;

(e) Declaration as a Habitual Traffic Offender in any state;

(f) Disbarment or suspension for any period of time of the judge’s license to practice law in any state;

(g) Adjudicated violation of the Oregon Code of Judicial Conduct;

(h) False statement in application for position as judge.

(2) Whenever the Mayor determines that there may be cause to terminate the judge, the Mayor shall mail a notice to the judge stating the reasons for the proposed termination, a brief summary of the evidence relied upon, and the procedure for the judge to dispute the proposed decision.

(3) The judge shall have ten (10) days from the date of the written notice to request a hearing before the City Council in order to dispute the proposed decision. If the Mayor does not receive a request for hearing within ten (10) days from the date of the notice, the City Council shall make a decision. If a timely request for a hearing is received, the Mayor shall notify the judge of the time and place of the hearing. The hearing may be held in executive session, or at the request of the judge, shall be heard in an open hearing. The hearing procedure shall be governed by Oregon Public Meetings Law. The City Council shall make a final decision in open session after considering all the evidence.

[Added, Section 2, Ord. No. 2002-91, June 6, 2002.]

2 City Contracting and Purchasing (2.500 to. 2.507)

2.500 Title and Purpose

Sections 2.500 to 2.630 shall be known as "the contracting and purchasing code." The term "this code" as used in Sections 2.500 to 2.630 shall mean the contracting and purchasing code, unless the context otherwise requires. The purpose of this code is to provide for the establishment of uniform, efficient and economical contracting and purchasing policies, procedures, rules and regulations for the city in accordance with the City Charter and Chapters 279A, 279B, and 279C of the Oregon Revised Statutes and are specifically adopted in place of the State Attorney General's Model Rules.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2005-20, Feb. 17, 2005.]


2.501 Definitions

(1) For purposes of this code the following definitions apply, unless the context requires otherwise:

(a) Bid: A competitive offer in which price, delivery (or project completion) and conformance to specification will be the predominant award criteria. When authorized by an exemption granted by the Board, bid also includes a proposal wherein a solicitation of competitive proposals or offers is utilized for procurement when specification and price will not necessarily be the predominant award criteria.

(b) Bid Opening: The date, time and place set for opening of competitive bids and, unless otherwise specified in the bid documents, the deadline for the receipt of bids.

(c) Board: The city council or board of water commissioners acting as local contract review board pursuant to Sections 2.621, 2.623 and ORS 279A.060.

(d) Competitive Bidding: The formal process for advertising, bid and bid opening required by ORS Chapter 279B and 279C for all public contracts which are not exempt.

(e) Competitive Quotes: The solicitation of offers from competing vendors. The solicitation and the offer may be in writing or oral.

(f) Public Contract: A sale or other disposal, or a purchase, lease, rental or other acquisition by a contracting agency of personal property, services, including personal services, public improvements, public works, minor alterations, or ordinary repair or maintenance necessary to preserve a public improvement.

(g) Manager: The city manager of the City of Medford or any city employee appointed in writing by the manager to act for him in the exercise of the authority granted by the Charter and this code. (2) Terms not defined herein shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with Chapter 279 of the Oregon Revised Statutes.

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord No. 6884, May 16, 1991; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2005-20, Feb. 17, 2005.]


2.503 Authority of Manager

(1) Except as otherwise provided by this code, the manager shall have authority to purchase and contract for all materials, supplies, equipment, services and public improvements for which funds have been appropriated by the city council, and to sell or dispose of all personal property of the city which is surplus, obsolete, or unusable. Contracts made by the manager pursuant to this code are "authorized . . . by ordinance of the council" within the meaning of Section 32 of the City Charter without individual authorization by the city council. The manager shall also administer and enforce all city contracts.

(2) The manager is hereby authorized to obligate the City of Medford as follows:
(A) For a single obligation not exceeding $150,000 for the purchase of goods and services, supplies,  materials, equipment, or contractual services; without further authorization by special ordinance or other specific council approval;
(B) For a single obligation not exceeding $100,000 for services including but not limited to architectural, engineering and related services as defined in ORS 279C.105; or
(C) For a single obligation not exceeding $100,000 for public improvement contracts.  As used in this section 2.503, “single obligation” includes the original contract and any individual or cumulative change orders.  When the cumulative amount of change orders exceed 25% of the original contract and the manager’s expense authority herein, any change order must have council approval, regardless of whether the individual change order is within the manager’s authority.  

(3) All purchases exceeding the manager's obligation authority must be authorized by ordinance, except as provided in Section 2.589 for insurance contracts.  The manager may authorize a change order on a contract approved by council provided the individual or cumulative change orders do not exceed 25% of the original contract, or do not exceed the manager's contracting and purchasing authority.

(4) The manager may execute intergovernmental agreements and agreements that contain hold-harmless and limitations of liability clauses, to the extent of his or her purchasing authority herein.

(5) The manager may delegate his authority to obligate the city to one or more subordinates designated in writing. Authority so delegated may not exceed $25,000 on a single obligation, except that, in the manager's absence, the acting city manager may exercise all of the manager's authority.

[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6884, May 16, 1991; Amd. Ord. No. 7455, Sept. 2, 1993; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2013-52, Apr. 4, 2013; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2017-17, Feb. 16, 2017.]

2.504 Authority of City Manager to Purchase or Lease Real Property by Agreement

(1) The City Manager (Manager) is hereby authorized to purchase real property with a negotiated value up to $50,000, whether by mutual agreement, or in circumstances where the Council has authorized eminent domain.

(2) Prior to purchasing any real property with a negotiated value over $10,000, the Manager shall obtain a preliminary title report and an opinion letter from a licensed realtor; or an appraisal performed by a certified real estate appraiser.

(3) The Manager may delegate his authority to obligate the City to one or more subordinates designated in writing. Authority so delegated may not exceed $10,000 on a single obligation.

(4) Notwithstanding Section 2.185(7), the Manager is authorized to lease as lessor or lessee real property not to exceed 10 years in duration, including renewals. The Manager’s authority in this section is limited to the above process for the above dollar limits as for purchasing real property. The total City expense or income over the life of the lease including potential renewals shall be used when determining the dollar limits for a lease.

[Added, Ord. No. 2010-87, May 6, 2010.]


2.505 Regulations and Procedures.

The manager shall establish and amend regulations and procedures for the efficient and economical administration of the purchasing and contracting functions authorized by the code and the city charter. The regulations and procedures, and amendments, shall be in writing and on file in the office of the manager as a matter of public record, available for public inspection during business hours.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985.]

2.507 Prohibition of Interest in City Contracts

Procurements under this code are subject to conflicts-of-interest analysis under state law including but not limited to ORS Chapter 244.  Unless authorized by a resolution of the council, no City of Medford funds will be spent towards defense or payment of fines for Oregon Government Ethics Commission violations.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2013-52, Apr. 4, 2013.]


2 Bidding and Award (2.509 to 2.559)

2.509 Competitive Bidding

Public contracts issued by the city shall be awarded by competitive bidding except as exempted under the provisions of ORS 279A.025, 279A.100, 279A.030 or 279C.335 and the provisions of this code.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2005-20, Feb. 17, 2005.]


2.511 Bid Documents

(1) The Bid Documents Shall Include the Following:
(a) Instructions and information to bidders concerning the bid submission requirements, including the time and date set for opening of bids, the address of the office to which bids are to be delivered, and any other special information;
(b) Where applicable, the purchase description, specifications, delivery or performance schedule, inspection and acceptance requirements, and special evaluation factors; and
(c) The contract terms and conditions, including warranty, bonding and bid security requirements, as applicable.
(d) All addenda issued by the manager.
 
(2) Determination of Contractual Terms and Conditions. The manager is authorized to determine the contractual provisions, and terms and conditions of solicitations and contracts, provided such provisions, terms and conditions are not contrary to statutory or regulatory requirements.

(3) Compliance and Exceptions to terms and Conditions
(a) The Manager has the right to reject any bid or proposal that takes exception to specifications or to contract terms unless the right to take exception is specifically granted in the Invitation to Bid or Request for Proposals. Bids or proposals which take exception to the specifications or contract terms, or which are made contingent upon the City's acceptance of different or additional specifications or terms, may be rejected because they are not responsive to the Invitation to Bid or the Request for Proposals.
(b) Any exceptions to the terms, conditions or specifications must be clearly stated in writing by the bidder in the signed returned bid or proposal. Exceptions to the terms and conditions become part of the contract only upon written acceptance by the City.

[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 6884, May 16, 1991; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.513 Public Notice

(1) Distribution. Bid documents or notices of the availability of bid documents shall be mailed or otherwise furnished to a sufficient number of bidders for the purpose of securing competition. Notices of availability shall indicate where, when, and for how long the bid documents may be obtained; generally describe the supply, service or construction desired; and may contain other appropriate information. The manager may charge a fee or require a deposit for the bid documents.

(2) Advertising.

(a) Unless exempted every formal solicitation of bids shall be advertised on the City of Medford Website. An abbreviated advertisement directing bidders to the website for bid shall be published at least once in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the city and in as many additional issues and publications as the manager may determine to be necessary or desirable to ensure competition. If the contract is for a public improvement with an estimated cost in excess of $125,000, the advertisement shall be published in at least one trade newspaper of general statewide circulation.

(b) All website advertisements for bids shall state:

1. If the contract is for a public work, that no bid will be received or considered unless the bid contains a statement by the bidder that the provisions of ORS 279C.800 to 279C.870 or the Davis-Bacon Act (40 USC 276a) are to be complied with.

2. The date and time after which bids will not be received, which date shall not be less than five (5) days after the date of the last publication of the website advertisement;

3. The date that prequalification is a requirement;

4. The character of the work to be done or the items to be purchased;

5. The office where contract terms, conditions and specifications may be seen;

6. The name and title of the person designated to receive bids;

7. The date, time, and place that bids will be publicly opened.

8. That each bid must contain a statement as to whether the bidder is a "resident bidder" as defined in ORS 279A.120(1)(6);

9. That the City may reject any bid not in compliance with all prescribed public bidding procedures and requirements, and may reject for good cause any or all bids upon a finding of the City that it is in the public interest to do so;

10. Whether or not a contractor or subcontractor must be licensed under ORS 468A.720 to do asbestos abatement work; and

11. That no bid for a construction contract shall be received or considered unless the bidder is registered with the Construction Contractors Board or licensed by the State Landscape Contractors Board as required by ORS 671.530.

[Amd. Sec. 4, Ord No. 6884, May 16, 1991; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2005-20, Feb. 17, 2005; Amd. Ord. No. 2010-112, May 20, 2010.]


2.515 Bid Preparation

(1)     Bids shall be typed or prepared in ink and shall be signed in ink by the bidder or an authorized representative of the bidder. The City shall not accept electronic facsimile bids or signatures.
(2)     Bids shall be made on the bid form provided and submitted in a sealed envelope.
(3)     Alterations or erasures, if any, shall be initialed in ink by the person signing the bid.
(4)     Bids shall contain a fully executed bid package, including a certification that all the bid documents furnished to bidders by the City have been read, and shall also contain any other required documents and descriptive literature.
[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 6884, May 16, 1991; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002; Amd. Ord. No. 2002-129, Aug. 1, 2002.]

2.517 Bidder Prequalification

The manager may require mandatory prequalification of bidders as provided in ORS 279B.120 and 279B.125.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985.; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord No. 7426, July 15, 1993; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2005-20, Feb. 17, 2005.]


2.518 Bidder Disqualification

A person may be disqualified from consideration for award of a contract as provided in ORS 279B.130.

[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 7426, July 15, 1993; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2005-20, Feb. 17, 2005.]


2.519 Bidder Submissions

(1) Bid Samples and Descriptive Literature. Bid samples or descriptive literature may be required when it is necessary to evaluate required characteristics of the items bid. Bid samples will be returned in accordance with provisions contained in the bid documents.
(2) Receipt of Bid. It is the bidder's responsibility to ensure that bids, modifications and withdrawals are received by the designated office of the city prior to the stated bid opening time.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.521 Bid Security

(1) Public Improvement Contracts. Bid security in the amount of 10 percent of the bid shall be required for public improvement contracts where the amount of the contract exceeds $25,000. The bid security shall be forfeited if the bidder fails to execute the contract promptly and properly if awarded.

(2) Other Public Contracts. Bid security not to exceed 10 percent of the bid may be required by the city for other contracts in order to guarantee acceptance of the award.

(3) Form of Bid Security. The following forms of bid security will be accepted by the city: (a) Surety bond from a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Oregon; or (b) Cashier's check or certified check.

(4) Return of Bid Security. The bid security of all unsuccessful bidders shall be returned after a contract has been executed, or all bids have been rejected.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7,2002.]

2.523 Pre-bid Conferences

Pre-bid conferences may be held by the manager to explain the procurement requirements or conduct site inspections. The manager may require attendance at the pre-bid conference as a condition for bidding.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.525 Protest of Bid Specifications

(1)     Time for Submission of Protest. Unless a different deadline is specified in the Invitation to Bid or Request for Proposals, protests of bid specifications shall be presented to the city in writing at least four (4) calendar days prior to bid opening. Such protest shall include the reasons for protest and any proposed changes to specifications. No protest against award because of the content of bid specifications shall be considered after the deadline established for submitting such protest.
(2)     Extension of Opening Date. If any bid specification protest is received in accordance with section (1) above, the bid opening date may be extended if necessary to allow consideration of the protest and issuance of any addenda to the bid documents.
(3)     Identification of Protest. Envelopes containing protests of bid specifications shall be addressed to the officer designated to receive bids and shall be marked as follows:
Bid Specification Protest
Bid Number or Other Identification
(address)
[Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 6884, May 16, 1991; Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.527 Addenda To Bid Documents

(1) Form. Changes to bid documents shall be accomplished by addenda. The bidder shall acknowledge receipt of all addenda issued, either with the bid or separately prior to bid opening.
(2) Distribution. Addenda shall be sent to all prospective bidders known to have obtained the bid documents or attending any mandatory pre-bid conferences.
(3) Timeliness. Addenda shall be issued within a reasonable time (preferably five (5) days prior to bid closing) to allow prospective bidders to consider them in preparing their bids, but in no case less than 48 hours before the bid opening. If necessary, the manager may notify prospective bidders by telegram or telephone, followed by a confirming written addendum.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.529 Pre-opening Modification or Withdrawal of Bids

(1)     Modifications. Bids once submitted may be modified in writing prior to the time and date set for bid opening. Any modifications shall be signed by an authorized officer, and state that the new document supersedes or modifies the prior bid. Telegraphic, facsimile, or similar modification shall not be accepted. To ensure the integrity of the bidding process, the envelope containing any modifications to a bid shall be marked as follows:
Bid Modification
Bid Number or Other Identification
(address)
(2) Withdrawals.
     (a) Bids may be withdrawn by written notification on company letterhead signed by an authorized person and received prior to the time and date set for opening. Bids also may be withdrawn in person prior to the scheduled bid opening upon presentation of appropriate identification. Telegraphic, facsimile, or similar withdrawal shall not be accepted.
     (b) Unopened bids withdrawn under subsection (a) above, may be released to the bidder after voiding any date and time stamp used.
     (c) Requests to withdraw bids shall be marked as follows:
Bid Withdrawal
Bid Number or Other Identification
(address)
(3) Documentation. All documents relating to the modification or withdrawal of bids shall be made a part of the appropriate bid file.
[Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 6884, May 16, 1991; Amd. Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.531 Receipt, Opening, and Recording of Bids

(1) Receipt. Upon its receipt, each bid and modification shall be time-stamped or marked by hand but not opened and shall be stored in a secure place until bid opening. If bids or modifications are opened inadvertently or are opened prior to the time and date set for bid opening because they were improperly identified by the bidder, the bids or authorized modification documents shall be resealed and stored for opening at the correct time. When this occurs, documentation of this procedure shall be placed in the bid file.
(2) Opening and Recording. Bids and modifications shall be opened publicly at the time, date and place designated in the bid documents. If witnesses are present at the bid opening, and to the extent practicable, the name of each bidder, the bid price(s), and such other information as considered appropriate, shall be read aloud. On voluminous bids, the city may advise bidders as part of the bid documents that the bid items and prices will not be read aloud.
(3) Availability. The opening bids shall be available for public inspection prior to award except to the extent the bidder designates trade secrets or other proprietary data to be confidential. ORS 192.500(1)(b). The manager shall verify and determine that the confidential information claimed to be exempt is in fact exempt from disclosure under the Oregon Public Records Law. Material so designated shall accompany the bid and shall be readily separable from the bid in order to facilitate public inspection of the nonconfidential portion of the bid. Prices, makes, model or catalog numbers of items offered, scheduled delivery dates, and terms of payment shall be publicly available regardless of any designation to the contrary.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.533 Late Bids, Late Withdrawals, and Late Modifications

(1) Definition. Any bid received after the time and date set in the bid documents for receipt of bids is late. Any request for bid withdrawal or modification received after the time and date set for bid opening is late. Timeliness shall be determined by the officer designated to receive bids. Such determination shall be final and binding on all parties.
(2) Disposition. Late bids, late modifications, or late withdrawals shall not be considered.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.535 Time for Acceptance

Bids shall be valid for thirty (30) days unless otherwise specified in the bid documents. However, after opening bids, the city may request orally or in writing that bidders extend the time in writing during which the city may accept their bids.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.537 Award of Contract

(1) General. Unless exempt from competitive bidding, the contract, if awarded, is to be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. "Lowest responsible bidder" means the lowest bidder who has substantially complied with all prescribed bidding procedures and requirements and who has not been disqualified under ORS 279B.125

(2) Special Requirements. The bid documents shall set forth any special requirements and criteria which will be used to determine the lowest responsible bidder. No bid shall be evaluated for any requirement or criterion that is not disclosed in the bid documents, city ordinances and regulations, or state law.

(3) Product Acceptability.

(a) The bid documents shall set forth the evaluation criteria to be used in determining product acceptability. The City may require the submission of bid samples, descriptive literature, technical data, or other material, and may also provide for accomplishing any of the following prior to award: (i) Demonstration, inspection or testing of a product prior to award for such characteristics as quality or workmanship; (ii) Determination of adequacy of service facilities and availability of parts; (iii) Examination of such elements as appearance, finish, taste, or feel; or (iv) Other examinations to determine whether the product conforms with specifications.

(b) The acceptability evaluation is conducted only to determine that a bidder's offering is acceptable as provided in the bid documents. Any bidder's product which does not meet the minimum requirements shall be rejected. Product rejections are not considered bidder disqualifications and are not grounds for appeal under ORS 279B.425.

(4) Determination of Lowest Responsible Bidder. Following determination of product acceptability as set forth in subsection (3), if any is required, bids will be evaluated to determine which bidder offers the lowest cost to the City in accordance with the evaluation criteria set forth in the bid documents. Only objectively measurable criteria which are set forth in the bid documents shall be applied in determining the lowest responsible bidder. Examples of such criteria include, but are not limited to, transportation cost, volume weighing, trade-in allowances, cash discounts, depreciation allowances, cartage penalties, and ownership or life cycle cost formulas. Evaluation factors need not be precise predictors of actual future costs; but to the extent possible, such evaluation factors shall:

(a) Be reasonable estimates based upon information the public agency has available concerning future use;

(b) Treat all bids equitably; and

(c) Recognize that public policy requires acquisitions and public improvements to be accomplished at the least cost.

(5) Restrictions. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to permit contract award to a bidder submitting a higher quality item than that designated in the bid documents if such bidder is not also the lowest responsible bidder as determined under subsection (4) of this section. Further, this section does not permit negotiations with any bidder, except as provided for in ORS 279C.340.

(6) Order of Evaluation. Nothing in this section is intended to prescribe the order of timing of the evaluation of particular components of a bid or proposal. In order to save resources, the City may review price first, and then determine whether the apparent low bid or best proposal meets all product specifications.

[Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 6884, May 16, 1991; Amd. Sec. 17, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2005-20, Feb. 17, 2005]


2.539 Low Tie Bids

(1) Definition. Low tie bids are low responsible bids from responsible bidders that are identical in price, fitness, availability and quality and which meet all the requirements and criteria set forth in the bid documents.

(2) Awards.

(a) Low tie bids are subject to the Oregon preference contained in ORS 279A.120(2)(a): "In all public contracts, the public contracting agency shall prefer goods or services that have been manufactured or produced in this state if price, fitness, availability and quality are otherwise equal."

(b) Low tie bids that remain tied after application of the statutory Oregon preference shall be awarded according to the following sequence: 1. Preference shall be given to the bidder whose principal offices or headquarters are located in Oregon. 2. If a tie still remains after applying #1 above, award shall be made by drawing lots among any tied Oregon bidders. Such bidders shall be given notice and an opportunity to be present when the lots are drawn.

3. If none of the tied bidders is located in Oregon, award of the contract shall be made by drawing lots.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 18, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2005-20, Feb. 17, 2005.]


2.541 Rejection of Individual Bids or Proposals

(1) General. This section applies to rejections, in whole or in part, of individual bids or proposals. In accordance with ORS 279B.100 and 279C.395, the city may reject in whole or in part, any bid not in compliance with all prescribed bidding procedures and requirements, and may reject for good cause any bid or proposal upon a written finding of the person authorized to award the contract that it is in the public interest to do so. No bid shall be considered unless the bid security, properly executed, has been submitted with the bid as required by the bid documents.

(2) Reasons for Rejection. Reasons for rejecting a bid include but are not limited to:

(a) The bidder has not prequalified under ORS 279B.120, or has been disqualified under ORS 279C.860; or

(b) The bidder has been declared ineligible by the Commissioner of the Bureau of Labor and Industries under ORS 279.361; or

(c) The bid is not responsive, that is, it does not conform in all material respects to bid document requirements, including all prescribed public bidding procedures and requirements; or

(d) The supply, service, or construction item offered in the bid is unacceptable by reason of its failure to meet the requirements of the bid documents or permissible alternates or other acceptability criteria set forth in the bid documents; or

(e) The bidder is not capable of satisfying the terms and conditions of the public contract in a timely manner due to financial incapacity, inability to obtain bonding, loss of license, or other objective cause; or

(f) Other circumstances of the particular bid, proposal, or bidder indicate that acceptance of the bid would impair the integrity of the selection process or result in an imprudent contract by the City.

(3) Form of Business Entity. The corporate or business form of bidders shall be subject to scrutiny, so that previously disqualified bidders, or their officers and directors, may not by subterfuge, change of apparent ownership, or other adjustments in formal appearance, avoid application of any disqualification provisions of ordinance or statute.

[Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 6884, May 15, 1991; Amd. Sec. 19, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2005-20, Feb. 17, 2005.]


2.542 Rejection of all Bids or Proposals

(1) All bids or proposals may be rejected for good cause upon a written finding by the Manager, Council or Board that it is in the public interest to do so. Notification or rejection of all bids or proposals, along with the good cause justification and finding of public interest, shall be sent to all who submitted a bid.
(2) Reasons for rejecting all bids or proposals include, but are not limited to finding that:
     (a) Due to the content of or error in the bid documents, including its terms, conditions or specifications, the solicitation process unnecessarily restricted competition for the public contract; or
     (b) The price, quality, or performance presented by the lowest or best responsible bidder is, in the opinion of the Manager, Council or Board, too costly or of insufficient quality to justify acceptance of the bid or proposal; or
     (c) Misconduct, error, or ambiguous or misleading provisions in the bid documents threaten the fairness and integrity of the competitive process; or
     (d) Causes other than legitimate market forces threaten the integrity of the competitive procurement process. These causes include, but are not limited to, those that tend to limit competition such as restrictions on competition, collusion, corruption, unlawful anti-competitive conduct, and inadvertent or intentional errors in the bid documents; or
     (e) The terms, conditions or specifications did not reflect the needs of the City and a revised solicitation is required; or
     (f) Unanticipated circumstances require a change in financial planning such that the funds previously allocated to the contract are to be used for another purpose.
[Added Sec. 10, Ord. No. 6885, May 16, 1991; Amd. Sec. 20, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.543 Mistakes in Bids

(1) General. Clarification or withdrawal of a bid because of an inadvertent, nonjudgmental mistake in the bid requires careful consideration to protect the integrity of the competitive bidding system, and to assure fairness. Except as provided in this rule, if the mistake is attributable to an error in judgment, the bid may not be corrected. Bid correction or withdrawal by reason of a nonjudgmental mistake is permissible but only to the extent it is not contrary to the interest of the City or fair treatment of other bidders.
(2) Mistakes Discovered After Bid Opening but Before Award. This subsection prescribes procedures to be applied in situations where mistakes in bids are discovered after the time and date set for bid opening but before award.
     (a) Minor Informalities. Minor informalities are matters of form rather than substance that are evident from the bid documents, or insignificant mistakes that can be waived or corrected promptly without prejudice to other bidders or the city; that is, the informality does not affect price, quantity, quality, delivery, or contractual conditions except in the case of informalities involving unit price. Examples include, but are not limited to, the failure of a bidder to:
1. Return the number of duplicates of signed bids or the number of duplicates of other documents required by the bid documents;
2. Sign the bid form in the designated block so long as a signature appears in the bid documents evidencing an intent to be bound;
     (b) Mistakes Where Intended Correct Bid is Evident. If the mistake and the intended correct bid are clearly evident on the face of the bid form, or can be substantiated from accompanying documents, the manager may accept the bid. Examples of mistakes that may be clearly evident on the face of the bid form are typographical errors, errors in extending unit prices, transposition errors, and arithmetical errors. Mistakes that are clearly evident on the face of the bid form also may include instances in which the intended correct bid is made clearly evident by simple arithmetic calculations. For example, missing unit price may be established by dividing the total bid item by the quantity of units for that item, and a missing or incorrect total bid for an item may be established by multiplying the unit price by the quantity when those figures are available on the bid. For discrepancies between unit prices and extended prices, unit prices shall prevail.
     (c) Mistakes Where Intended Correct Bid is Not Evident. The city may not accept a bid in which a mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid form but the intended correct bid is not clearly evident or cannot be substantiated from accompanying documents.
[Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 6884, May 16, 1991; Amd. Sec. 21, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.544 Protest of Award


(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide an administrative procedure to resolve disputes concerning which bidder is entitled to the award before the contract is awarded. This section applies only to formal competitive bidding.
(2) Notice of Intent to Award. Prior to the award of the contract, the Manager shall send all bidders who provided an address a written notice of intent to award the contract naming the bidder who appears to be the lowest responsible bidder.
(3) Right to Protest. Any actual bidder who is adversely affected or aggrieved by the city's notice of intent to award of the contract to another bidder on the same solicitation shall submit to the city a written protest of the notice of award prior to the deadline specified in the notice, which shall not be less than seven days after the notice was mailed. The written protest shall specify the grounds upon which the protest is based. In order to be an adversely affected or aggrieved bidder with a right to submit a written protest, a bidder must itself claim to be eligible for award of the contract as the lowest responsible bidder and must be next in line for award, i.e., the protestor must claim that all lower bidders are ineligible for award because they are nonresponsive or nonresponsible. The city shall not entertain a protest submitted after the time period specified in the notice.
(4) Authority to Resolve Protests. The officer awarding the contract shall have the authority to settle or resolve a written protest submitted under (2), supra.
(5) Decision. If a protest is resolved in favor of the bidder who filed the protest, a new notice of intent to award shall be sent to all bidders.
(6) Notice of Award. Upon award of the contract, a written notice of award shall be sent to all bidders who provided an address. The notice of award of the contract shall constitute the final decision of the city on all protests.
[Added, Sec. 12, Ord. No. 6884, May 16, 1991.]

2.545 Negotiation With Bidders Prohibited.

Unless a request for proposal is used, the city shall not negotiate with any bidder prior to award of a contract, except as provided for in ORS 279C.340 when all responsive bids from responsible bidders exceed the City's cost estimate.  After award of the contract, modifications to the contract shall be made with change orders or addenda to the contract and in accordance with the exemption rules of this code.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 22, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2005-20, Feb. 17, 2005.]


2.547 Cancellation of Invitations to Bid

(1) Cancellation in the Public Interest. An invitation to bid may be cancelled, in whole or in part, and all bids may be rejected when it is in the public interest as determined by the manager or council. The reasons therefor shall be made part of the bid file.
(2) Notice of Cancellation. When an invitation to bid is cancelled prior to bid opening, notice of cancellation shall be sent to all holders of bid documents. When an invitation to bid is cancelled after bid opening, notice shall be sent to those bidders who submitted a bid. The notice of cancellation shall:
     (a) Identify the invitation to bid;
     (b) Briefly explain the reason for cancellation; and
     (c) Where appropriate, explain that an opportunity will be given to compete on any resolicitation.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 23, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.549 Disposition of Bids or Proposals if Bid Cancelled

(1) Prior to Bid Opening. When an invitation for bids is cancelled prior to bid opening, all bids received will be returned to bidders unopened, if submitted with a clearly visible return address. If there is no return address on the envelope, the bid will be opened to determine the source and then returned to sender.

(2) After Bid Opening. When all bids are rejected, the bids received shall be retained and become part of the city's permanent file.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 24, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.551 Documentation of Award

(1) Basis of Award. Following award, a record showing the basis for determining the successful bidder shall be made a part of the bid file.

(2) Contents of Award Record. The record shall consist of:
(a) Completed bid tabulation sheet.
(b) Written justification for any rejection of lower bids.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 25, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.553 Foreign Contractor

If the amount of the contract exceeds $10,000 and the contractor is a "foreign contractor," the contractor shall promptly report to the Oregon Department of Revenue on forms to be provided by the Department of Revenue the total contract price, terms of payment, length of contract and such other information as the Department of Revenue may require before final payment can be received on the contract. A copy of the report shall be forwarded to the city. The city shall satisfy itself that the above requirements have been complied with before it issues final payment on the contract. For the purposes of this rule, a foreign contractor is one who is not domiciled in or registered to do business in the State of Oregon.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 26, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.555 Availability of Award Decisions

(1) Contract Documents. A signed purchase order, price agreement, or contract document, as applicable, shall be sent to the successful bidder.

(2) Notification of Unsuccessful Bidders. Unsuccessful bidders need not be notified. Tabulations of awarded bids may be obtained for a nominal charge in person or by submitting to the city a written request stating the bid number and a self-addressed, stamped envelope.

(3) Availability of Bid Files. Completed bid files shall be available for public review at the city.

(4) Copies from Bid Files. Copies of material from bid files, other than previously described tabulation sheets, may be obtained upon payment of a reasonable copying charge.

(5) Retention of Documents. Original documents shall be retained as follows:

(a) All service contracts must be kept for two years after the contract has been completely performed.
(b) Capital contracts must be kept permanently.
(c) Goods contracts must be kept for seven (7) years after delivery of the goods.
(d) The award record shall be kept for the same period as the contract.
(e) For unsuccessful bids, the signed bid form showing quantities and prices shall be retained for one (1) year after award.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 27, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.557 Performance and Payment Bond

(1) Public Improvement Contract. Except in emergencies, when the requirement may be waived pursuant to ORS 279C.380(4), a performance bond and a payment bond in a sum equal to the contract price shall be required for all public improvement contracts.

(2) Other Public Contracts. The manager may require performance security for other public contracts. Such requirements shall be stated in the bid documents.

(3) Requirement for Surety Bond. A surety bond furnished by a surety company authorized to do business in Oregon is the only acceptable form of performance security unless specified in the bid documents.

(4) Time for Submission. Upon request by the city, the apparent successful bidder must furnish the required performance bond within 10 days. Prompt submittal of the performance bond is required to ensure timely project initiation. Failure to furnish the bond prior to the deadline may result in rejection of the bid, and forfeiture of bid security and award to the next lowest responsible bidder.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 28, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002; Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2005-20, Feb. 17, 2005.]


2.559 Life Cycle Costing

(1) In determining the lowest responsible bidder, in the award of a contract, the city may use the concept of life cycle costing if it complies with this section. As used in this section, life cycle costing means determining the cost of a product for its useful life.

(2) (a) Prior to the time of writing specifications for the product, the manager shall identify those factors which will have cost implications over the life of the product. (b) The Invitation to Bid shall set out clearly the factors and methodology to be used in life cycle cost adjustments. (c) At or after the formal bid opening, the results of life cycle costing adjustments shall be applied to the base bid, and the bidder whose total bid results in the lowest ownership cost, taking into account the life cycle costing adjustments, shall be considered the lowest responsible bidder. 

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 29, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]


2 Exemptions from Competitive Bidding (2.561 to 2.630)

2.561 Contracts Under Certain Dollar Amounts

(1) The manager may, in his discretion, let public contracts not to exceed $150,000 for the purchase of goods, materials, supplies and services without formal competitive bidding, if the manager has determined that the awarding of the contract without formal competitive bidding will result in cost savings and the following conditions are complied with:

(a) The contract is for a single project, and is not a component of or related to any other project.

(b) When the amount of the contract does not exceed $10,000, the manager should, where feasible, obtain competitive quotes.

(c) When the amount of the contract is more than $10,000, but less than $150,000, the manager shall obtain a minimum of three competitive quotes. The manager shall keep a written record of the source and amount of the quotes received. If three quotes are not available, a lesser number will suffice provided that a written record is made of the effort to obtain the quotes.

(2) The manager may, in his discretion, let public contracts for trade related projects, i.e., construction, maintenance, repair, or similar labor and materials contracts without formal competitive bidding if the manager has determined that the awarding of the contract without formal competitive bidding will result in cost savings and the following conditions are complied with:

(a) The contract is for a single project, and is not a component of or related to any other project.

(b) When the amount of the contract does not exceed $10,000, the manager should, where feasible, obtain competitive quotes.

(c) When the amount of the contract is more than $10,000, but less than $150,000, the manager shall obtain a minimum of three competitive quotes. The manager shall keep a written record of the source and amount of the quotes received. If three quotes are not available, a lesser number will suffice provided that a written record is made of the effort to obtain the quotes.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 30, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2013-116, Aug. 1, 2013; Amd. Ord. No. 2014-98, Aug. 21, 2014.]

2.563 Request for Proposal

(A)  The City may, at the discretion of the manager (or the Council, if the contract is outside the manager's authority), use request-for-proposal (RFP) competitive procurement methods subject to the following conditions:
(1) In place of Lowest Responsible Bidder and Lowest Responsive Bid, the solicitation document shall refer to the Most Advantageous Proposer and Proposal. 
(2) Generally.
Where not authorized in this code as a Class Procurement for Design-Build and Construction-Manager General Contractor procurements, the use of Request for Proposals must be specifically authorized for a Public Improvement Contract under the Competitive Bidding requirement of ORS 279C.335(1), and this code.
(3) Solicitation Documents.
In addition to the Solicitation Document requirements for Sealed Bids under this code, RFP Solicitation Documents shall conform to the following standards:
(a) The City shall set forth selection criteria in the Solicitation Document. Examples of evaluation criteria include price or cost, quality of a product or service, past performance, management, capability, personnel qualification, prior experience, compatibility, reliability, operating efficiency, expansion potential, experience of key personnel, adequacy of equipment or physical plant, financial wherewithal, sources of supply, references and warranty provisions. Evaluation factors need not be precise predictors of actual future costs and performance, but to the extent possible, such factors shall be reasonable estimates based on information available to the City;
(b) When the City is willing to negotiate terms and conditions of the Contract or allow submission of revised Proposals following discussions, the City must identify the specific terms and conditions in or provisions of the Solicitation Document that are subject to negotiation or discussion and authorize Offerors to propose certain alternative terms and conditions in lieu of the terms and conditions the City has identified as authorized for negotiation. The City must describe the evaluation and discussion or negotiation process.
(c) If the City chooses to engage in Competitive Range discussions and negotiations it will set forth that process in the Solicitation Document.
(d) When the City intends to Award Contracts to more than one Proposer, the City must identify in the Solicitation Document the manner in which it will determine the number of Contracts it will Award. The City shall also include the criteria it will use to determine how the City will endeavor to achieve optimal value, utility and substantial fairness when selecting a particular Contractor to provide Personal Services or Work from those Contractors Awarded Contracts.
(e) Competitive Proposals are not required to comply with first-tier subcontractor disclosure or reciprocal preferences.
(4) Evaluation of Proposals.
(a) Evaluation. The City shall evaluate Proposals only in accordance with criteria set forth in the RFP and applicable law and Section 2.585. The City shall evaluate Proposals to determine the Proposer or Proposers submitting the Proposal or Proposals that are the most advantageous to the City.
(i) Clarifications. In evaluating Proposals, The City may seek information from a Proposer to clarify the Proposer's Proposal. A Proposer must submit Written and Signed clarifications and such clarifications shall become part of the Proposer's Proposal.
(ii) Limited Negotiation. If the City did not permit negotiation in its Request for Proposals, the City may, nonetheless, negotiate with the highest-ranked Proposer, but may then only negotiate the:
                                      (1) Statement of Work; and
                                      (2) Contract Price as it is affected by negotiating the statement of Work.
(3) The process for discussions or negotiations when all bids exceed the engineer’s  estimate does not apply to negotiations under this section.
(b) Cancellation. Nothing in this rule shall restrict or prohibit the City from canceling the Solicitation at any time.

(B) Design-Build Contracts authorized by Request for Proposal Procurement Method.
(1) Design-Build Contract. A Design-Build Contract may be authorized, if the following types of benefits and characteristics are reasonably demonstrated:
(a) Full Integration. Obtaining, through a design-build team, engineering design, plan preparation, value engineering, construction engineering, construction, quality control and required documentation as a fully integrated function with a single point of responsibility;
(b) Value Engineering. Integrating value engineering suggestions into the design phase, as the construction contractor joins the project team early with design responsibilities under a team approach, with the potential of reducing contract changes;
(c) Risk Reduction. Reducing the risk of design flaws, misunderstandings and conflicts inherent in construction contractors building from designs in which they have had no opportunity for input, with the potential of reducing contract claims;
(d) Project Time. Shortening project time as construction activity, including, but not limited to, early submittals, mobilization, subcontracting and advance work, commences prior to completion of a "biddable" design, or where a design solution is still required, as in complex or phased projects; or
(e) Collaborative Problem Solving. Obtaining innovative design solutions through the collaboration of the contractor and design team, which would not otherwise be possible if the contractor had not yet been selected.
(f) In addition to the above, Design-Build contracts are authorized for disaster relief efforts. 
(2)  Additional Characteristics for Design-Build Contracts.
(a) Licensing. If a design-build contractor is not an Oregon licensed design City shall require that the design-build contractor disclose in its written offer that it is not an Oregon licensed design professional, and identify the Oregon licensed design professional or professionals who will provide design services. See ORS 671.030(5) regarding the offer of architectural services, and ORS 672.060(11) regarding the offer of engineering services that are appurtenant to construction services.
(b) Performance Security. The surety's obligation on performance bonds, or the offeror’s obligation on cashier's or certified checks accepted in lieu thereof, includes the preparation and completion of design and related professional services specified in the contract. This additional obligation, beyond performance of construction services, extends only to the provision of professional services and related design revisions, corrective work and associated costs prior to final completion of the contract, or for such longer time as may be defined in the contract. The obligation is not intended to be a substitute for professional liability insurance, and does not include errors and omissions or latent defects coverage.
         (c) Contract Elements.
(i) Design Services. The level or type of design services required must be clearly defined within the procurement documents and contract, along with a description of the level or type of design services previously performed for the project. The services to be performed shall be clearly delineated as either design specifications or performance standards, and performance measurements must be identified.
(ii) Professional Liability. The contract shall clearly identify the liability of design professionals with respect to the design-build contractor and the City, as well as requirements for professional liability insurance.
(iii) Risk Allocation. The contract shall clearly identify the extent to which the City requires an express indemnification from the design-build contractor for any failure to perform, including professional errors and omissions, design warranties, construction operations and faulty work claims.
(iv) Warranties. The contract shall clearly identify any express warranties made to the City regarding characteristics or capabilities of the completed project, regardless of whether errors occur as the result of improper design, construction, or both, including any warranty that a design will be produced that meets the stated project performance and budget guidelines.
(v) Incentives. The contract shall clearly identify any economic incentives and disincentives, the specific criteria that apply and their relationship to other financial elements of the contract.
(vi) Honoraria. If allowed by the requests for proposals, honoraria or stipends may be provided for early design submittals from qualified finalists during the solicitation process on the basis that the City is benefitted from such deliverables.
(3) Not all of the above characteristics must be shown to procure a Design-Build contract.  Further, characteristics of CM/GC contracts may be included in a Design-Build contract procurement.  The procurement documents shall reflect whether and why characteristics were considered or not. 
 
(C) Construction Manager / General Contractor (CM/GC) Contracts Authorized
(1) CM/CG Contract. A CM/GC Contract may be authorized, if the following types of benefits and characteristics are reasonably demonstrated:
(a) Time Savings. The public improvement has significant schedule ramifications, such that concurrent design and construction are necessary in order to meet critical deadlines and shorten the overall duration of construction. Operational and financial data may be considered that show significant savings or increased opportunities for generating revenue as a result of early completion, as well as less disruption to public facilities as a result of shortened construction periods;
(b) Cost Savings. Early contractor input during the design process is expected to contribute to significant cost savings. Value engineering, building systems analysis, life cycle costing analysis and construction planning may be considered that lead to cost savings. Any special factors influencing this analysis should be considered, including high rates of inflation, market uncertainty due to material and labor fluctuations or scarcities, and the need for specialized construction expertise due to technical challenges; or
(c) Technical Complexity. The public improvement presents significant technical complexities that are best addressed by a collaborative or team effort between the City, design professionals and contractor, in which the contractor will assist in addressing specific project challenges through pre-construction services. The need for contractor input on issues such as operations of the facility during construction, tenant occupancy, public safety, delivery of an early budget or GMP, financing, historic preservation, difficult remodeling projects and projects requiring complex phasing or highly coordinated scheduling may be considered.
(d) In addition to the above, Design-Build contracts are authorized for disaster relief efforts. 
(2) Additional characteristics of CM/GC contracts. 
(a) Basis for Payment. The CM/GC process adds specified Construction Manager services to traditional general contractor services, requiring full contract performance within a negotiated Guaranteed Maximum Price (GMP). The basis for payment is reimbursable direct costs as defined under the contract, plus a fee constituting full payment for work and services rendered, which together shall not exceed the GMP.
(b) Setting the GMP. The GMP shall be set at an identified time, after supporting information reasonably considered necessary to its use has been developed, and the supporting information shall define with particularity both what is included and excluded from the GMP. A set of drawings and specifications shall be produced establishing the GMP scope.
(c) Adjustments to the GMP. The contract shall clearly identify the standards or factors under which changes or additional work will be considered outside of the work scope that warrants an increase in the GMP, as well as criteria for decreasing the GMP. The GMP shall not be increased without a concomitant increase to the scope defined at the establishment of the GMP or most recent GMP amendment. 
(d) Cost Savings. The contract shall clearly identify the disposition of any cost savings resulting from completion of the work below the GMP; that is, under what circumstances, if any, the CM/GC might share in those cost savings, or whether they accrue only to the City's benefit. Unless there is a clearly articulated reason for sharing such cost savings, they should accrue to the City.
(e) Cost Reimbursement. The contract shall clearly identify what items or categories of items are eligible for cost reimbursement within the GMP, including any category of "General Conditions" (a general grouping of direct costs that are not separately invoiced, subcontracted or included within either overhead or fee), and may also incorporate a mutually-agreeable cost-reimbursement standard.
 (f) Audit. Cost reimbursements shall be made subject to final audit adjustment, and the contract shall establish an audit process to ensure that contract costs are allowable, properly allocated and reasonable.
(g) Fee. Compensation for the CM/GC's services shall be paid on the basis of a fee that is inclusive of profit, overhead and all other indirect or non-reimbursable costs. Costs determined to be included within the fee should be expressly defined wherever possible.
The fee, first expressed as a proposed percentage of all reimbursable costs, shall be identified during and become an element of the selection process. It shall subsequently be expressed as a fixed amount when the GMP is established.
(h) Incentives. The contract shall clearly identify any economic incentives, the specific criteria that apply and their relationship to other financial elements of the contract (including the GMP).
(i) Controlled Insurance Programs. For projects anticipated to exceed $75 million, the contract shall clearly identify whether an owner controlled or contractor controlled insurance program is anticipated or allowable. If so, the contract shall clearly identify (1) anticipated cost savings from reduced premiums, claims reductions and other factors, (2) the allocation of cost savings, and (3) safety responsibilities and/or incentives.
(j) Early Work. The Request for proposals shall clearly identify, whenever feasible, the circumstances under which any of the following activities may be authorized and undertaken for compensation prior to establishing the GMP:
                        (1) Early procurement of materials and supplies;
                        (2) Early release of bid packages for such things as site development; and
                        (3) Other advance work related to critical components of the contract.
(k) Subcontractor Selection. The contract shall clearly describe the methods by which the CM/GC shall receive, open and record bids or price quotations, and competitively select subcontractors to perform the contract work based upon price, as well as the mechanisms by which the City may waive those requirements. The documents shall also describe completely the methods by which the CM/GC and its affiliated or subsidiary entities may compete to perform the work, including, at a minimum, advance notice of the CM/GC's intent to compete and a public opening of bids or quotations by an independent party.
(l) Subcontractor Approvals and Protests. The contract shall clearly establish whether the City must approve subcontract awards, and to what extent, if any, the City will resolve procurement protests of subcontractors and suppliers. The related procedures and reporting mechanisms should be established with certainty, including whether the CM/GC acts as the City's representative in this process and whether the CM/GC's subcontracting records are considered to be public records. In any event, the City shall retain the right to monitor the subcontracting process in order to protect City’s interests.
(m) CM/GC Self-Performance. Whenever feasible, the contract shall establish the elements of work the CM/GC may self-perform without competition, including, for example, the work of the job-site general conditions. In the alternative, the contract shall include a provision for City approval of CM/GC self-performance.
(n) Socio-Economic Programs. The contract shall clearly identify conditions relating to any required socio-economic programs (such as Affirmative Action or Prison Inmate Labor Programs), including the manner in which such programs affect the CM/GC's subcontracting requirements, the enforcement mechanisms available, and the respective responsibilities of the CM/GC and City.
(3) Not all of the above characteristics must be shown to procure a CM/GC contract.  Further, characteristics of Design-Build contracts may be included in a CM/GC contract procurement.  The procurement documents shall reflect whether and why characteristics were considered or not. 
 
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 31, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2013-116, Aug. 1, 2013.]


 

2.565 Emergencies

(1) The city council or the city manager may, in their discretion, let public contracts without formal competitive bidding if an emergency exists and the emergency consists of circumstances creating a substantial risk of loss, damage, interruption of services or threat to public health or safety that could not have been reasonably foreseen and requires prompt execution of a contract to remedy the condition. The city manager's authority under this exemption is limited to contracts under $50,000.

(2) The city council shall, when it uses this exemption, adopt a resolution indicating the existence of the emergency stating with specificity the emergency conditions necessitating the prompt execution of the contract. The city manager shall report to the council in writing at its next meeting all contracts awarded under this section and the specific justification for the use of the exemption.

(3) Any contract awarded under this exemption shall be awarded within 60 days following declaration of the emergency unless an extension is granted pursuant to ORS 279B.080 and 279C.335(5).

[Amd. Sec. 13, Ord. No. 6884, May 16, 1991; Amd. Sec. 32, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002; Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2005-20, Feb. 17, 2005.]


2.567 Equipment Repair and Overhaul

Contracts for equipment repair or overhaul may be let without formal competitive bidding. Where practicable, the department head should obtain competitive quotes.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 33, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.569 Contracts for Price Regulated Items

The city may, without competitive bidding, contract for the direct purchase of goods or service where the rate or price for the goods or services being purchased is established by federal, state, or local regulatory authority.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 34, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.571 Gasoline, Diesel Fuel, Heating Oil, Lubricants and Asphalts

The city is exempt from formal competitive bidding requirements for the purchase of gasoline, diesel fuel, heating oil, lubricants and asphalts if the city seeks competitive quotes from a majority of vendors in the area, makes its purchases from the least expensive source, and retains written justification for the purchase made.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 35, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.573 Copyrighted Materials

If the contract is for the purchase of copyrighted materials and there is only one known supplier available for such goods, the manager may contract for the purchase of the goods without competitive bidding or competitive quoting.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 36, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.575 Periodicals

The city may purchase subscriptions for periodicals, including journals, magazines, and similar publications without competitive bidding or competitive quoting.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 37, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.577 Purchases of Used Personal Property

The manager may purchase used personal property or used vehicles for $50,000 or less without competitive bidding if the manager has determined that the direct purchase without competitive bidding will result in cost savings. Three competitive quotes shall be obtained. If three quotes are not available, a written record must be made of the attempt to obtain quotes.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Ord. No. 7148, June 18, 1992; Amd. Sec. 38, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.579 Advertising and Tourist Promotion Contracts

The manager may purchase advertising without competitive bidding or competitive quoting. Contracts for promoting the use of the city of Medford for recreational, cultural, convention and tourist-related activities and services are exempt from competitive bidding and competitive quoting.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985.; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6613, May 3, 1990; Amd. Sec. 39, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.581 Investment Contracts

The Finance Director may, without competitive bidding, contract for the purpose of the investment of public funds or the borrowing of funds by the city when such investment or borrowing of funds is contracted pursuant to duly enacted statute, ordinance, charter, or council resolution, and any administrative regulations prescribed by the city manager.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 40, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.582 Selection of Architectural, Engineering, Land Surveying, Photogrammetric Mapping, Transportation Planner Services and Related Services Contracts

(1)  Application.
This section applies to the screening and selection of architects, engineers and land surveyors, photogrammetrists, transportation planners and providers of related services.  
 
Related services means services that are related to planning, designing, engineering or overseeing public improvement projects or components of public improvement projects, including but not limited to landscape architectural services, facilities planning services, energy planning services, space planning services, hazardous substances or hazardous waste or toxic substances testing services, cost estimating services, appraising services, material testing services, mechanical system balancing services, commissioning services, project management services, construction management services and owner’s representation services or land-use planning services.
 
Transportation planning services means transportation planning services for projects that require compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act, 42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.

This code does not apply to the screening and selection of the above services when using the design-build or construction manager/general contractor method of selection, when the architectural, engineering, survey, photogrammetry or transportation planning and related services do not constitute a majority of the total amount of those contracts.

This section does not apply to screening and selection of the above services when the estimated amount of those services does not exceed $100,000.  In those circumstances, and in emergencies, the services may be contracted by direct procurement with no formal solicitation required, and the City may use any reasonable or lawful contracting method to procure the services. 

This section does not apply to a contract forarchitectural, engineering,photogrammetric mapping, transportation planning or land surveying services or related servicesif the project described in the contract consists of work that has been substantially described, planned or otherwise previously studied or rendered in an earlier contract with the consultant that was previously awarded by the City and the new contract is a continuation of the project.
 
(2) Quality Based Selection.
The City shall select consultants to provide architectural, engineering, survey, photogrammetry or transportation planning and related services based on the consultant’s qualifications for the type of professional service required.  

The City’s screening and selection procedures under this section, regardless of the estimated cost of the consultant services, may include considering each proposer’s:  
(a) Specialized experience, capabilities and technical competence which the proposer may demonstrate with its proposed approach and methodology to meet the project requirements;
(b) Resources committed to perform the work and the proportion of the time that the proposer’s staff would spend on the project, including time for specialized services, within the applicable time limits;
(c) Record of past performance, including but not limited to price and cost data from previous projects, quality of work, ability to meet schedules, cost control and contract administration;
(d) Ownership status and employment practices regarding minority, women and emerging small businesses or historically underutilized businesses;
          (e) Availability to the project locale;
          (f) Familiarity with the project locale; and
          (g) Proposed project management techniques.

When using Quality Based Selection, the City may use a request for proposal process with the restriction that any price or other cost-related component be sealed until after selection of the consultant.  The fact that the consultant is required to submit sealed cost-related components neither requires the City to accept, nor prohibits the City from accepting, the costs-based information.  The City shall rank the proposers and shall negotiate with the highest ranked proposer. 
 
(3) Pricing Information and Negotiating a Contract.
The City may use pricing policies and proposals or other pricing information including the number of hours proposed for the service required, expenses, hourly rates and overhead, to determine the consultant compensation only after the City has selected a proposer to negotiate with. The City and the selected proposer shall mutually discuss and refine the scope of services for the project and shall negotiate conditions, including but not limited to compensation level and performance schedule, based on the scope of services.  The compensation level must be reasonable and fair as determined solely by the City.  

If the City and the initial selected proposer are unable for any reason to negotiate a contract at a compensation level that is reasonable and fair to the City, the City shall in writing terminate negotiations with the selected proposer.  The City may then negotiate with the other proposers by order of rank.
 
The City may at any time terminate the consultant selection process, as determined to be in the best interests of the City.

 (4) Disclosure of Proposals.
The City will not make available for public inspection the contents of the proposals until after the notice of intent to award has been sent. 

Whether or not a proposal is opened at a public meeting, the City shall withhold from disclosure to the public trade secrets, as defined in ORS 192.501 and information submitted to the City in confidence as described in ORS 192.502, that are contained in a proposal, so long as the trade secrets and confidential information has been identified by the proposer.

If the solicitation is cancelled, the City shall return to all proposers their proposals.  The City shall keep a list of all such returned proposals and proposers. 
 
[Added, Ord. No. 2011-248, Dec. 15, 2011.]

2.583 Personal Service Contracts

(1) The following are personal service contracts:
(a) Contracts for services performed as an independent contractor in a professional capacity, including but not limited to the services of an accountant; attorney; architectural or land use planning consultant; physician or dentist; registered professional engineer; appraiser or surveyor; passenger aircraft pilot; aerial photographer; or data processing consultant.
(b) Contracts for services as an artist in the performing or fine arts, including but not limited to persons identified as photographer, filmmaker, painter, weaver, printmaker or sculptor.
(c) Contracts for services of a specialized, creative and research-oriented, noncommercial nature.
(d) Contracts for services as a consultant.
(e) Contracts for educational and human custodial care services.
 
(2) The following are not personal service contracts:
(a) Contracts, even though in a professional capacity, if predominantly for a product, e.g., a contract with a landscape architect to design a garden is for personal services, but a contract to design a garden and supply all the shrubs and trees is predominately for a tangible product.
(b) A service contract to supply labor which is of a type that can generally be done by any competent worker, e.g., janitorial, security guard, crop spraying, laundry and landscape maintenance service contracts.
(c) Contracts for trade-related activities considered to be labor and material contracts.
(d) Contracts for services of a trade-related activity, even though a specific license is required to engage in the activity. Examples are repair and/or maintenance of all types of equipment or structures.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 41, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.585 Screening and Selection

(1) Except those contracts subject to Qualifications Based Selection under code Section 2.582 and state law, the procedures set forth in this section shall be followed in the selection and screening of all contractors for personal services as defined in Section 2.583.

(2) No formal selection process is required if:

(a) The amount of the contract does not exceed $10,000, or
(b) The contract is for legal services performed by an attorney, or
(c) The contractor is a person designated to represent the City in administrative proceedings, arbitration or labor negotiations. However, the official who awards the contract shall make a written public record of the reasons for selection of the contractor.

(3) When the amount of the contract is more than $10,000 but less than $150,000, the Manager may obtain a minimum of three competitive quotes. The Manager shall keep a written record of the source and amount of the quotes received. If three quotes are not available, a lesser number will suffice provided that a written record is made of the effort to obtain the quotes.

(4) When the amount of the contract exceeds the Manager's obligation authority, the contractor shall be selected by the City Council.

(5)  Design-Build and Construction Manager/General Contractor contracts shall be awarded after all proposals have been reviewed by a screening committee.  The screening committee shall include a non-voting ex officio City Council member appointed by the Mayor. The committee shall always include two staff members.  The Council or City Manager, for contracts within the Manager's authority, shall give due consideration to the recommendations of the screening committee.

(6) Proposals to be reviewed by a screening committee under subsection (4) of this section shall be solicited using competitive request-for-proposal methods subject to the conditions contained in Section 2.563.

[Amd. Sec. 14, Ord. No. 6884, May 16, 1991; Amd. Sec. 42, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2013-116, Aug. 1, 2013.]

2.587 Single Seller of Product Required

Subject to the requirements of Section 2.605, the city may purchase without competitive bidding if there is only one seller of a product of the quality required, or if the efficient utilization of existing equipment or supplies requires specification of a compatible product for which there is only one seller. Whenever this exemption is used, a written record shall be made of the circumstances justifying it.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 43, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.589 Insurance Contracts

(1) Property, casualty, and liability insurance shall be purchased by the City Manager through a licensed insurance agent designated by the City Manager as "agent of record." Among the services to be provided by such agent is the securing of competitive proposals from insurance carriers for all coverages for which the agent of record is given responsibility. Actual selection of insurance carriers and policies shall remain subject to the discretionary approval of the City Manager.

(2) Prior to the selection of an agent of record, the City Manager shall publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the City generally describing the nature of the insurance the City will require and requesting proposals from licensed insurance agents who wish to be appointed agent of record.

(3) In selecting an agent of record, the City Manager shall select the agent(s) most likely to perform the most cost effective services. In determining which proposal is the most cost effective, the City Manager shall consider service, coverage and cost. Proposals for agent of record designation shall be referred to a screening committee appointed by the City Manager and consisting of at least two members of his staff and at least one outside expert in the field of public entity insurance who are not officers or employees of the City. The screening committee shall examine the proposals and make a recommendation to the City Manager as to the relative merit of the proposals submitted.

(4) Any appointment period shall not exceed three years. Agents may serve more than one appointment period. Upon expiration of an appointment period, the agent may be reappointed at the discretion of the Manager without requesting proposals from other agents.

(5) Employee benefit insurance and workers compensation coverage and other types of insurance not specified herein, may be purchased through an agent of record selected in the manner provided herein, or the City Manager may purchase specific insurance contracts from any agent or insurance carrier.

(6) The dollar amount limits of Section 2.503(2) shall not apply to purchase of insurance under authority granted herein.

[Add. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Ord. No. 5900, Aug. 6, 1987; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5957, Aug. 20, 1987; Amd. Ord. No. 6088, Apr. 7, 1988; Amd. Ord. No. 6831, Mar. 21, 1991; Amd. Ord No. 7108, Apr. 16, 1992; Amd. Ord. No. 7826, Mar. 2, 1995; Amd. Sec. 44, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.591 Affirmative Action Contracts and Grant Agreements

Affirmative action contracts aiding minority or disadvantaged groups and grant agreements with nonprofit corporations and other charitable organizations are exempt from competitive bidding and other requirements of ORS Chapter 279 pursuant to ORS 279A.100.

[Add. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6613, May 3, 1990; Amd. Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2005-20, Feb. 17, 2005.]


2.593 Contract Amendments (Including Change Orders and Extra Work)

Any contract amendment for additional work including change orders, extra work, field orders, or other change in the original specifications which increases the original contract price, may be made with the contractor without competitive bidding subject to the following conditions:
(1) A binding obligation exists on the parties covering the terms and conditions of the additional work; or
(2) The amount of the aggregate cost increase resulting from all amendments shall not exceed 25% of the initial contract.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 45, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.595 Requirements Contracts

(1) The city may enter into requirements contracts whereby it is agreed to purchase requirements for an anticipated need at a pre-determined unit price providing the following conditions are complied with:
(a) The contract must be let by competitive procurement based on the city's estimate of the quantities required.
(b) The term of the contract including renewals does not exceed three years.
 
(2) The city may use State of Oregon requirements contracts using the procedures prescribed by the State. The city may use the requirements contract entered into by another public contracting agency when a formal inter-agency agreement exists between the two agencies.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 6613, May 3, 1990; Amd. Sec. 46, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.596 Purchase of Fasteners

The purchase of fasteners is exempt from competitive bidding. For purposes of this section, the term "fasteners" includes bolts, nuts, pins, clevises, wire ends, wire ties, hydraulic and pipe fittings, and other miscellaneous small parts which fasten two items together.
[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 7765, Nov. 17, 1994.]

2.597 Data and Word Processing Contracts

Contracts for acquisition of data and word processing hardware and systems software may be let using alternate competitive procurement methods subject to the following conditions:
(a) If the contract amount does not exceed $50,000, the city shall, as a minimum, follow informal competitive procurement methods. Prior to selection of a vendor, reasonable efforts will be made to solicit proposals from three or more vendors. Justification of award shall be documented and become a public record of the city.
(b) If the contract amount exceeds $50,000, the city may use the request for proposal process (Section 2.563) and shall solicit written proposals. Solicitations shall be requested from appropriate vendors appearing on lists compiled by the manager or by advertising. The city shall document the evaluation and award process, which will be part of the public record justifying the award.
(c) If the amount of the contract exceeds $500,000, in addition to the requirements of subsection (1)(b) of this code, the city shall:
1. Provide an opportunity for vendors to review requirements and, prior to submitting proposals, comment on any specifications which they feel limit competition;
2. Provide that residual values be considered only if they are clearly ascertainable; and
3. Provide that cost of conversion will be minimized by the city. Vendors competing in this category of procurement shall be given the opportunity to review the evaluation of their proposal before final management review and selection. If there is less than a 1% difference between the performance/cost ratio of the highest ranked proposals, appropriate consideration must be given to the procurement of equipment which will encourage competition.
 
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 47, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.599 Telecommunications Systems Contracts

(1) Contracts for acquisition of telecommunications system hardware and software may be let using alternate competitive procurement methods subject to the following conditions:
(a) If the contract amount does not exceed $50,000, the city shall as a minimum obtain competitive quotes. Prior to selection of a vendor reasonable efforts will be made to solicit proposals from three or more vendors. Justification of award shall be documented and become a public record of the city.
(b) If the contract amount exceeds $50,000, the city may use the request-for-proposal process (Section 2.563) and shall solicit written proposals. Solicitation shall be requested from appropriate vendors appearing on lists compiled by the manager or by advertising.
 
(2) The telecommunications solicitation authorized in subsection 1(b) shall:
(a) State the contractual requirements in the solicitation document;
(b) State the evaluation criteria to be applied in awarding the contract and the roles of any evaluation committee. Criteria that would be used to identify the proposal that best meets the city's needs may include, but not be limited to cost, quality, service, compatibility, product reliability, operating efficiency, and expansion potential;
(c) State the provisions made for vendors to comment on any specifications which they feel limit competition.

 
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 48, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.601 Specification of Particular Brand Names or Products

(1) Specifications for public contracts shall not expressly or implicitly require any product of any particular manufacturer or seller except pursuant to an exemption under this code.
(2) If there is no other practical method of specification, public contracting agencies may designate a particular brand name, make, or product "or equal", but this practice should be avoided whenever practicable.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 49, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.603 Copyrighted Materials

The city may specify a specific copyrighted product. This exemption does not include patent or trade mark goods.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 50, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.605 Single Manufacturer or Compatible Products

(1) If there is only one manufacturer or seller of a product of the quality required, or if the efficient utilization of the existing equipment or supplies requires a compatible product of a particular manufacturer or seller, the city may specify such particular product subject to the following conditions:
(a) The product is selected on the basis of the most competitive offer considering quality and cost. The term "cost" includes not only the product price but also other items of expense such as costs related to quality or conversion.
(b) Prior to awarding the contract, the city has made reasonable effort to notify all known vendors of competing or comparable products of the intended specifications and invited such vendors to submit competing proposals. If the purchase does not exceed $50,000, such notice and invitation may be informal. If the amount of the purchase exceeds $50,000, such notice shall include advertisement in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the contract is to be performed and shall be timely to allow competing vendors a reasonable opportunity to make proposals.
 
(2) If the amount of the purchase exceeds $50,000 and is not also pursuant to the data and word processing exemption, Section 2.597, the city shall document its actions in the bid file. Such documentation shall include:
(a) A brief description of the proposed contract or contracts.
(b) A detailed description of the reasons why the product and/or seller was selected and any competing products and/or sellers that were rejected. The description shall also include the efforts taken by city to notify and invite proposals from competing vendors.
 
(3) If the city intends to make several purchases of the product of a particular manufacturer or seller for a period not to exceed two years, it may so state in the documentation required by subsection (1)(b) and section (2), and such documentation shall be sufficient notice as to subsequent purchases.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 51, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.607 Product Prequalification

(1) When it is impractical to create specific design or performance specifications for a type of product to be purchased, the city may specify a list of approved products by reference to particular manufacturers or sellers in accordance with the following product prequalification procedure:
(a) The manager has made reasonable efforts to notify all known manufacturers or vendors of competitive products of its intention to accept applications for inclusion in its list of prequalified products. Notification shall include advertisement in a trade journal of state-wide distribution when possible. In lieu of advertising, the manager may notify vendors and manufacturers appearing on the appropriate list maintained by the city.
(b) The manager permits application for prequalification of similar products up to 15 days prior to advertisement for bids on the product.
 
(2) If an application for inclusion in a list of prequalified products is denied, or an existing prequalification revoked, the manager shall notify the applicant in writing. The applicant may appeal to the board (council). [Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 52, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.609 Brand Name or Mark Exemption Applications

The manager may apply for and receive a brand name or mark exemption ruling from the board (council) for current and contemplated future purchases. Applications shall contain the following information:
(1) A brief description of the contract or contracts to be covered. The description should include contemplated future purchases.
(2) The brand name, mark, or product to be specified.
(3) The reasons for seeking the exemption.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 53, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.611 Specific Exemptions

(1) The manager may request a ruling from the board (council) exempting a particular contract or contracts from the bidding requirements of ORS 279B.050(1) which are not otherwise exempted under this code. The request shall contain the following:

(a) The nature of the project;

(b) Estimated cost of the project;

(c) A narrative description of the cost savings anticipated by the exemption from competitive bidding and the reasons competitive bidding would be inappropriate.

(d) Proposed alternative contracting and purchasing practices to be employed; and

(e) The estimated date by which it would be necessary to let the contract.

(2) The review authority may require such additional information as is deemed necessary to determine whether a specific contract is to be exempt from competitive bidding.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 54, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002; Amd. Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2005-20, Feb. 17, 2005.]


2.613 Conditions of Exemptions

The board (council) may grant specific exemptions under ORS 279B.085(3) or 279B.215(2) under the following conditions:

(1) Exemption from competitive bidding may be granted if the exemption is not likely to encourage favoritism in public contracts or substantially diminish competition and will result in substantial cost savings.

(2) Products may be specified by brand name, mark, manufacturer or seller upon any of the following findings:

(a) It is unlikely that such exemption will encourage favoritism in the awarding of public contracts or substantially diminish competition for public contracts;

(b) The specification of a product by brand name or mark, or the product of a particular manufacturer or seller, would result in substantial cost savings to the city;

(c) There is only one manufacturer or seller of the product of the quality required, or

(d) Efficient utilization of existing equipment or supplies requires acquisition of compatible equipment or supplies.

[Amd. Sec. 15, Ord. No. 6884, May 16, 1991; Amd. Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2005-20, Feb. 17, 2005.]


2.615 Auction Sales of Personal Property

Personal property may be sold at auction if the manager determines that the auction contemplated will probably result in a higher net return than if the property were sold by competitive written bid.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 55, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002.]

2.617 Sales of Personal Property

The manager may sell personal property, including recyclable or reclaimed materials, without formal competitive bidding if the manager has determined that a negotiated sale will result in increased net revenue and the following conditions are complied with:

(1) When the current market value per item is deemed to be less than $1,000, the manager may establish a selling price, schedule and advertise a sale date, and sell to the first qualified buyer meeting the sale terms; or

(2) When the current value per item is deemed to exceed $1,000, the personal property must be offered for competitive written bid and be advertised in accordance with ORS 279B.055, or be offered for sale at public auction in accordance with Section 2.615. If no bids are received or if a determination is made that the market value of the property exceeds the offer of the highest responsible bidder, all bids may be rejected and the manager may negotiate a sale subject to the following conditions:

(a) An appraisal of the market value of the property is obtained and documented and the negotiated sale price exceeds the market value; or

(b) The sale amount exceeds the highest bid received through the bidding or auction process.

(3) The city manager may, where he deems it to be in the best interest of the city, transfer any surplus property, regardless of the value of the item, to the State of Oregon Department of Administrative Services to be sold under an intergovernmental agreement providing for surplus property disposal in Jackson County, Oregon.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 1998-264, Dec. 10, 1998; Amd. Sec. 56, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002; Amd. Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2005-20, Feb. 17, 2005.]


2.619 Donations of Personal Property

(1) The manager may transfer surplus personal property, including recyclable or reclaimed materials, with or without remuneration without competitive bids to the following activities:
(a) Another public agency; or
(b) Any sheltered workshop, work activity center or group care home which operates under contract or agreement with, or grant from, any state agency and which is certified to receive federal surplus property; or
(c) Any recognized non-profit activity which is certified to receive federal surplus property.
(d) Recognized private non-profit social or health service activities.

(2) Transfers under subsection (1) are subject to the following conditions:
(a) A determination has been made that the property is not needed for other public purposes;
(b) If the property has a current market value of $250 or more, the donation or sale shall:
1. Be approved by the city council.
2. Be documented to be clearly in the public interest.

(3) The City Manager may approve the transfer of personal property that was assigned to a fire or police department employee, such as a badge or shield, to an employee who has been promoted, or a badge, shield, fire helmet, or weapon to an employee retiring in good standing provided the City is reimbursed for the current market value of the badge, shield, fire helmet, or weapon by the employee, Medford Police Association, or Medford Firefighters Association prior to the transfer. Nothing in this section is intended to apply to property such as computers, calculators, fax machines, telephones, palm pilots, or any other mechanical or technical equipment.

(4) The city shall maintain a record of all transfers, donations or sales authorized by this section.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 57, Ord. No. 2002-37, March 7, 2002; Amd. Ord. No. 2003-39, Feb. 20, 2003.]

2.621 Local Contract Review Board

The council is hereby designated as the local contract review board and with respect to purchasing and contract concerns of this city shall have all the powers granted to a Local Contract Review Board by ORS 279A.060.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 17, Ord. No. 2005-20, Feb. 17, 2005.]


2.623 Authority of Board of Water Commissioners

The board of water commissioners is hereby granted full authority to act as a Local Contract Review Board with all the powers authorized by ORS 279A.060 for all contracting matters relating to the extension, maintenance, repair and operation of the city water system or systems.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5510, Sept. 5, 1985; Amd. Sec. 18, Ord. No. 2005-20, Feb. 17, 2005.]


2.630 Manager's Authority to Execute Grant Agreements

The City Manager is hereby delegated authority to execute grant agreements with agencies which provide grant funds to the city so long as the total amount of any non-reimbursable costs which the grant agreement would obligate the city to incur does not exceed the sum of $50,000 and the funds to cover those non-reimbursable costs have been budgeted.
[Added Ord. No. 8305, March 13, 1997.]

2 Jury Trials (2.705 to 2.755)

2.705 Right to Trial by Jury

(1) A person charged with any offense defined and made punishable by code as a crime shall have the right to trial by jury upon filing written demand with the municipal court at least six days, excluding Sundays and legal holidays, prior to the trial date set by the municipal court.

(2) The trial of any offense defined and made punishable by this code as a violation shall be by the court without a jury.

(3) The city shall have the burden of proving the alleged violation by a preponderance of the evidence.

(4) The defendant may not be required to be a witness in the trial of a violation.

[Amd. Ord. No. 4498, Nov. 19, 1981; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2000-55, April 6, 2000.]

2.710 Number of Jurors

The jury shall consist of six persons sworn to try the cause for which they are called. The jurors shall be selected as provided in sections 2.715 to 2.730

2.715 Term of Court

The terms of municipal court jurors shall be limited to one jury trial within a 24 month period.
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2017-38, April 20, 2017 to be effective May 1, 2017.]

2.720 Jury List

On January 1 of each year, the court clerk shall prepare a jury list from the latest tax roll and registration books used at the last city election in the same manner in which jury lists are prepared for circuit courts.
[Amd. Ord. No. 4498, Nov. 19, 1981.]

2.725 Jury Panel

The clerk of the court shall generate by means of electronic equipment or other random selection method, a number of names sufficient to meet the projected need for a jury panel for a particular date.
[Amd. Ord. No. 4498, Nov. 19, 1981; Replaced Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2017-38, April 20, 2017 to be effective May 1, 2017.]

2.730 Jury Selection

At least six days, excluding Sundays and legal holidays, prior to the trial date, the defendant or his attorney and the city attorney shall appear before the municipal judge or his designate for the selection of the jury. The time and place of the selection shall be as designed by the court, and the judge shall notify the defendant or his attorney and the city attorney of the time and place. The judge or his designate shall then select, by lot, ten names of persons from the jury panel, the first six selected to serve as jurors and the remaining four to serve as alternate jurors. The defendant or his attorney may then challenge by peremptory challenge six of the prospective jurors, and the city may challenge by peremptory challenge four of the prospective jurors. The order of challenges shall be that the defendant or his attorney may challenge three, then the city attorney may challenge two, then the defendant or his attorney may again challenge three and the city attorney may challenge two. Additional names shall be selected, by lot, to replace those jurors challenged. When six jurors and four alternates have been selected, they shall be notified to appear at the appointed time and place and shall constitute the trial jury.
[Amd. Ord. No. 4498, Nov. 19, 1981.]

2.735 [Repealed Ord. No. 4498, Nov. 19, 1981.]


2.740 [Repealed Ord. No.4498, Nov. 19, 1981.]


2.745 Payment of Jurors

Those jurors notified and who appear at trial shall receive compensation from the city in the amount of $10.00 for each day of attendance upon the municipal court.
[Repealed Ord. No. 4498, Nov. 19, 1981.]

2.750 [Repealed Ord. No. 4498, Nov. 19, 1981.]


2.755 Court Costs

(1) Whenever the municipal court imposes a fine or orders a bail forfeiture as a penalty for violation of an ordinance, this code, or a state traffic law, except parking violations, an assessment in addition to the fine or bail forfeiture and in addition to any assessment required to be collected under ORS 137.015 shall be imposed by the court. The amount of the city assessment for costs shall be the same as and in addition to the state assessment imposed under ORS 137.015. When any deposit of bail is made for an offense to which this section applies, the person making such deposit shall also deposit a sufficient amount to include the city assessment prescribed in this section as well as the state assessment.

(2) If bail is forfeited or a fine is imposed, the city assessment imposed by this section shall be deposited to the general fund of the city to help defray the cost of operating the municipal court. The state assessment imposed under ORS 137.015 shall be forwarded to the Department of Revenue. If bail is returned, the assessments made shall also be returned.

[Amd. Ord. No. 4498, Nov. 19, 1981.]

2.760 [Repealed Ord. No. 4498, Nov. 19, 1981.]


2.775 [Repealed Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5358, Feb. 7, 1985; See 1.025]


2.780 [Repealed Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5358, Feb. 7, 1985.]


2 Searches, Arrests and Warrants (2.805 to 2.815)

2.805 Scope and Purpose

The city charter authorizes the council to enact ordinances and adopt regulations not inconsistent with the constitution and laws of the state to maintain and establish the peace, good order, health, cleanliness, prosperity and general welfare of the city. To attain these objectives, the council finds that it is essential to provide for the procedures, conditions and manner by which arrests may be made in aid of the enforcement of city ordinances and this code, and the procedure and conditions under which search warrants may be issued by the council to conform to constitutional requirements. It is the intention of the council that the provisions of sections 2.805 to 2.815 be liberally construed to achieve the purposes above set forth and that they be interpreted and applied in a manner compatible with the law of the state.

2.810 General Search Warrants

(1) A search warrant may be issued by the court for the search of any premises within the city when the property sought in the search was used in the commission of, or would constitute evidence of, a violation of ordinance or this code.
(2) A search warrant issued under this section shall be executed by the municipal judge and directed to the chief of police or a city police officer and shall command the person or persons to search for personal property of a particular nature at a particular place and to bring it before the municipal court.
(3) A search warrant shall not be issued except upon probable cause shown by affidavit, particularly naming or describing a person and describing the property and the place to be searched.
(4) The issuance, execution and return of a search warrant, and the disposition of property seized, shall be governed by the provisions set forth in ORS 133.525 to 133.703, except that the powers of magistrate shall be exercised by the municipal judge, and the process shall be used only in the enforcement of city ordinances and this code.
(5) No person shall hinder, delay or otherwise obstruct the search of property or premises or the seizure of personal property when the search or seizure is authorized by a search warrant issued under this section.

2.815 Citations for Violations

The City Manager may authorize any city employee to issue and serve a citation on a person who the city employee has probable cause to believe has committed an offense defined in this code as a violation.

(1) Service on individuals may be made by the Code Enforcement Officer or any authorized agent of the City by any of the following means:

(a) Service may be made by mailing the summons and complaint by restricted or unrestricted certified or registered mail, return receipt requested. For purposes of computing any time period prescribed by this ordinance, service by mail shall be complete three days after such mailing if the address to which it was mailed is within the State, and seven days after mailing if the address to which it is mailed is outside the State.

(b) No default shall be entered against any responsible party served by mail under this section that has not either received or rejected the registered or certified letter containing a copy of the summons and complaint, unless otherwise authorized by the municipal judge based upon service procedures of the Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure.

(c) Service may be made by delivering the summons and complaint directly to the person to be served.

(d) Substituted service may be made by delivering a copy of the summons and complaint at the dwelling house or usual place of abode of the person to be served, to any person over 14 years of age residing in the dwelling house or usual place of abode of the person to be served. Where substituted service is used, the Code Enforcement Officer or authorized agent of the City, as soon as reasonably possible, shall cause to be mailed a true copy of the summons and complaint to the responsible party at the responsible party’s dwelling house or usual place of abode, together with a statement of the date, time, and place at which substituted service was made. For the purpose of computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this ordinance, substituted service shall be complete upon mailing.

(e) If the person to be served maintains an office for the conduct of business, office service may be made by leaving a true copy of the summons and complaint at such office during normal working hours with the person who is apparently in charge. Where office service is used, the Code Enforcement Officer or authorized agent of the City, as soon as reasonably possible, shall cause to be mailed a true copy of the summons and complaint to the responsible party at the responsible party’s dwelling house or usual place of abode or the responsible party’s place of business or such other place under the circumstances that is most reasonably calculated to apprise the responsible party of the existence and pendency of the action, together with a statement of the date, time, and place at which office service was made. For the purpose of computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this ordinance, office service shall be complete upon such mailing.

(2) Service on particular responsible parties; minors, incapacitated persons, corporations, limited partnerships, the State, other public bodies, general partnerships and other entities, shall be on the persons named in the Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure.

[Amd. Ord. No. 5021, Dec. 1, 1983; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2000-55, April 6, 2000; Amd. Ord. No. 2006-197, Sept. 7, 2006.]


2.820 [Repealed Ord. No. 4515, Dec. 17, 1983.]

2 Uniform Short Form Complaint and Citation (2.855 to 2.880)

2.855 Short-Form Citation Authorized

(1) A citation conforming to the requirements of this section may be used by officers and other persons authorized to enforce any of the provisions of city ordinances or this code.

(2) The citation shall consist of at least three parts. Additional parts may be inserted for administrative purposes by departments charged with the enforcement of the ordinances or code sections. The required parts are:

(a) The complaint.

(b) The department record.

(c) The summons.

(3) Each of the three parts shall contain the following information or blanks in which the information shall be entered:

(a) The name of the court and the court's docket or file number.

(b) The name of the person or persons cited.

(c) The offense charged; the time and place, the date on which the citation was issued; the name of the complainant; and, in the case of zoning violations, the designation of the zone in which the violation occurred.

(d) The hour and date when the person cited is to appear in court.

(e) The bail, if any, fixed for the offense.

(4) Each of the parts may also contain identifying and additional information, as may be necessary or appropriate for administrative departments of the city. In the case of a zoning violation, this may include an indication of whether a written warning was previously issued to the defendant for the same violation, if it is a continuing one.

(5) The complaint shall contain a form of verification by the complainant to the effect that he swears that he has reasonable grounds to believe, and does believe, that the person cited committed the offense contrary to ordinance or this code. The complainant, whether he is a person charged with enforcement of the regulation, or a private person, shall make verification before the city court, or a clerk or deputy clerk of the court, or anyone else so authorized by an order of the court, and this action shall be entered in the court record.

[Amd. Ord. No. 2007-73, April 19, 2007.]


2.860 Contents of the Summons and Complaint

(1) A summons issued pursuant to section 2.855 is sufficient if it contains the following:
(a) The name of the court; the name of the person or persons cited; the date on which the citation was issued; the name of the complainant; and the time at which the person cited is to appear in court.
(b) A statement or designation of the offense in a manner that can be readily understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so; and the date and place the offense is alleged to have occurred.
(c) A notice to the person or persons cited that a complaint based on the offense will be filed with the court.
(d) The amount of bail, if any, fixed for the offense.

(2) A complaint in an alleged violation of an offense under section 2.855(1) is sufficient if it contains the following:
(a) The name of the court; the name of the city in whose name action is brought; and the name of the defendant or defendants.
(b) A statement or designation of the offense in a manner that can be readily understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so; and the time and place of the alleged offense.
(c) A verification as provided in section 2.855.

(3) When several violations of the building, mechanical, electrical or plumbing code(s) are related to the same project, act or transaction, on the same premises, by the same person, and the court finds that a multiplicity of complaints may be avoided and the violations may be properly charged in the same complaint without undue confusion of issues and without prejudice to the person cited, the court may permit charging more than one violation on the same uniform citation.

2.865 Delivery of the Summons and Complaint

An officer issuing the citation shall cause the summons to be delivered to the person cited and shall cause the complaint to be delivered to the court. When a complaint is verified by a private person, the court shall cause the summons to be delivered to the defendant by a peace officer.

2.870 Appearance of the Defendant; Return of Summons; Bail in Lieu of Appearance

(1) The defendant shall appear in court at the time mentioned in the summons if the citation is for an offense designated in this code as a crime.
(2) In all other cases, the defendant shall either appear in court at the time indicated in the summons, or prior to that time shall deliver to the court the summons, together with the amount of the bail set forth in the summons, enclosing a request for a hearing, or a statement of matters in explanation or mitigation of the offense, or the executed appearance, waiver of hearing, and plea of "guilty" appearing on the summons.
(3) When the defendant appears before the court in response to a summons, the defendant shall, when directed, post bail, appear for subsequent hearings, or comply with a sentence ordered by the court.
[Amd. Ord. No. 5022, Dec. 1, 1983.]

2.875 Effect of Defendant's Written Statement

If a defendant has submitted to the court a written statement with his bail, as provided in section 2.870, it constitutes a waiver of hearing and a consent to judgment by the court, declaring a forfeiture of bail on the basis of the statement, and any testimony or written statement of the arresting officer or other witnesses which may be presented to the court. If the defendant requests a hearing or if, under section 2.880, the court directs that a hearing be held, the court shall fix the date and time for hearing and, unless notice is waived, shall, at least five days in advance of the hearing, mail to the defendant notice of the date and time.

2.880 Judgment

In any case under subsection (2) of section 2.870, the court may direct that a hearing be held or enter the appropriate judgment, impose a fine, direct that the fine be paid out of the bail deposited by the defendant, and remit to the defendant any amount by which the bail exceeds the fine. No sentence may be imposed in excess of the bail deposited by the defendant, unless a hearing is held.
[Amd. Ord. No. 4498, Nov. 19, 1981.]

2 Unclaimed Property (2.905 to 2.945)

2.1000 [Repealed Ordinance No. 7854, May 4, 1995.]


2.1010 [Repealed Ordinance No. 7854, May 4, 1995.]


2.1020 [Repealed Ordinance No. 7854, May 4, 1995.]


2.1030 [Repealed Ordinance No. 7854, May 4, 1995.]


2.1040 [Repealed Ordinance No. 7854, May 4, 1995.]


2.1050 [Repealed Ordinance No. 7854, May 4, 1995.]


2.905 Storage of Property

Whenever any personal property other than a motor vehicle has in any manner come into the custody of the City without an owner or person entitled to possession thereof claiming it, the police department shall either place the personal property upon premises of the City as may from time to time be designated by the City Manager or store the personal property at the owner`s expense with some reputable storage yard, or other storage place pending investigation into the ownership or right of possession thereof.
[Added Ord. No. 5457, June 6, 1985.]

2.910 Search for Owner

Upon taking custody of personal property, the police department shall make reasonable inquiry as to the name and address of the owner or other person interested therein or entitled to possession.
[Added Ord. No. 5457, June 6, 1985.]

2.915 Disposition of Unclaimed Property

(a) All tangible personal property of whatever type or kind that remains unclaimed after notice of the right to claim such property within a reasonable time has been sent by the police department to all parties who reasonably appear to have an interest in such property shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall become the property of the City. Such property may be sold as prescribed in this chapter. As to the property that has been "found" by the City, rather than being left with the City and not reclaimed, the property shall not be deemed abandoned or become the property of the City until the City has complied with the requirements of state law regarding "found" property.

(b) The Chief of Police shall, upon receipt of written request from any department, or upon direction of the City Manager, transfer any such unclaimed property to said department for its official use in carrying out its duties and responsibilities. All such transfers shall be documented by written receipt.

[Added Ord. No. 5457, June 6, 1985.]

2.920 Transfer to State Agency

If the owner or other person interested or entitled to the possession of the personal property cannot be found, then the Chief of Police may transfer the property to the State of Oregon Department of Administrative Services for disposition in Jackson County, Oregon according to the terms of a written agreement between the City and the State of Oregon.
[Added Ord. No. 5457, June 6, 1985; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 1998-264, Dec. 10, 1998.]

2.925 Reclaiming Property

If the owner or other interested person, or person entitled to the possession of said property, shall apply to the Chief of Police before a sale thereof for the return of personal property and shall submit to the Chief of Police evidence satisfactory to him of his interest therein and tender, with said application, the costs in removing, storing, and making sale of the personal property, the Chief of Police, upon being satisfied that the claim is rightful, shall surrender the same to the claimant.
[Added Ord. No. 5457, June 6, 1985.]

2.930 [Repealed, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 1998-264, Dec. 10, 1998.]


2.935 [Repealed, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 1998-264, Dec. 10, 1998.]


2.940 Proceeds of Sale

Any sale and conveyance herein provided for shall be without redemption; the proceeds thereof shall be applied to the costs of sale and then go to the general fund of the City and the City shall assume no responsibility as to the condition of title of the property sold, and in the event that for any reason such sale shall be invalid the liability of the City is limited to the return of the purchase price upon application therefor made to the Council.
[Added Ord. No. 5457, June 6, 1985; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 1998-264, Dec. 10, 1998.]

2.945 Unsold Property

Any unclaimed property not sold or transferred to a City department may be held for sale at a later date, donated to a governmental or charitable agency or destroyed, whichever is, in the opinion of the Police Chief, most in the public interest. [Added Ord. No. 5457, June 6, 1985.]

2.1000 [Repealed Ordinance No. 7854, May 4, 1995.]

2.1010 [Repealed Ordinance No. 7854, May 4, 1995.]

2.1020 [Repealed Ordinance No. 7854, May 4, 1995.]

2.1030 [Repealed Ordinance No. 7854, May 4, 1995.]

2.1040 [Repealed Ordinance No. 7854, May 4, 1995.]

2.1050 [Repealed Ordinance No. 7854, May 4, 1995.]

2 Real Property Compensation [Repealed]

2.950 [Repealed, Ord. No. 2011-61, Apr. 7, 2011.]

repealed


2.955 [Repealed, Ord. No. 2011-61, Apr. 7, 2011.]

repealed

2.960 [Repealed, Ord. No. 2011-61, Apr. 7, 2011.]

repealed

2.965 [Repealed, Ord. No. 2011-61, Apr. 7, 2011.]

repealed

2.970 [Repealed, Ord. No. 2011-61, Apr. 7, 2011.]

repealed

2 Property Tax Exemption for Low Income Rental Housing [Repealed]

2.1000 [Repealed, Ord. No. 7854, May 4, 1995.]

Repealed

2.1010 [Repealed, Ord. No. 7854, May 4, 1995.]

Repealed

2.1020 [Repealed, Ord. No. 7854, May 4, 1995.]

Repealed

2.1030 [Repealed, Ord. No. 7854, May 4, 1995.]

Repealed

2.1040 [Repealed, Ord. No. 7854, May 4, 1995.]

Repealed

2.1050 [Repealed, Ord. No. 7854, May 4, 1995.]

Repealed

3 Public Improvements 

3 Streets and Sidewalks (3.001 to 3.070)

3.001 Standards for Public Works Construction in the City of Medford

Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, the following are hereby adopted as the minimum design and improvement standards for all streets, sidewalks, driveways, storm drain facilities, street lighting, water facilities and other public facilities of the City of Medford:
(a) "Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction," 1980 Edition, published by the Oregon Chapter of the American Public Works Association, except Division 3 thereof;
(b) "Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction," 1990 Edition Division 3, published by the Oregon Chapter of the American Public Works Association;
(c) City of Medford "Addendum #1 to APWA Standard Specifications and Drawings" a copy of which is attached to the adopting ordinance as Exhibit "A" and filed in the City Recorder's Office.
[Added Ord. No. 7340, March 18, 1993.]

3.005 Construction of Sidewalks

Sidewalks constructed to current standards shall be required along the street frontage of all building sites submitted to the Architectural Commission for review. Where a building site fronts an unimproved street or is in an individual subdivision, the requirement may be waived if adjacent property does not have existing sidewalks. All proposed building sites, including single-family residences, along arterial streets shall have sidewalks. Industrial parks are not required to have sidewalks, except along arterial streets.

3.010 Owners to Maintain Sidewalks

The owners of property within the city shall inspect and maintain all sidewalks abutting their property in a condition safe for use by the public at all times. If any property owner by his neglect to perform any duty required of him by this section causes injury or damage to any person or property, he shall be liable to the person suffering such injury or damage and shall indemnify the city for all damages it has been compelled to pay in such case. Such damages may be collected in a civil action against the property owner.

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2008-117, July 2, 2008.]


3.015 Sidewalk Specifications

Sidewalks shall be constructed or repaired in accordance with the following specifications:

(1) Concrete. Sidewalks shall be of concrete with a compressive strength of not less than 3,000 pounds per square inch, using not less than 500 pounds of cement per cubic yard of concrete, and with a maximum slump of 4 inches. In cold weather, calcium chloride may be added by dissolving in the mixing water an amount not exceeding 2 percent of the weight of the cement in the concrete mix.

(2) Other material. Other materials such as bricks or flagstone may be used for aesthetic effects where approved by the Site Plan and Architectural Commission. Such material will have flat surfaces suitably finished for sidewalk use. Materials submitted shall be comparable in strength to concrete and shall be placed with suitable mortar to provide a permanent, low-maintenance sidewalk.

(3) Construction: Sidewalks shall be constructed according to specifications prescribed by the City Engineer.

(4) Size and location. Except as otherwise ordered by the council, the size and location of sidewalks shall be as follows: a sidewalk shall be three and one-half inches thick, except where a sidewalk crosses a driveway it shall be 5 1/2 inches thick. A sidewalk shall slope one-quarter inch per foot toward the curb. The edge of the sidewalk nearest the curb shall be at an elevation equal to the rate of one-quarter inch per foot above the curb and the sidewalk shall abut the street line, but if there are existing sidewalks upon the same side of the street in the same block, then the sidewalk shall be constructed to conform to the line of the existing sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet in width except in the business district of the city where sidewalks shall extend from the property line to the curb. Sidewalks along arterial and collector streets shall be at least seven feet in width unless there is a planter strip between the curb and edge of sidewalk; in which case the sidewalk shall be a minimum of five feet in width. Required sidewalks width does not include curb width.

(5) Alignment. All sidewalks shall be aligned in accordance with the City Engineer's specifications. When Planning or Site Plan and Architectural Commission approval is not otherwise required, Public Works Department may approve curvelinear or meandering sidewalks to reduce negative impacts on established vegetation.  Where approved, such sidewalks shall tie to adjacent property lines in such a manner as to allow standard sidewalk construction on adjacent properties.

[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-117, July 2, 2008.]


3.020 Permit for Sidewalk Work

Before beginning the construction, reconstruction or repair of a sidewalk, a person shall apply to the City Engineer for a permit. If the proposed sidewalk conforms to the provisions of sections 3.015, the City Engineer shall establish the grade of the sidewalk, if not already established, and issue the permit upon payment of the appropriate permit fee as established in the most recent schedule approved by resolution of the City Council.   

 [Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7275, December 17, 1992. Fee effective January 1, 1993; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2005-165, Aug. 18, 2005.]


3.023 Notice of Sidewalk Repair

(1) If the Public Works Director or designee determines that an existing sidewalk is in disrepair or presents an unsafe or hazardous condition for public use, the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk will have sixty (60) days after receiving written notice from the City of the unsafe or disrepair condition to obtain a permit and complete repair of the sidewalk. The notice shall also state that if the repair is not made by the property owner, the City may repair the sidewalk and the cost of the repair and any administrative fees will be assessed against the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk.

(2) The notice shall be mailed certified to the owner of the property, or owner’s agent, at the address last shown on the records of the Jackson County Tax Assessor. If delivery receipt of the notice is not verified, notice directing repair of the defective sidewalk shall be posted on property responsible for the sidewalk.  The person posting the notice shall file with the City Recorder a certificate stating the date that the notice was posted.  

(3) An error in the name or address of the owner or agent shall not make the mailed notice void.

(4) The notice shall contain the following information:

(a) A description of the property, by street address or otherwise, which abuts the sidewalk;

(b) That the City has determined the sidewalk is in disrepair or presents an unsafe or hazardous condition for public use;

(c) A description of the disrepair or safety hazard.

(d)That the owner must obtain a permit and complete repair of the sidewalk within sixty (60) days from date of the notice;

(e) That if the owner does not properly repair the sidewalk within sixty (60) days from the date of the notice, it may be repaired by the City;

(f) That costs to repair the sidewalk and associated administrative fees, if the work is performed by the City, will be assessed to the abutting property owner;

(g) That the owner may appeal the City’s determination that the sidewalk is defective by filing, within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice, a written request with the City recorder for a hearing before the City Council; and

(5) Failure of the City to take action under Sections 3.023 to 3.030 shall not relieve the property owner of liability under Section 3.010.
(6) The Public Works Director, or his designee, may grant a 90-day extension of time to complete the repairs if the basis for such an extension is provided by the responsible property owner in writing. One additional 90-day extension will be granted if extraordinary circumstances described below are determined by the Public Works Director to apply:
          (a)  The property owner of an owner occupied residential property is age 65 or older, or:
          (b)  The original notice of defective sidewalk was mailed between November 1 and March 1, or:
          (c)   The cost of sidewalk repairs for a single property exceeds $1,500.
 

(7) By adopting these sections, the City does not intend to undertake any obligation to inspect and repair sidewalks as such is the obligation of the abutting property owner.

[Added, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2008-117, July 2, 2008; Amd. Ord. No. 2009-154, July 2, 2009, Amd. Ord. No. 2019-29, April 18, 2019]


3.025 Appeal to City Council

Any owner of property who has received notice to repair a sidewalk under Section 3.023 and who objects to the same may, within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice, appeal to the City Council for relief by filing a written request with the City Recorder for a hearing before the City Council.  The request shall include the owner's reasons for opposing the repairing of the sidewalk.  Within sixty (60) days the Council shall consider the appeal and determine whether the sidewalk is, in fact, defective.  If the Council finds that sidewalk repairs are necessary, the owner shall have twenty (20) days from the date of the Council determination, or as specified by the Council, to repair the sidewalk.

[Replaced, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2008-117, July 2, 2008.]


3.030 Repair by City; Assessment of Costs

(1)  If the defective sidewalk is not corrected within the time period provided, the Public Works Director or designee may cause the defective sidewalk to be repaired.

(2)  Notwithstanding other provisions of this Code, whenever, in the judgment of the Public Works Director or designee, there is reasonable cause to believe that a clear and immediate danger to the public health, welfare, or safety or to the environment exists from the defective sidewalk, the Public Works Director or designee, without hearing or prior notice, may cause the summary repair of such sidewalk.

(3)  The Public Works Director or designee shall cause a record to be kept of the cost incurred to repair the sidewalk, including a charge of 25 percent or $15, whichever is greater, for engineering and administration, and shall file a statement of costs with the City Recorder, who may then assess the costs on the property as provided in Section 5.535.

[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2008-117, July 2, 2008.]


3.035 [Repealed, Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2008-117, July 2, 2008.]

 

3.040 Permit Required for Work in the Public Right-of-Way

Except as otherwise permitted in agreements between the City and a public utility operating within the city limits, no person shall excavate, oil, grade, surface, repair, construct, reconstruct or do any work upon a public sidewalk, street, alley, curbing, or within any other portion of public right-of-way, or within an easement granted to the City, unless a permit for the work has been issued by the manager.  The person applying for the permit shall pay the appropriate permit fee provided for in the most recent schedule approved by resolution of the City Council.  Fees shall not exceed the average or actual cost of providing the service covered by the permit.  This fee schedule shall be amended periodically by resolution of the City Council and kept on file in the Engineering Division and the City Recorder's office.

[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2005-165, Aug. 18, 2005.]


3.045 Application for Permit

Application shall be made to the City Engineer and shall contain:

(a) The name of the applicant;

(b) The person doing the work;

(c) The time when the work will be completed;

(d) The location, specific nature, and material to be used in the work; and

(e)  A traffic control plan.

[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2005-165, Aug. 18, 2005.]


3.050 Approval of Application by City Engineer

(1) If the city engineer finds the work for which a permit is applied under Section 3.040 to 3.045 does not constitute a hazard to persons or property and does not interfere with maintenance or contemplated improvement work of the city or with the public convenience, and the nature of the work and the materials to be used in connection with the work are appropriate for the purposes thereof, he shall issue the permit.
(2) The permit shall contain the conditions the city engineer decides are appropriate and proper for the public safety and convenience or as may be in effect or adopted by the city and the time within which the work is to be done, the nature of the work, and the materials to be used in connection therewith.

3.055 Revocation of Permit; Appeal

(1) The city engineer may revoke a permit for noncompliance with the provisions of the permit or if an error or mistake is made in the issuance of the permit.
(2) If the city engineer refuses to issue a permit or revokes a permit, the applicant may appeal to the council as provided in section 1.025.
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 5358, Feb. 7, 1985.]

3.060 Nonapplicability to City

Sections 3.040 to 3.050 do not apply to work done:
(1) By or at the direction of the city;
(2) Under contract with the city; or
(3) Under a permit granted under other provisions of the code

3.070 New Pavement - Limitation on Cuts

(1) Except as provided herein, newly surfaced or resurfaced residential streets shall not be cut for three years and newly surfaced or resurfaced arterial or collector street shall not be cut for 5 years.

(2) Emergency cuts by the City or Water Commission to protect public health or safety shall be allowed by the City Engineer with no additional permit fees.  All other requested emergency cuts may be allowed by the City Engineer if the applicant pays an additional permit fee provided for in the most recent schedule approved by resolution of the City Council.  The additional fee requirement applies to anyone making a cut including, but not limited to, the City, the Water Commission and other public and private agencies. The fees shall be deposited in the Street Fund.

(3) Application for a permit to cut pavement shall be made under Sections 3.040, 3.045 and 3.050 of this Code. The applicant shall restore the surface as prescribed by the City Engineer.

(4) At least 6 months before a street is resurfaced or rebuilt, utilities and abutting property owners shall be notified by mail that the project is planned and cuts will thereafter be limited as provided in this section. If the required notice is not sent to any person, the fees required by subsection (2) shall be waived for that person.

[Added, Ord. No. 8190, Sept. 19, 1996; Amd. Ord. No. 2003-294, Nov. 20, 2003; Amd. Ord. No. 2005-21, Feb. 17, 2005; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2005-165, Aug. 18, 2005.]

3 Driveways and Culverts (3.305 to 3.365)

3.305 Definitions

As used in sections 3.310 to 3.365, the following mean:

a)  Culvert.  A short enclosed conduit which provides conveyance for a watercourse across an intersecting travelway, such as a driveway, bike path, sidewalk, etc., and lies within the public right-of-way of an unimproved street.  The cross-sectional shape of the culvert may be square, round, rectangular, or arched, and the length of the culvert shall be the amount necessary to enable the crossing.  Any other stormwater conveyance structure or conduit within the public right-of-way will be considered a public storm drain and shall require design by a registered professional engineer and submittal to the City's Engineering Division for review and approval. 

b)  Driveway. An accessway to and from private property onto a public street.  

c)  Improved Street. A public street in which the roadway has been improved as a part of the public street and alley system by the construction of concrete or asphaltic surface to the width required, and other specifications imposed by the City, with concrete curbs and gutters on both sides of the street.

d)  Unimproved Street. A street within the city other than an improved street.

[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2005-165, Aug. 18, 2005.]


3.310 Permit Required

No person shall construct or maintain a driveway across a public sidewalk, parkway, or street without first obtaining a permit, nor construct or maintain a driveway for which a permit is required, in violation of the provisions of sections 3.305 to 3.350.

3.315 Permit Application

The city engineer shall receive applications for the permit required in section 3.310. The application shall state the location, grade and dimensions of the proposed driveway and the purpose for which it is desired, together with a sketch showing the full frontage of the property, existing driveways, requested driveways, and the locations of the nearest driveway on either side of the property.

3.320 Permit Issuance

Upon receipt of an application for a permit to construct or maintain a driveway and upon payment to the city engineer of the permit fee required by section 3.330, the city engineer shall issue a permit if he finds that the driveway will not be an unreasonable hazard.

3.325 Appeal of Permit Denial

If the city engineer refuses to issue the driveway permit, the applicant may appeal to the council within 30 days after the refusal. The appeal procedure specified in section 1.025 shall be followed.
[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5358, Feb. 7, 1985.]

3.330 Driveway Permit Fee

The permit fee for each new driveway or driveway repair shall be the appropriate fee as established in the most recent schedule approved by resolution of the City Council.

[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 7275, December 17, 1992. Fee effective January 1, 1993; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2005-165, Aug. 18, 2005.]


3.335 Revocation of Permit

A permit for construction and maintenance of a driveway may be revoked by the council if:
(1) The driveway is not maintained in a safe condition; or
(2) The council finds the maintenance of the driveway is an unreasonable hazard to the public safety or detrimental to the public welfare; or
(3) The driveway is constructed contrary to the provisions of sections 3.340 to 3.345.

3.340 Construction Specifications

(1) Driveways and sidewalks shall be designed and constructed in accordance with plans and specifications on file in the office of the manager.
(2) The city engineer is authorized to establish and amend plans and specifications by administrative order. The plans and specifications shall consider the safety of the traveling and pedestrian public while permitting the greatest use and enjoyment to the owners of adjacent property.

3.345 Exception to Standards

The city engineer is authorized to grant a permit when the plans and specifications do not conform to the standards established, if the driveway would not, in the opinion of the city engineer, create unreasonable hazards to the traveling and pedestrian public.

3.350 Paved Driveway on Unpaved Street

Subject to section 3.355, a paved driveway constructed on private property to give access to the property from an unpaved street shall conform to the proposed sidewalk grade along the street.

3.360 Laying of Culverts

The right to lay culverts under accessways such as driveways within the street area of an unimproved street is expressly reserved to the City. A person desiring the installation of a culvert shall apply to the City requesting it, stating its length, location and purpose. The applicant shall deposit with the City Engineer the fee provided by section 3.365. The City Engineer shall issue a permit specifying the length, diameter, location, and position of the culvert and other specifications necessary for the construction of a culvert adequate to convey the surface water, with regard to the preservation of the street and the protection of property abutting the street. The City shall construct the culvert pursuant to the permit.  The City Engineer may allow a prequalified contractor to install the culvert under certain conditions.

Stormwater conduits lying within the public right-of-way and crossing minimum access drives, private streets or other accessways, and which have been designed by a registered professional engineer, may also be installed by a private contractor if the design has been approved by the City Engineer.  In such cases, the stormwater conduit will be permitted as part of the public improvements for the development and a separate culvert permit will not be required.

[Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2005-165, Aug. 18, 2005.]


3.365 Culvert Installation Fee

The permit fee for culvert installation, which includes the costs of culvert pipe, rock over the pipe, backfill and labor, shall not exceed the actual or average placement costs per linear foot of culvert.  Fees for culvert installation are provided in the most recent fee schedule approved by resolution of the City Council.

[Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2005-165, Aug. 18, 2005.]

3 Special Assessment Procedure (3.405 to 3.485)

3.405 Definitions

As used in section 3.405 to 3.485, the following mean:

(1) Actual cost means all direct or indirect costs incurred by the city before assessment in order to undertake a local improvement. The term "actual cost" includes the portion of the total actual cost allocated to a particular lot. "Actual cost" includes, but is not limited to, the costs of labor, materials, supplies, equipment rental, property acquisition, permits, engineering, financing, reasonable program delinquencies, return on investment, required fees, insurance, administration, accounting, depreciation, amortization, operation, maintenance, and repair or replacement. Actual cost may include the salaries, wages and benefits payable to employees of the city to the extent the same are reasonably allocable to the work or services performed by the employees in connection with a local improvement. However, as a condition to inclusion of any salaries, wages or benefits payable to employees of the city as costs of a local improvement, the city shall establish a record keeping system to track the actual work done or services performed by each employee on or in connection with such local improvement.

(2) Bond issuance and administration costs means all costs associated with issuance, registration, transfer and payment of bonds for long-term financing of assessments and systems development charges.

(3) Deferred improvement agreement means an acknowledged and recorded agreement executed by a property owner which runs with the land in which the owner agrees that the city has jurisdiction to construct certain local improvements and assess a pro rata share of the cost against owner's property described therein. A deferred improvement agreement may also contain a non-remonstrance agreement.

(4) Estimated assessment means, with respect to each property to be assessed in connection with a local improvement, the total assessment that, at the time of giving notice of the assessment and the right to object or remonstrate, the city estimates will be levied against the property following completion of the local improvement. The estimate shall be based on the city's estimate at that time of the actual costs of the local improvement and the proposed formula for apportioning the actual costs to the property.

(5) Final assessment means, with respect to each property to be assessed in connection with a local improvement, the total assessment levied against the property following completion of the local improvement. The total assessment shall be based on the actual costs of the local improvement and the formula for apportioning the actual costs to the property. Bond issuance costs shall be separately stated and shall not be entered on the lien docket unless and until the owner files an application to pay in installments. If bond issuance costs are added, the total amount shall then be deemed to comprise the "final assessment."

(6) Finance Director means the department head designated by the City Manager to keep records of assessments and installment payments.

(7) Financing means all costs necessary or attributable to acquiring and preserving interim or permanent financing of a local improvement. Financing costs that are to be incurred after the levy of a final assessment may be included in the final assessment based on the city's reasonable estimate of the financing costs if the city first documents the basis for the estimate and makes the documentation available to interested persons on request.

(8) Local improvement. An improvement constructed by the city for which a special assessment may be made on property specially benefitted.

(9) Lot. A platted lot or other contiguous parcel of land to which a single tax lot number has been assigned.

(10) Owner. The owner of title to real property or the contract purchaser of real property of record as shown on the last available complete assessment roll in the office of the county assessor of Jackson County, Oregon.

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7125, May 7, 1992.]

3.410 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 7125, May 7, 1992.]


3.411 Petitions and Remonstrances

(1) Except for paving projects where a petition is required by the Charter, the City Council may initiate a local improvement without a petition. When the City receives a petition for paving that conforms to the requirements of Section 29(2) of the Charter, the petition shall be promptly filed in the office of the City Recorder. No action by the Council is required to receive and file the petition. Once a petition is received, it is binding on the signers and a request by a petition signer to remove his or her name from the petition shall have no legal effect. The petition shall be valid for a period of one year from the date it was received by the City. If the Council does not adopt an ordinance ordering the improvement before the petition expires, the petition shall be void. Two or more separate petitions for contiguous improvements may be combined and treated as a petition for a single project.

(2) A deferred improvement agreement shall be treated as a petition for a local improvement district, except that a deferred improvement agreement shall be recorded in the Official Records of Jackson County and shall not expire unless otherwise specifically provided in the agreement or by statute.

(3) Except in the case of arterial street improvements described in Section 29(3) of the Charter, remonstrances do not affect the legal authority of the Council to proceed with a local improvement. Remonstrances may be negated by a non-remonstrance agreement.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 7125, 5/7/92.]

3.415 Initiation of Proceedings

(1) After preparation and approval of plans and specifications for a proposed local improvement, the council shall adopt a resolution declaring its intent to cause the construction and to assess benefitted properties for all or part of the cost.

(2) The resolution shall state the nature and location of the proposed improvements and further identify it by reference to the approved plans and specifications, which shall be maintained in a designated office in city hall and be available for inspection by the public.

(3) The resolution shall describe with reasonable certainty the area within which property is proposed to be assessed for the improvement and

(4) The resolution shall set a time and place for hearing on the proposed improvement before the council.

(5) The resolution shall be recorded in the Official Records of Jackson County.

[Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 7125, May 7, 1992.]

3.420 Notice of Hearing

(1) Notice of the hearing on the proposed local improvement shall be given by publishing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing.

(2) The published notice shall:
(a) Specify the time and place the council will hear and consider the views of parties who have an interest in or are aggrieved by the proposed improvement;
(b) Describe the general location and nature of the improvement, the area within which property may be specially assessed as described in the resolution in section 3.415; and
(c) Identify the place where the project documents are available for inspection and the requirements for submitting written materials for consideration by the council.

(3) In addition to notice by publication, the recorder shall, at least three weeks prior to the hearing, mail notice to the owners whose property is to be assessed at the addresses shown in the records of the county assessor.

(4) The mailed notice shall:
(a) State that the council is considering an assessment for local improvements,
(b) Describe the general location and nature of the improvement,
(c) Identify the place where the project documents are available for inspection,
(d) State the formula for apportioning costs and the amount of the estimated assessment on the property of the owner to whom the notice is addressed, and
(e) Specify the time and place the council will hear and consider objections or remonstrances to the proposed improvement and the requirements for submitting written materials for consideration by the council.

[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 7125, May 7, 1992.]

3.425 Hearing; Improvement Ordinance

(1) At the hearing, the council shall hear and consider objections and other representations made by owners, and shall hear and consider all other relevant information presented.

(2) If the council determines that the proposed local improvement shall be made, it shall adopt an ordinance ordering construction of the improvement. The ordinance shall contain a legal description of the district and shall be recorded in the Official Records of Jackson County.

(3) When the improvement has been so authorized, the city manager or the water commission may invite bids or make other arrangements necessary for construction and general obligation improvement warrants or other debt instruments may be issued for the cost thereof as provided by statute.

[Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 7125, May 7, 1992.]

3.430 Notice of Proposed Assessment

(1) After the work is done and the actual cost determined, the city manager or the water commission shall prepare the proposed assessments to the respective lots within the assessed district and file them in the office of the recorder. Notice of the proposed assessment shall then be mailed to the owner of each lot proposed to be assessed not less than ten days prior to the last day for filing written objections. The notice shall state the amount of the assessment proposed on the property, the date of the final hearing and shall specify a date by which written objections shall be filed with the recorder.
(2) Written objections and supporting documents must be filed in fifteen copies not later than 5:00 pm on Friday of the week prior to the hearing. Objections filed shall state the grounds for the objection. At the final hearing, the council shall consider the objections and may adopt, correct, modify or revise the proposed assessments and shall by ordinance finally determine the amount of the assessment to be charged against each lot within the area according to the special benefit accruing to it from the improvement and shall levy the final assessments.
[Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 7125, May 7, 1992.]

3.431 Notice of Final Assessment

After the final assessment has been levied by the Council, the City Recorder shall cause notice of the final assessment to be mailed to the owner of each lot to be assessed. Publication of the notice is not required. The notice shall identify the local improvement for which the assessment was levied and the final assessment for each lot. In addition, the notice shall state that the owner of any property to be assessed shall have the right to make application to the City for payment of the final assessment in installments as provided in Section 3.440.
[Added Sec. 8, Ord. No. 7125, May 7, 1992.]

3.435 [Repealed Sec. 9, Ord. No. 7125, May 7, 1992.]


3.440 Attachment of Lien

(1) Assessments shall become liens upon the properties assessed after the passage of the ordinance levying them and entry in the city lien docket and shall be immediately due and payable. Bond issuance and administration costs shall be added to an assessment when the installment application is filed. Interest and billing charges shall be added to each assessment as they accrue. The city may enforce collection of the assessments in the manner prescribed by law.

(2) A written application to pay in installments under the Bancroft Act shall be filed with the City Recorder within 10 days after mailing of the notice of final assessment. However, an application may be accepted at the discretion of the city manager at any time unless the council has authorized foreclosure of the lien.

(3) Unless otherwise provided in the ordinance levying the assessments, the application shall provide that the applicant agrees to pay the final assessment over a period of ten years from the date of assessment in equal semi-annual installments of principal plus interest on the unpaid balance, beginning six months after the date of assessment.

(4) The application shall provide that the applicant acknowledges and agrees to pay interest at the rate provided by ordinance on all unpaid assessments.

(5) The application shall contain a statement, by lots or blocks, or other sufficient legal description, of the property of the applicant assessed for the improvement.

(6) The application shall state that the applicant does thereby waive all irregularities or defects, jurisdictional or otherwise, in the proceedings to cause the local improvement for which the assessment is levied and in the apportionment of the actual cost of the local improvement.

(7) An owner who elects to file an application to pay in installments shall agree to pay an additional amount to be added to the assessment to recover bond issuance and administration costs. This amount shall be determined by the City Council at the time it levies the assessment based on a reasonable estimate of bond issuance and administration costs.

(8) An owner who elects to file an application to pay in installments shall agree to pay a billing charge to be added to each installment. The billing charge shall be a pro-rated share of the actual cost of billing and keeping records of installment payment accounts. The amount of the billing charge shall be determined from time to time by the Finance Director.

[Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 7125, May 7, 1992.]

3.445 Mailing of Notices

When a notice is sent by mail to the owner of a lot affected by a proposed assessment or a final assessment, the notice shall be addressed to the owner or his agent according to the records of the county assessor.
[Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 7125, May 7, 1992.]

3.450 Segregation of Assessments

(1) The City may apportion a special assessment imposed upon a single tract or parcel of real property among all the parcels formed from a subsequent partition or other division of that tract or parcel, if the subsequent partition or division is in accordance with ORS 92.010 to 92.160 and is consistent with all applicable comprehensive plans as acknowledged by the Land Conservation and Development Commission under ORS 197.251. The proportionate distribution of a special assessment authorized under this subsection may be made whenever the special assessment remains wholly or partially unpaid, and full payment or an installment payment is not due.

(2) The City shall apportion a special assessment under this section when requested to do so by any owner, mortgagee or lienholder of a parcel of real property that was formed from the partition or other division of the larger tract of real property against which the special assessment was originally levied.

(3) Apportionment of a special assessment under this section shall be in accordance with an order or resolution of the city council. The order or resolution shall describe each parcel of real property affected by the apportionment, the amount of the assessment levied against each parcel, the owner of each parcel and such additional information as is required to keep a permanent and complete record of the assessments and the payments thereon. A copy of the order or resolution shall be filed with the finance director, who shall make any necessary changes or entries in the lien docket.

(4) When a special assessment is being paid in installments under the Bancroft Bonding Act or ORS 268.485, 450.155, 450.897 or 451.530, if the special assessment is apportioned among smaller parcels of real property under this section, the installments remaining unpaid shall be prorated among those smaller parcels so that each parcel shall be charged with that percentage of the remaining installment payments equal to the percentage of the unpaid assessment charged to the parcel upon apportionment.

3.455 Application for Segregation

(1) Application to segregate shall be filed with the Recorder on a form to be furnished by the Recorder. The application shall include:
(a) A lot book report from a title company showing copies of the deeds and other instruments evidencing all ownerships, other interests, and legal descriptions of the parcels to be segregated.
(b) The original and segregated tax lot numbers, original and segregated assessed valuations, names and addresses of the owners, and all others having an interest in the property, and any other relevant information requested by the Recorder.
(c) An express waiver of defects, jurisdictional or otherwise, in the original assessment.

(2) The application shall be accompanied by a fee of $100 for each tract partitioned plus $25 for each parcel over two parcels when a single tract is partitioned into more than two parcels and all are segregated at the same time, for a maximum fee of $400.

(3) If the Recorder finds that the application is complete and proper, it shall be submitted to the city council along with a proposed resolution prepared in accordance with Section 3.450(3). Copies of the proposed resolution shall be mailed to all persons shown by the application to have an interest in the property at least seven (7) days prior to the council meeting at which the resolution will be considered. The copy of the resolution shall be accompanied by a notice stating the date of the meeting and that all written objections filed with the Recorder prior to the date of the meeting will be considered by the council. Oral objections will not be heard.

[Amd. Ord. No. 7242, Nov. 5, 1992]

3.465 Curative Provisions

An improvement assessment shall not be rendered invalid by any error, mistake, delay, omission, or irregularity in the proceedings. The provisions of sections 3.405 through 3.485 shall be directory and not jurisdictional.

3.470 Interest on Assessments

(1) All non-delinquent assessments levied by the city upon real property for local improvements shall bear interest on the unpaid balance thereof from the date the assessment is due and payable at the rate specified in this subsection (1):
(a) From the date of the assessment to the date of the Bancroft bonds sold to redeem warrants issued for the cost of the improvement, the rate shall be the rate on the warrants rounded up to the next whole percentage point.
(b) From and after the date of the Bancroft bonds sold to finance the improvement, the rate shall be the net effective interest rate on the bond issue rounded up to the next one-tenth of one percent.

(2) Assessments levied by the city upon real property for incurred charges shall bear interest on the unpaid balance from the date the assessment is due and payable at the rate of eighteen percent (18%) per annum.  The City Recorder shall have the discretion and the authority to reduce or eliminate this interest on a retroactive basis if (a) the property owner has agreed to a monthly payment plan and is faithfully and consistently making payments according to that plan, or (b) the property owner is making complete payment of the principal owing, and circumstances exist that would make reduction or elimination of interest fair and just under the totality of the circumstances.  Under such agreements, interest shall accrue at the reduced or eliminated rate while monthly payments are being made, and preexisting interest above and beyond the reduced or eliminated rate shall be forgiven upon complete payment of the owed principal and any reduced interest.

(3) Non-delinquent assessments levied when a different rate was in effect shall continue to bear interest at the rate in effect at the time the assessments were levied.

(4) Delinquent assessments for local improvements and delinquent systems development charges shall bear interest at the rate of eighteen percent (18%) per annum while delinquent.

(5) An assessment shall be deemed delinquent if any payment is not made within 60 days after it becomes due and payable.

[Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 7125, May 7, 1992; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-21, March, 1, 2018.]

3.475 Foreclosure of Liens

All city assessment liens may be foreclosed in accordance with the procedures of ORS 223.505 to 223.650. Notice by personal service upon the property owner is not required prior to foreclosure except as provided in ORS 223.635.

3.480 Duties of Finance Director

The finance director shall be custodian of the lien dockets and shall be charged with keeping records concerning bonded liens and assessments.

3.485 Duties of Recorder

The recorder shall collect delinquent liens or assessments, take all the steps necessary to enforce liens or assessments, and maintain records pertaining to collection proceedings.


3 Systems Development Charges - Generally (3.705 to 3.739)

3.705 Purpose

The purpose of systems development charges imposed pursuant to this ordinance is to impose a portion of the cost of capital improvements for wastewater, drainage, flood control, streets, and parks upon those developments that create the need for or increase the demands on capital improvements. The Medford Water Commission is hereby authorized to impose such systems development charges for capital improvements to the water system as the law allows and as it sees fit; the provisions of this ordinance do not apply to Water Commission charges.
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6911, June 20, 1991.]

3.707 Scope

The systems development charges imposed by this ordinance are separate from and in addition to any applicable tax, assessment, charge or fee otherwise provided by law or imposed as a condition of development.
[Added Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6911, June 20, 1991.]

3.709 Definitions

For purposes of this ordinance the following mean:

Capital improvements. Facilities or assets used for:
(1) Waste water collection, transmission, treatment and disposal;
(2) Drainage and flood control;
(3) Transportation; or
(4) Parks and recreation.

Development. Constructing a building, making a physical change in the use or appearance of a structure or land, creating or terminating a right of access or any other change in the use of land that results in increased usage of a capital improvement.

Developer. The person who causes a development to occur, including, but not limited to, a person who applies for a building permit or a permit to connect to the sewer system.

Improvement fee. A fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be constructed after the date the fee is adopted pursuant to section 4 of this ordinance.

Parcel of land. A lot, parcel, block or other tract of land that is occupied or may be occupied by a structure or structures or other use, and that includes the yards and other open spaces required under the zoning, subdivision or other development ordinances.

Qualified public improvements. A capital improvement that is:
(1) Required as a condition of residential development approval;
(2) Identified in the plan adopted pursuant to section 8 of this ordinance; and
(3) Not located on or contiguous to a parcel of land that is the subject of the residential development approval.

Reimbursement fee. A fee for costs associated with capital improvements constructed or under construction on the date the fee is adopted pursuant to section 4 of this ordinance.

Systems development charge. A reimbursement fee, an improvement fee or a combination thereof assessed or collected at the time of increased usage of a capital improvement, at the time of issuance of a development permit or building permit, or at the time of connection to the capital improvement.

"Systems development charge" includes that portion of a sewer or water system connection charge that is greater than the amount necessary to reimburse the city for its average cost of inspecting and installing connections with water and sewer facilities. "Systems development charge" does not include fees assessed or collected as part of a local improvement district or a charge in lieu of a local improvement district assessment or the cost of complying with requirements or conditions imposed by a land use decision.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 6911, June 20, 1991.]

3.711 Systems Development Charge Established

(1) Systems development charges shall be established and may be revised by resolution of the council.
(2) Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of the resolution establishing the charge or other local or state law, systems development charges shall be imposed upon all developers of land within the city.
(3) A legal action challenging the methodology adopted by the council pursuant to this section shall not be filed later than 60 days after its adoption.
[Added Sec. 4, Ord. No. 6911, June 20, 1991.]

3.712 Notice and Hearing

(1) The City Council shall hold at least one public hearing prior to adoption or amendment of a methodology for any system development charge.

(2) The City Recorder shall maintain a list of persons who have made a written request for notification prior to adoption or amendment of a methodology for any system development charge. Written notice shall be mailed to persons on the list at least 90 days prior to the first hearing to adopt or amend a system development charge and the methodology supporting the adoption or amendment shall be available at least 60 days prior to the first hearing to adopt or amend. The failure of a person on the list to receive a notice that was mailed shall not invalidate the action of the city. The City Recorder may periodically delete names from the list, but at least 30 days prior to removing a name from the list must notify any person whose name is to be deleted that a new written request for notification is required if the person wishes to remain on the notification list.

(3) Provided, however, in the case of a change in the methodology for the system development charge for the regional sewage treatment plant, the required hearing may be held by the Regional Committee before it approves the change and the required notices may be sent by the secretary to the Regional Committee.

[Added, Ord. No. 7641, May 19, 1994; Amd. Ord.No. 7829, March 2, 1995; Amd. Ord. No. 2004-176, Aug. 19, 2004.]


3.713 Methodology

(1) The methodology used to establish a reimbursement fee shall consider the cost of then-existing facilities, prior contributions by then-existing users, the value of unused capacity, rate-making principles employed to finance publicly owned capital improvements, and other relevant factors identified by the council. The methodology shall promote the objective that future systems users shall contribute no more than an equitable share of the cost of then-existing facilities.
(2) The methodology used to establish an improvement fee shall consider the estimated cost of projected capital improvements needed to increase the capacity of the systems to which the fee is related.
(3) The methodology used to establish an improvement fee or a reimbursement fee, or both, shall be contained in a resolution adopted by the council.
[Added Sec. 5, Ord. No. 6911, June 20, 1991.]

3.715 Authorized Expenditures

(1) Reimbursement fees shall be applied only to capital improvements associated with the systems for which the fees are assessed, including expenditures relating to repayment of indebtedness.
(2)(a) Improvement fees shall be spent only on capacity increasing capital improvements, including expenditures relating to repayment of future debt for the improvements. An increase in system capacity occurs if a capital improvement increases the level of performance or service provided by existing facilities or provides new facilities. The portion of the improvements funded by improvement fees must be related to demands created by development.
(2)(b) A capital improvement being funded wholly or in part from revenues derived from the improvement fee shall be included in the plan adopted by the city pursuant to section 8 of this ordinance.
(3) Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (2) of this section, systems development charge revenues may be expended on the direct costs of complying with the provisions of ORS 223.297 to 223.314, including the costs of development of systems development charge methodologies and providing an annual accounting of systems development charge expenditures.
[Added Sec. 6, Ord. No. 6911, June 20, 1991.]

3.717 Expenditure Restrictions

(1) Systems development charges shall not be expended for costs associated with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an incidental part of other capital improvements.
(2) Systems development charges shall not be expended for costs of the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements.
[Added Sec. 7, Ord. No. 6911, June 20, 1991.]

3.719 Improvement Plan

Before imposing an improvement fee, the council shall adopt a plan that:
(1) Lists the capital improvements that may be funded with improvement fee revenues; and
(2) Lists the estimated cost and time of construction of each improvement.
The plan may be modified at any time.
[Added Sec. 8, Ord. No. 6911, June 20, 1991.]

3.721 Collection of Charge

(1) The systems development charges established by resolution pursuant to this ordinance are payable upon issuance of:
(a) A building permit;
(b) A development permit for development not requiring the issuance of a building permit; or
(c) A permit to connect to the sewer system.
 
(2) If development is commenced or connection is made to the sewer system without an appropriate permit, the systems development charge is immediately payable upon the earliest date that a permit was required.

(3) The City Manager shall collect the applicable systems development charge from the developer of a parcel when a permit that allows building or development or a parcel is issued or when a connection to the sewer system of the city is made.

(4) The City Manager shall not issue such permit or allow such connection until the charge has been paid in full, until provision for installment payments has been made pursuant to section 10 of this ordinance or unless an exemption has been granted.

(5) Additional provisions regarding collection of system development charges may be set forth in the resolution establishing the charge.

[Added Sec. 9, Ord. No. 6911, June 20, 1991.]

3.723 Credits

The resolution establishing an improvement fee shall provide for a credit against such fee for the construction of a qualified public improvement, as provided by ORS 223.304. Additional credits beyond those required by the statute may be allowed by such resolution. Credit shall not be transferable from one development to another or from one type of capital improvement to another. [Added Sec. 10, Ord. No. 6911, June 20, 1991.]

3.725 Installment Payment

(1) When an eligible systems development charge is due and collectable, the owner of the parcel of land subject to the development charge may apply for payment in up to 40 semi-annual installments, to include interest on the unpaid balance, in accordance with ORS 223.208 and city ordinances.  In addition to single family residences and multi-family dwellings, the City hereby also authorizes the use of installment payments for all types of development, including but not limited to commercial and industrial properties.  The application shall provide that the owner agrees to pay an additional specified amount for bond issuance and administration costs, which shall be determined on the same basis as the most recent bond issuance and administration costs charged to persons for bonding assessments for local improvements. The application shall provide that the owner agrees to pay interest at the rate of 8 percent per annum on the unpaid balance until the bonds are sold and thereafter the rate shall be the net effective interest rate on the bond issue rounded up to the next one-tenth of one percent. The application shall also provide that the owner agrees to pay a billing charge to be added to each installment. The billing charge shall be a pro-rated share of the actual cost of billing and keeping records of installment payment accounts. The amount of the billing charge shall be determined from time to time by the Finance Director.

(2) The City Manager shall provide application forms for installment payments which shall include a waiver of all rights to contest the validity of the lien except for the correction of computational errors. The applicant shall pay an administration fee in cash at the time of application in the amount of three percent of the balance due or $25, whichever is greater.

(3) An application for installment payments shall have the burden of demonstrating the applicant's authority to assent to the imposition of a lien on the parcel and that the interest of the applicant is adequate to secure payment of the lien.

(4) Upon acceptance of the application, the lien shall be entered in the lien docket. From that time the city shall have a first lien upon the described parcel for the amount of the systems development charge, together with interest on the unpaid balance at the rate established by the council. The lien shall be enforceable in the manner provided in ORS Chapter 223.

(5) Only those systems development charges designed to finance the purchase or development of a public park or recreational facility, or the construction, extension or enlargement of a street, storm sewer, community water supply or sewerage or disposal system (the last three facilities as defined in ORS 199.464), imposed by the city as a condition to issuance of any occupancy permit or imposed at some other time determined by ordinance, are eligible for payment in installments as set forth in this section. [Amd. Sec. 13, Ord. No. 7125, May 7, 1992; Amd. Ord. No. 7943, Aug. 17, 1995; Amd. Ord. No. 2003-243, Sept. 4, 2003.]


3.727 Segregation and Use of Revenue

(1) All funds derived from a particular type of systems development charge are to be segregated by accounting practices from all other funds of the city. That portion of the systems development charge calculated and collected on account of a specific facility system shall be used for no purpose other than those set forth in section 6 of this ordinance.
(2) The City Manager shall provide the city council with an annual accounting, based on the city's fiscal year, for systems development charges showing the total amount of systems development charge revenues collected for each type of facility and the projects funded from each account.
[Added Sec. 12, Ord. No. 6911, June 20, 1991.]

3.729 Appeal Procedure

(1) A person aggrieved by a decision required or permitted to be made by the City Manager under this ordinance or a person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of systems development charge revenues may appeal the decision or the expenditure to the City Council as provided in Section 1.025, or subsection (2) below, describing with particularity the decision or expenditure from which the person appeals.

(2) An appeal of an expenditure must be filed within two years of the date of the alleged improper expenditure. Appeals of any other decision must be filed within 10 days of the date of the decision.

(3) The council shall determine whether the decision or the expenditure is in accordance with this Ordinance and the provisions of ORS 223.297 to 223.314 and may affirm, modify or overrule the decisions. If the council determines that there has been an improper expenditure of systems development charge revenues, the council shall direct that a sum equal to the misspent amount shall be deposited within one year to the credit of the account or fund from which it was spent.

(4) Appeals of decisions regarding imposition of sewage treatment systems development charges, except appeals challenging an expenditure, shall be heard by the Regional Committee pursuant to intergovernmental agreement. [Added Sec. 13, Ord. No. 6911, June 20, 1991; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2004-217, Nov. 4, 2004.]


3.731 Prohibited Connection

No person may connect to the water or sewer systems of the city unless the appropriate systems development charge has been paid or a lien or installment payment method has been applied for and approved.
[Added Sec. 14, Ord No. 6911, June 20, 1991.]

3.733 Effect on Monies Previously Collected

The provisions of Sections 1-14 of this ordinance do not apply to systems development charges collected prior to its effective date. Use of funds previously collected shall be governed by the law in effect at the time of collection.
[Added Sec. 15, Ord. No. 6911, June 20, 1991.]

3.735 Severability

The invalidity of a section or subsection of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections or subsections.
[Added Sec. 16, Ord. No. 6911, June 20, 1991.]

3.737 Effective Date

Sections 3.705 through 3.735 shall be effective July 1, 1991.
[Added Sec. 17, Ord. No. 6911, June 20, 1991.]

3.739 Deferral of System Development Charges

(1) Notwithstanding other provisions to the contrary, including Section 3.876, builders and developers may defer payment of street, sewer, storm drain, and parks System Development Charges (SDCs) as follows.
(2) To seek deferral of SDCs under this section, a builder or developer must file an application in a form provided by the City at the time of building permit application, and must pay a fee established by Council resolution. 
(3) When SDCs are deferred as set forth in this section, the SDCs will be calculated at the time the deferral application is filed.  All timelines for challenging the calculation of SDCs run from this date of calculation, and not from the due date for payment of SDCs as set forth below. 
(4) The amount of SDCs which may be deferred as provided in this section is as follows:
a. For single-family residential development, the full amount of SDCs can be deferred as set forth in subsection (5).  The deferral mechanism set forth in this section shall not be available if the total SDCs for a particular property are calculated to be over $500,000.
b. For multi-family residential development, commercial development, and industrial development, if the total SDCs are $250,000 or less, the full amount of SDCs can be deferred as set forth in subsection (5).  If the total SDCs are between $250,001 and $500,000, then 30% of the SDCs shall be paid at time of building permit issuance, and the remainder can be deferred as set forth in subsection (5).  The deferral mechanism set forth in this section shall not be available if the total SDCs for a particular property are calculated to be over $500,000.
(5) The length of the deferral provided for in this section is as follows:
a. For single-family residential development, payment of SDCs shall be deferred to time of sale, or time of actual occupancy, whichever occurs first.  For purposes of this section, “time of sale” refers to sale of a structure, not sale of a bare lot.
b. For multi-family residential development, commercial development, and industrial development, payment of SDCs shall be deferred to issuance of certificate of occupancy, time of sale, or time of actual occupancy, whichever occurs first. 
c. In circumstances where payment of SDCs has been deferred until time of sale, the SDCs shall be paid by the seller as opposed to the buyer.
(6) Whenever SDCs are deferred as set forth in this section, the City shall place a lien in the amount of the deferred SDCs on the property as per the mechanism specified in Section 3.440.  The lien shall be entered at least sixty days after approval of the application for SDC deferral.
(7) SDCs deferred under this section do not accrue interest until they are due as set forth in subsection (5) above.  If not paid when due, SDCs will accrue interest from that due date at the rate of eighteen percent (18%) per annum simple interest, as set forth in Section 3.470(2).  The City Recorder shall have the authority to adjust the rate under the circumstances set forth in Section 3.470(2).
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-97, Aug. 2, 2018, effective Aug. 17, 2018.]
 

3 Systems Development Charges Arterial and Collector Streets (3.1 to 3.827)

3.1 Table of Values

TABLE 3.1

TABLE OF VALUES FOR DETERMINING ATTRIBUTABLE NEW TRAVEL

The following table shall be used in the calculation of the Street Development Charge:

 

CATEGORY OF USE

REPRESENTATIVE TRIP-ENDS PER UNIT

PERCENT REDUCTION

CHARGEABLE TRIP-ENDS PER UNIT

AVERAGE TRIP-LENGTH

1. RESIDENTIAL

 	 	 	 
A. Single-family

10 each

0

10/dwelling

6.7

B. Multi-family

 	 	 	 
1) Regular

6.6/dwelling

0

6.6/dwelling unit

6.7

2) Senior Housing

3.3/dwelling

0

10/dwelling

6.7

2. TRANSPORTATION

 	 	 	 
A. Commercial Airport

60/comm'l flights/day

10

54/comm'l flights/day

5.8

B. Truck/Bus

 	 	 	 
Terminals

82/acre

0

82/acre

5.8

3. RETAIL

 	 	 	 
A. 0 - 50,000

87.87-(0.8787xGFA) per 1000sf*

40

52.72-(0.5272xGFA) per 1000sf*

5.8

B. 50,001 - 175,000

46.27-(0.0469xGFA) per 1000sf*

40

27.77-(0.0282xGFA) per 1000sf*

5.8

C. 175,001 & up

38.06 per 1000sf

40

22.84 per 1000sf

5.8

4. SERVICES

 	 	 	 
A. Hotels/Motels

8.67/room

25

6.5/room

5.8

B. Professional

 	 	 	 
Personal and Repair Services

 	 	 	 
1) 0 - 15,000

26.11-(0.358xGFA) per 1000sf*

10

23.5-(0.322xGFA) per 1000sf*

5.8

2) 15,001 - 50,000

24.49-(0.2497xGFA) per 1000sf*

10

23.5-(0.322xGFA) per 1000sf*

5.8

3) 50,001 & up

12.00 per 1000sf

10

10.8 per 1000sf

5.8

C. Cemeteries

4.16/acre

0

4.16/acre

3.3

D. Amusement and Recreation Services

 	 	 	 
1) Outdoor

 	 	 	 
a) Park

2.2/acre

0

2.2/acre

9.0

b) Golf Course

37.6/hole

0

37.6/hole

9.0

E. Health Services

 	 	 	 
1) Hospital

20.2/1000sf

0

20.2/1000sf

5.8

2) Nursing Care Services

2.6/bed

0

2.6/bed

5.8

F. Educational Services

 	 	 	 
1) Elementary Schools

1.032/student

0

1.032/student

3.3

2) High Schools

3)  Colleges

1.385/student

1.2/student

0

0

1.385/student

1.2/student

3.3

3.3

 

G. Social Services

 	 	 	 
Membership
Organizations	 	 	 	 
1) Non-profits,

 	 	 	 
churches and fraternal organizations

7.7/1000sf

50

3.85/1000sf

3.3

5. GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION

68.9/1000sf

20

55.1/1000sf

3.3

6. OTHER COMMERCIAL/ INDUSTRIAL

 	 	 	 
A. 0 - 50,000

10.0-(0.10xGFA) per 1000sf*

0

10.0-(0.10xGFA) per 1000sf*

5.8

B. 50,001 & up

5.0 per 1000sf

0

5.0 per 1000sf

5.8

*GFA = Gross Floor Area ) 1000 sf

Where units are "square feet", this refers to the gross floor area of the entire building as hereinafter defined in this section. Where the units are "acres", this refers to the total improved area of the site. When calculating charges for developments that do not have direct access to an arterial or collector street, the average trip length shown in the table shall be reduced by 20% to account for the portion of the average trip that uses lower-order streets. “Having direct access” means the first public street right-of-way that one enters after leaving the property in question. If a development takes direct access onto two public streets of different classification, the street of the highest order shall be used to determine the average trip length. The column labeled "Percent Reduction" sets forth the estimated percentage of "passerby trips" or "diverted link trips" to be deducted so that the chargeable trips will reflect impacts on the system caused by the development.

UNITS OF MEASURE

1) Gross Floor Area (GFA): The gross floor area of a building is the same (in square feet) of the area at each floor level, including cellars, basements, mezzanines, penthouses, corridors, lobbies, stores, and offices, that are included within the principal outside faces of exterior walls, not including architectural setbacks or projections. Included are all stories or areas that have floor surfaces with clear standing head room (6 feet, 6 inches, minimum) regardless of their use. Where a ground level area, or part thereof, within the principal outside faces of the exterior wall is left unenclosed, the gross floor area of the unenclosed portion is said to be considered as a part of the overall square footage of the building. All unroofed areas and unenclosed roofed-over spaces, except as defined above, are to be excluded from the area calculations. Any roofed-over areas with three or more sides and used for storage of materials or goods shall be included in the gross floor area. For purposes of the trip-generation calculation, the gross floor area of any parking garages within the building shall not be included within the gross floor area of the entire building.

2) Other There are some business establishments where the unit of measure for the particular category-of-use in the above table is not applicable, e.g., card-lock gas stations where there is no building area or roofed-over areas. In such cases, the City Engineer may assign a trip-generation rate based on some other unit of measure, e.g., number of pumps, acres, etc.

[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 7855, April 6, 1995; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2000-181, Sept. 7, 2000; Amd. Ord. No. 2007-02, Jan. 18, 2007; Amd. Ord. No. 2012-197, Dec. 20, 2012.]


3.805 Purpose of System Development Charge

This ordinance establishes system development charges for capital improvements to the arterial and collector street system in accordance with ORS 223.297 to 223.314. The premise upon which the Street System Development Charge (SSDC) is based is that each new development should provide to the arterial and collector street system an additional amount of capacity representative of the demand that it will cause and that the charge to the developer will be representative of the cost of that additional capacity. In actual practice, the rates will be set lower than the amounts needed to fund all the needs generated by development. These charges will provide a significant portion of the funding needed for capital improvements and each developer will pay a fair share. It is assumed that, in most cases, direct construction of arterial or collector streets by a developer will not be necessary. In those cases where a developer does have to construct or improve arterial or collector streets within or outside the development as a condition of development approval, the developer will receive a credit against the system development charge. The SSDC is an "improvement fee" as defined in ORS 223.299 since the charge to the developer is for costs associated with capital improvements to be constructed. It is assumed that all traffic generators in the city impact the entire arterial and collector system and all SSDCs are calculated on the same basis regardless of the location of the development. The reasons for this assumption are:
(1) the city is fairly compact in size,
(2) there are no significant barriers to traffic flow,
(3) major traffic attractors such as Downtown, Medford Center, and Rogue Valley Mall are centrally located,
(4) residential generators are dispersed throughout the city and the surrounding area, and
(5) there is no factual basis for breaking the city into smaller street improvement districts.

[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6944, July 18, 1991; Amd. Sec. 13, Ord. No. 7855, April 6, 1995.]

3.806 [Repealed, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2011-160, Aug. 18, 2011.]

repealed


3.807 Establishment of the Street System Development Charge

(1) There is hereby established a charge to be levied within the City to be known as the Street System Development Charge (SSDC), which shall be collected at the time of increased usage of the arterial and collector street system.  No building permit shall be issued after the effective date of this section unless the SSDC for the development for which the permit will be issued has been paid in full. As used in this section, "development" means construction, erection, or placement on a site of a building, structure, mobile home park pad, golf course, public park, or the construction of any addition to or enlargement of any of the foregoing. "Development" does not include setup of a mobile home on an existing pad in a mobile home park. When a change in use of a building which was subject to the SSDC when constructed results in increased usage of the arterial and collector street system, the occupant whose activities cause the increased usage shall be charged for the new use less a credit equal to the amount of the SSDC which was paid for the prior use. No charge for change of use shall be made after 3 years from the date the certificate of occupancy was issued for the building. No one shall be charged a SSDC on account of any "home occupation" as defined in Chapter 10 of this Code.

(2) The applicant for a building permit or business license shall be required to state in writing the intended use of the building in sufficient detail to enable the City Engineer to determine the appropriate category of use. If the use of a building changes or if the stated use is incorrect, the occupant shall report the change of use to the City Engineer within 30 days and promptly pay any additional SSDC that may be due. If any occupant subject to the SSDC fails to report an incorrect statement of use or a change of use within 30 days or fails to pay the additional SSDC within 10 days after invoice, the occupant shall pay a penalty of 10% of the balance due plus interest on the unpaid balance at the rate of 1.5% per month.

(3) At the time of development, the person applying for a building permit shall submit a reduced building plan to the following specifications:
Size: 8 1/2" x 11" or 11" x 17" sheet
Scale: 1 inch = 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, or 100 feet.

The building plan shall show the footprint of all floors and the division of tenant space or suites.

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7052, January 2, 1992; Amd. Ord. No. 7083, March 5, 1992; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 7618, Apr. 21, 1994; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2000-182, Sept. 7, 2000; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2011-160, Aug. 18, 2011.]

3.809 Administrative officer designated

The City Manager shall employ a qualified person as City Engineer. In addition to such other duties and responsibilities as may be assigned to him, the City Engineer shall be responsible for the administration of this ordinance. The City Engineer shall be responsible for developing administrative procedures for calculation and collection of fees, developing and administering capital improvement programs and related activities.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 6944, July 18, 1991.]

3.811 Methodology for Calculation of the SSDC

(1) The formula for calculating the SSDC shall be:

Attributable New Travel in Vehicular-Miles Per Day = (Vehicular Trip Ends Per Day x Average Trip Length) ) 2

New Lane-Miles of Roads = Attributable Travel ) Capacity Per Lane-Mile in Vehicles Per Day

Construction Cost = New Lane-Miles of Roads x Construction Cost Per Lane-Mile (See (3) below)

Right of Way Cost = New Lane-Miles of Roads x Right of Way Cost Per Lane-Mile of constructed street (See (5) below)

Credits = Present Value of Future Annual Payments + Allowable Developer Costs

SSDC (impact fee) = Construction Cost + Right of Way Cost - Credits

(2) The construction cost factor used in computing the Street Systems Development Charge shall be set as follows per lane mile.  This value may be updated from time to time by the City Council.

     After Termination of  
17-Transportation Surcharge                                 July 1, 2017
           $400,749                                                        $416,378

(3) The right-of-way cost factor used in computing the Street Systems Development Charge shall be set at the rate per lane mile of constructed street as shown below. This value may be updated from time to time by the City Council.

The following rate is hereby established for the right-of-way cost factor for one lane-mile of constructed street: 

    After Termination of
17-Transportation Surcharge                       July 1, 2017
        $162,402                                                $168,736

(4) The capacity factors used in computing the Street Systems Development Charge shall be 5,500 vehicles per lane-mile per day. This figure is based on average weekday traffic volumes.

(5) The values to be used for attributable new travel shall be as set forth in Table 3.1 entitled "Table of Values for Determining Attributable New Travel." The Category of Use shall be determined in accordance with the principles of classification set forth in Section 3.814 and the definitions set forth in 3.816.

(6) Credit shall be given for the present worth value of the projected increase in future property tax payments to retire arterial and collector street improvement bonds using a discount rate of seven percent (7%). The value of the improvements to be used in this calculation shall be the value shown in the building permit records.

(7)  Rates shall be adjusted July 1 each year thereafter by the January to January Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index (ENR-CCI), beginning July 1, 2017.

(8) Changes in the SSDC rate shall be applied to development applications and building permits as follows:

(a) Any complete application for a building permit for a project which has received the required approvals, such as Site Plan and Architectural Commission or Planning Commission approvals, and which has been entered into the City’s computerized building permit system prior to the effective date of the change, or is submitted by 5:00 p.m. of the previous business day, will be charged the old SSDC rate. All others shall be charged the new rate.

[Added Sec. 4, Ord. No. 6944, July 18, 1991; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7855, April 6, 1995; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 1998-172, Aug. 6, 1998; Amd Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-181, Sept. 7, 2000; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2005-227, Oct. 6, 2005; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2007-103, May 17, 2007; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2009-125, June 4, 2009; Amd. Ord. No. 2011-121, July 7, 2011; Amd. Ord. No. 2011-225, Nov. 17, 2011; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2016-13, Jan. 21, 2016; Amd. Sec. 1. Ord. No. 2017-67, June 15, 2017.]

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


3.812 [Repealed, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2011-160, Aug. 18, 2011.]

repealed


3.813 Alternate Calculations

(1) If an applicant does not want to use the trip generation rates as established by the City for determining the Street SDC or Street utility fee, the applicant may request an independent traffic study to determine the proposed development's trip generation rate.  The following process applies to both the Street SDC and Street utility fee except where noted.

(2) Anytime prior to the issuance of the required permit, an applicant may elect to use the Alternate Fee Calculation method of determining the trip generation rate for the type of development proposed. This election must be by written application to the City Engineer and must be accompanied with payment of the Street SDC fee using the standard methodology and values found in Table 3.1.

(3) If the developer or customer elects to use the Alternate Fee Calculation and if the trip-generation rates resulting from the independent traffic study are at least twenty-five (25) percent higher or lower than the trip-generation rates found in Table 3.1, Table of Values for Determining Attributable New Travel for the appropriate category-of-use for Street SDC fee, or Table 4.1, ITE Bundles and Formulas for Determining Trip-Ends for the Street utility fee, then the values generated by the independent traffic study shall be used to compute the fee. If the study rates are within 25% of the values in the City's tables, then the City's values shall be used.

(4) In order to be used to calculate the Street SDC for a proposed development or Street utility fee using the Alternate Fee Calculation method, the independent traffic study must meet the following standards unless the City's Traffic Engineer modifies them because of unique circumstances:
 
(a) The completed study must be stamped by either a licensed traffic engineer or a licensed civil engineer qualified to conduct traffic studies, who has been approved by the City's Traffic Engineer prior to beginning the study. If a civil engineer is selected, a signed and stamped statement of qualifications signifying their ability to perform such studies shall be required. The City's approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.
 
(b) All calculations shall be based on the average weekday traffic on the adjacent street for a general type of development similar to the proposed, and not on the average weekday traffic on the development site itself. The purpose of the study is to determine what a typical development like the one proposed will generate in trips after it has become an established entity in the community. Traffic counts shall be at least 12-hour counts.
 
(c) A minimum of five local sites with comparable land use shall be used for the study and approved by the City's Traffic Engineer. If, in the sole discretion of the City's Traffic Engineer, there are insufficient local sites, the Traffic Engineer will consider alternate sites within the states of Idaho, Oregon or Washington. The sites shall all have land uses that are of comparable general description to that of the proposed development when it is completed and in use.
 
(d) The traffic study shall be designed in accordance with the methodology described in the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual, current edition.
 
(e) The request to use the alternate calculation shall include a detailed description and drawing of the proposed development site, a description and drawing of each sampling site, a description of why these sites are representative of the impact likely to be generated by the proposed development and such other information as may be required by the City's Traffic Engineer.
 
(f) The completed report of the study shall be in a form approved by the City's Traffic Engineer and upon its completion shall be submitted to the City's Traffic Engineer for approval.

(5) The City's Traffic Engineer may approve, approve with conditions or reject the trip generation rate calculated in the report prepared under paragraph 4 above. The City Traffic Engineer shall approve the report if it conforms to generally accepted principles of traffic engineering. Upon approval, the trip rate for the proposed development shall be used to calculate the Street SDC except as described in paragraph 3 above. In the event that the Alternate Calculation results in a Street SDC which is less than that derived from the standard calculation, upon approval of the Alternate Calculation by the City Traffic Engineer, the City shall refund to the applicant the excess Street SDC collected, or reduce the amount the applicant agreed to pay. If the approved Alternate Calculation results in a Street SDC greater than the standard calculation, the applicant shall pay the difference to the City. In the event the applicant fails to promptly pay the difference to the City, the City may suspend the permit for the development or take other collection action until payment is made.  In the event the Alternative Calculation results in a revised street utility fee, refunds or additional charges shall be made in accordance with Section 4.1205, Adjustment of Bills for Billing Error.

[Added Sec. 5, Ord. No. 6944, July 18, 1991; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 7855, April 6, 1995; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2000-182, Sept. 7, 2000; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2011-160, Aug. 18, 2011; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2012-197, Dec. 20, 2012.]

3.814 Principles of Classification

(1) Definitions

(a) SIC Manual: Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1987 edition. Published by Executive Office of the President - Office of Management and Budget.

(b) Establishment: An establishment is an economic unit, generally at a single physical location, where business is conducted or where services or industrial operations are performed.

(c) Auxiliary Establishment: An establishment which is primarily engaged in performing management or support services for other establishments of the same company. According to the SIC manual, it is to be treated as a separate establishment only if it is located at a separate site. Examples of activities that might be considered auxiliary are: management and other general administrative functions such as accounting, data processing, and legal services; research, development and testing; and warehousing

(2) Classifying:  In assigning categories-of-use during the building permit process, the following principles shall be used as a guide:

(a) Classifications shall be made according to the 1987 edition of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual as much as possible. Exceptions to this are outlined in the foregoing definitions. Other factors, such as zoning, may also affect the classification.

(b) Each building permit is to be classified according to the primary activity of the establishment that will, or does, occupy the building or site. (To determine the primary activity of an establishment selling both retail and wholesale goods, the relative number of sales to general public customers shall be used rather than the volume of sales dollars).

(c) Where distinct and separate economic activities are performed at a single physical location, or in a single building, each activity may be treated as a separate establishment and, therefore, may be classified separately.

(i) Split use within a building shall be determined on the basis of the nature of the business rather than any particular use of floor space within the building. For example--a manager's office or bookkeeper's office within a retail store shall not provide a basis for splitting the use of that building into "Retail" and "Professional Service". That office is an integral part of the business and the business is a retail business, not a professional office or service. The entire floor area shall be considered to be retail for purposes of calculating the Street SDC fees.

(ii) Another aspect to consider is whether different aspects of the same business which are housed within the same building could 'stand alone' as businesses of their own. For example, Les Schwab and other tire stores sell tires, batteries, etc.--retail items. And this is a major part of their business. But they also do a lot of service work--installation, flat repair, brake work, alignments, etc. This is also a large part of their business. Either one of these could 'stand alone', i.e., does not need the other aspect of the business to function. This should be a necessary test when determining whether to allow 'split use' for a particular business.

(iii) Buildings which house two or more separate businesses may be allowed to use different categories of use. A retail store and an insurance office in the same building would allow a 'split use' of "Retail" and "Professional Service" even though they are housed in the same building. The key difference between this situation and that in paragraph (i) above is that there are two distinct and separate businesses here. Again, the focus needs to be on the nature of the entire business and not incremental divisions of floor space within the building.


(d) Separate buildings of a single establishment (business) at a single physical location may be classified separately if they fall under the SIC Manual definition of "auxiliary establishment (see definition in Section 3.814(1)c--examples of auxiliary establishments are found on pages 14, 15 and 17 of the SIC Manual). An auxiliary establishment may occasionally be considered for separate classification even though it is physically connected to the primary operating establishment, but only if the employment is significant for both the auxiliary and the primary activity of the auxiliary serves other establishments of the same company.

(e) Building complexes, such as strip malls, etc., where more than 50,000 sq. ft. are contained under one roof and where the businesses are primarily retail, shall be considered to be all retail. No SDC fees will be charged when one space goes vacant and then fills again.

(3) Appeals--Any person dissatisfied with the category-of-use assigned to his or her project may appeal such classification to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Recorder any time after the person is informed of the classification, but not later than 10 days after payment of the SSDC.  The decision of the City Council in these matters shall be based on the primary nature of the establishment and not by the amount of traffic generated by it.  The primary nature of an establishment shall be determined by the Principles of Classification found in Section 3.814(1) and (2) of the Code and the definitions of the Categories-of-Use found in Section 3.816 of the Code.  Decisions by the Council shall be used for the SSDC fee categories-of-use.

[Added Sec. 5, Ord. No. 7855, April 6, 1995; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2000-182, Sept. 7, 2000; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2004-217, Nov. 4, 2004; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2011-160, Aug. 18, 2011; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2012-197, Dec. 20, 2012.]


3.815 Explanation of SSDC Methodology

This section explains and defines the method of calculating the SSDC:

(1) Travel. The relevant travel by land-use type and unit is calculated by multiplying the number of trip ends per day (ADT) times the average trip length. The result is then reduced to one-half to adjust the number of trip ends to the number of travel trips (a travel trip, say from home to work, would have two trip-ends, one leaving home and one arriving at work) but would count as only one trip. The individual factors in this calculation and their sources are: a. Vehicular Trip Ends Per Day. The values shown in Table 3.1 for Average Daily Travel (ADT), in trip-ends per day, are based upon available data from published and unpublished sources. Rates have been adjusted to reflect percentages-of-new trips for each land use. b. Average Trip Lengths. The values for Average Trip Lengths are based upon available data from published and unpublished sources. In calculating SSDCs for developments that do not have direct access to an arterial or collector street, the average trip length shall be reduced by 20% to account for the portion of the average trip that uses lower-order streets. “Having direct access” means the first public street right-of-way that one enters after leaving the property in question. If a development takes direct access onto two public streets of different classification, the street of the highest order shall be used to determine the average trip length.

(2) Required New Lane Miles. This is calculated by dividing the attributable new miles of daily travel by the capacity of a lane of roadway.

(3) Construction Cost. The number of lane-miles of new roads, as discussed above, is multiplied by the construction cost per lane-mile of road.

(4) Right of Way Cost. The right of way cost equals the number of lane miles required multiplied by the right of way cost per lane-mile.

(5) Credit for Land and Improvements.

(a) If land is required to be deeded or dedicated to the City for collector or arterial street right-of-way as a condition of development approval, the developer shall receive compensation by credit for that exaction as described in (5)(c) below. Credits for right-of-way shall be equal to the value of such land on the date of the Final Order of either the Planning Commission or the Site Plan and Architectural Commission, whichever occurs first and includes the condition for the dedication. Said value will be determined by the real market value last recorded on the tax assessor's records for the parcel being developed or the value indicated by an appraisal by a licensed fee appraiser selected by the City if the developer agrees to pay for the appraisal and deposits the estimated cost in advance. The tax assessor’s value shall be used unless a written request to have the land value determined via appraisal is submitted to the City Engineer within 60 calendar days of said Final Order. The appraisal shall determine the value of the parent parcel prior to project influence and shall be done in accordance with accepted methods used in the industry for establishing the value of public right-of-way. The right-of-way cost factor used to compute the SSDC will not be considered in determining the amount of credit. Land required to be deeded to the City for any other classification of streets other than collector or arterial will be deemed to be for the developer's benefit and will not be compensated for by credits.

(b) Where it is a condition of development approval that the developer either provide in part or in its entirety a street improvement or traffic device that provides additional total capacity to collector or arterial streets of the City, the developer will receive compensation by credit for the reasonable cost (as described in (c)(i)(e) below) of that additional capacity, as described in (c) below, unless the need for the improvement is specifically attributable to that development. If, for his convenience, the developer wishes to provide a greater facility than required or wishes to construct a facility prior to the time that the City ordinarily would, the City, at its sole discretion, may elect to participate but shall not be required to do so. The credits provided by this paragraph apply to both on-site and off-site improvements.

(c) (i)(a) All SSDC credits for eligible land dedications and street improvements will be paid in cash in accordance with the parameters identified below.  All cash payments will be approved administratively, per applicable expense authority limits of the City's contracting and purchasing code.  For those developments whose credit period began (see Section 3.815(5)(c)(iii) below) prior to June 4, 2009, payments shall be made to the entity applying for the building permit unless, a written agreement already existed prior to June 4, 2009 between the developer who constructed the improvements or dedicated the right-of-way, and the City. For those developments whose credit period begins after June 4, 2009, payments shall be made to the developer who constructs the improvements or dedicates the right-of-way, unless otherwise provided for in a written agreement between said developer and the City. Such an agreement is also subject to the restrictions of Section 3.723.

(b) Payment of Credits for Residential Land Divisions--The total credit allowed for a single- or multi-family residential land division development shall be calculated following the construction of the improvements, or following the recording of final plat, whichever comes later, and will be prorated across the number of dwelling units to be constructed in said development.  The proration for a single- or multi-family development will be based on the ratio of the chargeable trips for each dwelling unit to the total chargeable trips for the entire development using the numbers in Table 3.1, located at the end of this chapter. Cash payment shall be made as each building permit is issued. The maximum credit to be allocated to each individual dwelling unit shall be no more than the value of the corresponding SSDC fee which will be due for that same dwelling unit at the time the total credit value for the development is calculated. Credits in excess of the SSDC fees to be generated from such a development shall be paid in cash upon recording of the final plat.

(c) Payment of Credits for Non-Residential Land Divisions--Credits for commercial and industrial land divisions shall be calculated at the same point in the review process as those for residential land divisions. Cash payments shall be made as each building permit fee is paid which has a SSDC fee as part of said building permit. The cash payment resulting from a new building permit in a non-residential land division shall be equal to the amount of the SSDC fee calculated for said building permit. Credits shall be paid out as building permits are issued, on a "first-come, first-served" basis until used up. Total credits for the development shall be reduced by the amount of each payment until: 1) all parcels in the land division are fully developed, 2) the credits are reduced to zero, or 3) the credit period expires, whichever comes first. If credits remain after all parcels are developed, and if the credit period has not expired, the remaining credits shall be paid in cash to the developer.

(d) Credits for other types of developments, such as those approved by the Site Plan and Architectural Commission, shall be determined after the completion of the improvements, and/or recording of the right-of-way dedication. Distribution or assignment of these credits shall be in accordance with Section 3.815(5)(c)(i)(a).

(e) If the developer constructed the improvements, then the credit will be calculated using the same construction cost factor per lane mile used in the SSDC formula (Section 3.811(2)), regardless of the actual cost. In calculating credits for right-of-way, exactions and assessments, no credit shall be given for the time value of money.

(ii) When a change in the SSDC formula of Section 3.811(2) occurs, street construction credits for all developments shall be applied based on the date of the first submittal of the public improvement drawings to the Engineering Division for review and approval. Street construction credits for developments whose public improvement drawings are submitted to the City for review before the effective date of the change shall be determined using the old SSDC construction cost factor. Those developments for which public improvement drawings are submitted on or after the effective date of the change will be credited using the new SSDC construction cost factor. Credits generated by right-of-way dedications are not affected by the changes in the SSDC formula in Section 3.811(2).

(iii) The length of the credit period for all developments shall be ten years, which is the maximum allowed by ORS 223.304(5)(d). For subdivisions and land partitions, the credit period shall begin with the date the final plat is recorded with the Jackson County Clerk’s Office. For other types of development, the credit period shall begin with the date the improvements are accepted by the City. Plats which were recorded after May 16, 1992, and whose credit period had been set through previous ordinances at either three years or five years, shall have their credit periods extended to ten years.

(iv) Credits allowed under this subsection (5) shall be paid as building permits are issued for construction within the platted area to which the credit was assigned until the total credits for the development have been used up or the credit period has expired. At the expiration of the credit period, any remaining credits shall be canceled and forfeited.

(d) When a change in use of an existing building results in increased usage of the arterial and collector street system, the occupant whose activities cause the increased usage shall be charged for the new use less a credit equal to the current SSDC for the prior use, whether occupied or vacant, and regardless of the length of the vacancy.  Said credit shall also be subject to the conditions of Section 3.807.  No refund will be given for a decrease in street usage. Credit may also be given for demolished or destroyed buildings previously existing on a parcel.  The burden of proof showing that there was a permitted building on the subject parcel, and the nature of its use, shall fall on the applicant.  No cash credits may be given for excess credits due to demolished buildings.

[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6996, October 3, 1991; Amd. Ord. No. 7448, August 19, 1993; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 7855, April 6, 1995; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 1998-172, Aug. 6, 1998; Amd Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-112, June 15, 2000; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2000-181 and Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2000-182, Sept. 7, 2000; Amd. Ord. No. 2002-104, June 20, 2002; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2003-245, Sept. 4, 2003; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2005-227, Oct. 6, 2005; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2007-103, May 17, 2007; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2009-125, June 4, 2009; Amd. Sec. 2 Ord. No. 2017-69, June 15, 2017.]

NOTE: Table 3.1 referenced herein appears at the end of this Chapter.


3.816 Definitions of Categories of Uses

The categories of use for determining the Street System Development Charge are defined as follows:

(1) Residential

(a) Single-family

A single-family detached dwelling. This category shall also include manufactured homes not located in a mobile home park and detached homes in self-contained parks or villages (including those for senior citizens). Boarding houses, rooming houses, etc. with five or fewer bedrooms shall be considered to be an SFR. A guest house shall be considered a part of the single-family residence and no additional fee shall be charged. If any of the rooms have kitchen facilities, then they shall be considered to be a separate dwelling unit and shall be charged under the "multi-family" category. Kitchen or kitchen facilities shall be any area separate from bathing and sanitation facilities which can be utilized for food preparation and which includes a sink, or plumbing for a sink, and may include any or all of the following: a dishwasher, stove, oven, or space for a refrigerator. If the building or facility contains more than five bedrooms, then it shall be charged under the "Hotel/Motel" category. A guest house or room is an accessory building or room designed, constructed and used to provide temporary sleeping accommodations for guests or for members of the same family as that occupying the main structure. A guest house or room contains no kitchen or kitchen facilities.

(b) Multi-family

(i) Regular - A building that is divided into more than one dwelling unit for the purpose of renting or single-family ownership (such as condominiums). For the purpose of the Street Systems Development Charge, mobile home parks shall be included in this category. Facilities may include recreation rooms, swimming pools and laundry facilities. These facilities shall not be categorized separately unless they are used primarily by persons other than those who reside in the mobile home park, or apartment/ condo/ townhouse complex. Boarding, lodging, rooming houses, etc. with five or fewer bedrooms shall be classified as SFRs; if more than five bedrooms, they shall be classified under "Hotel/Motel". If rooms contain kitchen facilities, then they shall be considered "Multi-family". Accessory dwelling units (ADU) shall be charged as multi-family residences. For SSDC purposes an ADU is defined as a residential dwelling unit, with a kitchen or kitchen facilities (as defined in paragraph a. ‘Single Family’), that can be used for independent living and is located on the same lot as the single-family residence.

(ii) Senior Housing Facility - A facility that will be 85% occupied by persons 55 years of age or older and which contains residential units similar to apartments or condominiums, and may be self-contained villages. They may contain special services such as medical facilities, dining facilities and some limited supporting retail facilities. This category would include, but not be limited to, retirement communities, congregate care facilities and elderly housing (attached). Although each of these may include medical facilities, the intent of this category is to include only those housing facilities considered to be providing independent living for the elderly. Detached elderly housing shall be considered to be in the Single-family category.

(2) Transportation

(a) Commercial Airport

A facility used for commercial air traffic and passengers. Only those buildings which are directly related to the operation of the airport itself shall be considered as part of this category. All other buildings shall be classified according to their individual function. Buildings for the manufacture, repair or servicing of aircraft shall be classified in separate categories. Building used to house offices of charter and other commercial flight services shall be classified under "Professional Services".

(b) Truck/Bus Terminal

A truck terminal is where goods are transferred between trucks, trucks and railroads, or trucks and ports, and includes all maintenance and office facilities and all land used by a commercial transportation company. A bus terminal includes all passenger loading and/or maintenance and storage areas used by a commercial bus company.

(i) Trucks - The focus of the ITE Manual's definition is the transfer of goods. It is not a facility whose primary use is by the general public. It serves primarily as a business-to-business carrier.

(ii) Bus Terminal - includes the entire improved area of a commercial bus company's facility that is used for passenger loading and/or maintenance and storage areas.

(3) Retail

This category includes such business establishments as those selling building materials, hardware, garden supply, mobile home dealers, general merchandise stores, food stores, car dealers, gas stations, apparel and accessory stores, eating and drinking places, and miscellaneous retail as outlined in the 1987 edition of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual. This category is intended to cover establishments which are primarily engaged in selling merchandise for personal or household consumption and rendering services which are incidental to the sale of the goods. Some of the important characteristics of Retail establishments are: they are engaged in activities to attract the general public to buy; they may process their products, but such processing is incidental or subordinate to selling; they sell to customers for personal or household use.

There are exceptions to the general rule of selling to the general public for personal or household use. Some of them are: lumber yards; paint, glass, and wallpaper stores; typewriter stores; stationery stores; and gasoline service stations. These sell both to the general public and to businesses but are classified as Retail by the SIC Manual. However, establishments which sell products only to institutional or industrial users and to other wholesalers and establishments that sell similar merchandise for use exclusively by business establishments should be considered to be wholesale activities. Such establishments will be classified under the "Other Commercial/Industrial" category.

Establishments primarily engaged in selling such merchandise as plumbing equipment, electrical supplies, used automobile parts, and office furniture shall be classified as "Retail" if the higher proportion of their customers are the general public. This rule is contrary to the statement in the Retail section of the SIC manual.

Establishments at which sales people are based, but who do their selling through visitations to the general public at other sites, shall be classified as "Retail". If these sales are to institutions, retailers, contractors, or other businesses, then they shall be considered to be a wholesale activity and shall be classified under "Other Commercial/Industrial".

Processing that is incidental or subordinate to selling often is conducted at retail establishments. For example, restaurants prepare meals, meat markets cut meat, bakeries bake bread. Separate establishments which sell merchandise for personal or household consumption which has been manufactured or assembled by another establishment of the same company shall be classified as Retail.

Anything classified under Division G (Retail) of the SIC manual shall be categorized as Retail for Street SDC purposes. An exception is Industry No. 5961-Catalogue and Mail Order Houses. These shall be categorized under the "Other Commercial/Industrial" category of the fee schedule.

A facility which houses a business, the primary nature of which is to sell goods and which consists of a showroom or sales area, office, and a material supply or storage area for goods sold by said business, shall not be considered to be partially a warehouse. These material-supply, or stock areas, are to be considered as an integral part of the business and shall not constitute a basis for consideration as a separate category of use for Street SDC fee purposes. This does not imply that a development or building cannot be classified under more than one Category-of-Use under other circumstances.

(4) Services

(a) Hotel/Motel

A commercial lodging facility providing sleeping accommodations to the general public. All establishments which fall under Industry No. 7011 of the SIC code manual shall be classified under this category. Restaurants or restaurant/lounges which are associated with these establishments and are open to the general public will be classified separately as "Retail". Boarding houses, rooming houses, etc. consisting of six or more bedrooms shall be classified here also. Bedrooms with kitchen facilities shall be considered separate dwelling units and shall be classified under "Multi-family".

(b) Professional, Personal and Repair Services

Establishments primarily engaged in providing a wide variety of services for individuals, businesses and government establishments, and other organizations. Services such as financial, insurance, real estate, engineering, accounting, research, management, legal, medical, repair, recreational and amusement services, except as specifically listed under other categories. It also includes museums, art galleries and utility customer service centers.

This category includes all those establishments listed in the SIC code manual under Division H (Finance, insurance and real estate), Division I (Services), Major Group 07 (Agricultural Services) and Industry 4215 (Courier Services), except for the following:

7992 Public Golf Courses See Golf Course

8051 Skilled Housing Care Facilities See Health Services 8052 Intermediate Care Facilities See Health Services. 8059 Nursing and Personal Care Fac's. See Health Services.

806 Hospitals See Health Services.

821 Elementary and Secondary Schools See Ed. Services 822 Colleges, Universities, Professional Schools and Junior Colleges See Ed. Services (Prof. Schools to remain as a "Prof. Service")

8351 Child Day Care See Ed. Services

8361 Residential Care See SFR, Multi-fam. or Health Services

8399 Other Social Services See Non-Profit

8641 Fraternal Organizations Church/Fraternal See Non-Profit

8661 Religious Organizations See Non-Profit

7011 Hotels/Motels See Hotel/Motel

Division H: Financial, Insurance and Real Estate Services. Finance includes depository institutions, non-depository credit institutions, holding companies, other investment companies, brokers and dealers in securities and commodity contracts. Insurance covers carriers of all types of insurance and insurance agents and brokers. Real Estate includes real estate operators (property management), real estate agents and managers, title companies and developers.

Division I: Services (General)

This includes establishments providing personal, business, repair and amusement services; certain types of health services; legal, engineering and other professional services; certain kinds of educational services; membership organizations (except fraternal); and other miscellaneous services shall be included. Establishments which provide specialized services closely allied to, or incidental to, activities in other categories shall be included in those categories rather than Services. Customer service centers of utility companies shall be classified under "Professional Services".

(c) Cemetery

A place for burying the dead, including accessory buildings used for funerals, mausoleum and crematorium.

(d) Amusement and Recreation Services

Generally, all amusement and recreation facilities except golf courses and public parks shall be placed under the "Professional Services" category. Seasonal outdoor recreational facilities such as miniature golf, go-carts, bumper boats, etc. shall be charged as a "Professional Service", using the gross square footage of the activity area (excluding parking but including any buildings). The SSDC fee will be reduced by a factor of 2 to account for the seasonal nature of the activity.

Outdoor Recreation

(i) Golf Course - This category includes private country club and municipal golf courses. It does not include miniature golf courses. Included as accessory to the golf course shall be the putting green, pro shop, club house and lounge. Restaurant and banquet facilities shall be considered separately as "Retail". Driving ranges shall also be considered separately under "Professional Services".

(ii) Park - A publicly-owned parcel of land kept for ornament and recreation, or an area maintained in its natural state intended for public use, or an enclosed arena or stadium intended for sports activities. The entire area of each park shall be subject to the fee regardless of whether it is irrigated or not and regardless of the source of any irrigation water.

(e) Health Services

(i) Hospital An institution where medical or surgical care is given to non-ambulatory and ambulatory patients, and overnight accommodations are provided. The term 'hospital' does not, however, refer to medical clinics (facilities that provide diagnoses and outpatient care only) or to nursing homes (facilities devoted to long term care of persons unable to care for themselves). Private-practice physicians' offices (with waiting-rooms, reception areas and examination rooms) which are located in hospital buildings or on hospital-owned land shall be classified under the "Professional Service" category.

(ii) Nursing Care Services

Facilities devoted to long term care of persons unable to care for themselves. This type of facility is characterized by residents who do little or no driving. Traffic is primarily generated by employees, visitors, and deliveries. Residents would not normally leave these premises unattended. These are facilities where provision of medical care is a major element. Facilities such as convalescent homes, nursing homes, chronic care facilities, homes for the terminally ill shall be classified here (See also Section 805 of the SIC manual). Residential care facilities with incidental nursing or medical services shall be classified under the appropriate "Residential" category. Facilities for "independent living" shall also be classified as "Residential".

(f) Educational Services

(i) Elementary Includes Kindergarten, elementary, middle school or junior high school with no student drivers. Day care and nursery school facilities shall also be included in this category.  The charge for non-residentially based day-care and nursery schools shall be based on the total student capacity of the facility.  Home-based day care with a capacity of up to five (5) children shall be considered a home occupation for the purposes of the Street SDC.  Home-based day care with a capacity of more than five (5) children shall be charged Street SDC at the Elementary School rate for the total student or child capacity of the facility.

(ii) High School A school for students who have completed middle school or junior high school.

(iii) College - Post high school academic institutions offering associates, bachelors, masters or doctoral academic degrees.

(a) Fee Calculation.

(1) SSDC - The calculation for the Street System Development Charge for the Elementary, High School and College categories shall be based on the design capacity of classroom area per student, as defined in the Administrative Guidelines for Street SDC’s (as authorized in Section 3.809). This shall include temporary classrooms as well.

(iv) Other - Professional schools that do not normally grant an academic degree or diploma shall be classified as a "Professional Service".

(g) Social Services and Membership Organizations

Non-Profits, Churches and Fraternal Organizations Organizations that meet requirements of the Internal Revenue Service for charitable nonprofit income status and that are not included in any other defined category. For the purpose of the Street Utility Fee and the Street Systems Development Charge, separate residential units will not be considered for nonprofit status but will be classified under the appropriate "Residential" category.

(i) Church - A church or synagogue is a building or buildings which houses an assembly hall or sanctuary, meeting rooms, classrooms and, occasionally, dining and cooking facilities. The gross floor area of all areas combined shall be used to establish fees. If the classrooms are used on a regular, daily basis, they shall be classified as a "School", whether they are in a separate building or not. Day care centers located on church property or in church buildings shall be considered to be schools also.

(ii) Fraternal Organization - A fraternal organization or lodge building usually consists of a clubhouse with dining and drinking facilities, recreation and entertainment facilities and meeting rooms. The gross floor area of the entire facility shall be used to calculate the fees. If the dining facility is open to the general public, it may be charged as a restaurant under the "Retail" category.

(iii) Non-Profit - The term non-profit refers mainly to social service agencies and was intended to be applied to their headquarters or main administrative offices. Satellite or auxiliary facilities operated by these agencies at other sites shall not be categorized as non-profit but shall be according to the function of that particular site. Government offices directly concerned with the delivery of social services to individuals and families shall be included in the "Government Administration" category. Social services without the IRS non-profit designation shall be classified as a "Professional Service".

(5) Government Administration

Facilities used primarily in the administration of city, county, state or federal government, including post offices (offices, courts, etc.) and some social service programs. This category includes all establishments listed under Division J (Public Administration) of the SIC code manual and all social programs operated and administered by any level of government.

(6) Other Commercial/Industrial This category includes establishments engaged in construction contracting, manufacturing, wholesale-distribution, and warehousing, as well as mail order houses, mini-warehouses, utility maintenance facilities, hangars, and furniture and carpet stores.

(a) Construction Services - This shall refer to the fixed place of business from which construction activities are managed or generally administered and shall include equipment and materials storage, and repair facilities. Installation of prefabricated building equipment or materials by general and special trade contractors shall be included in this category. Similar installation work performed as a service incidental to sale by employees of an establishment which sells prefabricated equipment and materials to the general public shall be placed in "Retail" category. An example would be the sale and installation of preassemble equipment such as major household appliances. However, if site assembly is required it should be the "Other Commercial/Industrial" category.

(b) Industrial - This category shall be for establishments engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products. These establishments are usually described as plants, factories, or mills and characteristically use power driven machines and materials-handling equipment. Establishments engaged in assembling component parts of manufactured products are also considered manufacturing if the product is neither a structure nor other fixed improvement. Also included is the blending of materials, such as lubricating oils, plastics resins, or liquors.

The materials processed by manufacturing establishments include products of agriculture, forestry, fishing, mining, and quarrying as well as products of other manufacturing establishments. The new product of a manufacturing establishment may be finished in the sense that it is ready for utilization or consumption, or it may be semifinished to become a raw material for another establishment engaged in further manufacturing.

Manufacturing production is usually carried on for the wholesale market, for interplant transfer, or to order for industrial users, rather than for direct sale to the domestic consumer. If it is for direct sale to the domestic consumer, then it will be classified as either a "Professional Service" or "Retail". The following activities, although not always considered as manufacturing, are so classified (according to the SIC Manual):

Milk bottling and pasteurizing;
Publishing (depending on the customer);
Ready-mixed concrete production;
Wood preserving;
Various service-type industries to the manufacturing trade, such as type-setting, engraving, plate printing, and preparing electrotyping and stereotype plates, but not blueprinting or photocopying services;
Electroplating, plating, metal heat treating, and polishing for the trade;
Fabricating of signs and advertising displays;
Boat building.
Some manufacturing-type activities which are performed by establishments primarily engaged in activities which are covered by another Category of Use are:
Breaking of bulk and redistribution into smaller lots, including packaging, repackaging, or bottling products, such as liquors or chemicals shall be categorized as Wholesale or Retail;
Establishments engaged in selling, to the general public, products produced on the same premises from which they are sold, such as bakeries, candy stores or ice cream parlors shall be categorized as "Retail";
Tire retreading and rebuilding, sign painting and lettering shops, computer software production and the production of motion pictures shall be classified as a "Professional Service".
Cabinet work on a custom basis to individual order shall be considered as a "Professional Service". The gross floor area to be used for this category shall include all office, storage, research and other auxiliary areas that are located on the site.

(c) Wholesale-Distributor - An establishment primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm, construction contractors, or professional business users; to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers in buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or companies. The establishment will include any offices, storage and shipping facilities as part of the chargeable area under this category. Establishments at which sales people are based, but who do their selling through visitations to customers, shall be considered to be "wholesale" if their customers are other than the general public.

(d) Mail Order - Establishments primarily engaged in the sale of products by catalogue or mail-order. The product is not picked up by the customer. Orders are filled and delivered by mail.

(e) Warehouse - A building used primarily for long-term dead storage of materials or goods. It is usually a separate facility typified by infrequent access by users. No sales, service, or repair activities are permitted on the premises. A facility which houses a business, the primary nature of which is to sell goods, and which may consist of a showroom or sales area, office and materials supply or storage area for goods sold by said business, shall not be considered to be partially a 'warehouse'. These material-supply or stock areas are to be considered as an integral part of the business and shall not constitute a basis for consideration as a separate category of use.

(f) Mini-Warehouse - A facility in which a storage unit or vault is rented for the storage of a general line of goods. The unit is physically separated from other units.

(g) Utility Maintenance Facility - A facility used by a utility company for maintenance and storage of maintenance materials and equipment.

(h) Hangars - Buildings used for storing and maintaining aircraft. If aircraft other than the tenant's aircraft are maintained, then the facility will be considered to be performing a "Repair Service" and shall be classified accordingly.

(i) Furniture and Carpet Stores - Stores specializing in the sale of household furniture and/or carpeting. They are generally large and include storage areas. See Sections 5712 and 5713 of the SIC Code. This does not include stores that primarily sell appliances, floor covering other than carpet, cabinets or curtains/draperies.

[Added Sec. 6, Ord. No. 7855, April 6, 1995; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2000-182, Sept. 7, 2000; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2005-227, Oct. 6, 2005; Amd. Ord. No. 2007-02, Jan. 18, 2007; Amd. Ord. No. 2008-259, Dec. 18, 2008; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2011-160, Aug. 18, 2011; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2012-197, Dec. 20, 2012.]


3.817 Exemptions

(1) Additions to single-family and multi-family dwellings that do not constitute the addition of a dwelling unit, as defined by the Uniform Building code, are exempt from the SSDC.

(2) For uses other than single-family and multi-family residential, an alteration, replacement or change in use that does not change the parcel's or structure's chargeable traffic generation is exempt from the SSDC; provided, however, that additions to the square-footage of such uses are not exempt.

[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 6996, October 3, 1991; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2000-182, Sept. 7, 2000; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2005-227, Oct. 6, 2005; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2011-160, Aug. 18, 2011.]


3.819 Appeal Procedure

(1) A person aggrieved by a decision required or permitted to be made by the City Engineer under this ordinance or a person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of systems development charge revenues may appeal the decision or the expenditure as provided in Section 3.729.

(2) Provided however, that any appeal of a decision regarding determination of a Category of Use shall be filed and decided as provided in Section 3.814(3).

[Added Sec. 8, Ord No. 6944, July 18, 1991; Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 7855, April 6, 1995; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2004-217, Nov. 4, 2004.]


3.820 [Repealed Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2004-217, Nov. 4, 2004.]

 


3.821 Segregation and Use of Revenue

All funds collected pursuant to Sections 3.805 through 3.820 of this chapter shall be deposited in a special revenue fund known as the Arterial and Collector Street SDC Fund.

Those funds collected from the SSDC shall be used only for capital improvements on the arterial and collector street system of the City and costs incidental thereto and to pay for the equitable share of the cost of accounting, management and government which is attributable to the fund, which shall not exceed 5% of the gross revenues of the Fund during any fiscal year.


[Added Sec. 9, Ord. No. 6944, July 18, 1991; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2000-182, Sept. 7, 2000; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2011-160, Aug. 18, 2011.]

3.823 Improvement Plan

The City Council shall adopt by resolution an Arterial and Collector Street Improvement Plan, a copy of which shall be kept on file in the office of the City Recorder. This document shall set forth the plan for expenditure of the funds collected pursuant to Sections 3.805 through 3.820 of this chapter and shall conform to the requirements of ORS 223.309. This plan may be amended from time to time by resolution, whenever the Council deems it necessary to make a change in its capital improvement planning for arterial and collector streets.
[Added Sec. 10, Ord. No. 6944, July 18, 1991; Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2000-182, Sept. 7, 2000.]

3.824 Formal Review of Need

The City Council shall formally review the need for a Street Systems Development Charge and a monthly Street Utility Fee at least once every five years from the date of adoption of this ordinance.

[Added Sec. 10, Ord. No. 7855, April 6, 1995; Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2000-182, Sept. 7, 2000; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2011-160, Aug. 18, 2011.]

3.825 [Repealed, Sec. 11, Ord. No. 7855, April 6, 1995.]


3.827 Incorporation into Code of Medford; Effective Date

Revisions to Sections 3.811 and 3.815 pertaining to the SSDC shall go into effect January 1, 2001. 

[Added Sec. 12, Ord. No. 6944, July 18, 1991; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2000-181 and Amd. Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2000-182, Sept. 7, 2000; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2011-160, Aug. 18, 2011.]

3 Systems Development Charges Sewer Collection (3.830 to 3.846)

3.830 Purpose of Sewer Collection System Development Charge

This ordinance establishes a system development charge for capital improvements to the City of Medford's sanitary sewer collection system in accordance with ORS 223.297 to 223.314. The premise upon which the Sewer Collection System Development Charge (SCSDC) is based is that each new development, or changes to an existing development, should provide to the sanitary sewer collection system an additional amount of capacity representative of the demand that it will cause and that the charge to the developer will be representative of the cost of that additional capacity. In actual practice, the rates will be set lower than the amounts needed to fund all the needs generated by the development. These charges will provide a significant portion of the funding needed for capital improvements to effect the impacts new development causes in the downstream sanitary sewer system and each developer will pay a fair share. The SCSDC is an "improvement fee" as defined in ORS 223.299 since the charge to the developer is for costs associated with capital improvements yet to be constructed.
[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-35, Feb. 17, 2000.]

3.831 Establishment of the Charge

There is hereby established a charge to be levied within the City to be known as the Sanitary Sewer Collection System Development Charge (SCSDC), which shall be collected at the time of increased usage of the sanitary sewer collection system. No building permit shall be issued after the effective date of this section unless the SCSDC for the development for which the permit will be issued has been paid in full. As used in this section, "development" means construction, erection, or placement on a site of a building, structure, mobile home or manufactured dwelling pad, golf course, public park, or the construction of any addition to or enlargement of any of the foregoing or any other change in use which causes a site sewer discharge to increase. "Development" does not include setup of a mobile home on an existing pad in a mobile home or manufactured dwelling park.
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-35, Feb. 17, 2000.]

3.832 Administrative Officer Designated

The City Manager shall employ a qualified person as City Engineer. In addition to such other duties and responsibilities as may be assigned to him, the City Engineer shall be responsible for the administration of this ordinance. The City Engineer shall be responsible for developing administrative procedures for calculation and collection of fees, developing and administering capital improvement programs and related activities.
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-35, Feb. 17, 2000.]

3.833 Explanation of SDC Methodology

The methodology of the SCSDC is based on future capacity-increasing capital improvements as identified in the City's Capital Improvement Plan for the Sanitary Sewer Collection System Development Charge Fund, and on planning criteria as identified in the report entitled "City of Medford Sewer Master Plan" dated April 2005 and prepared by Brown and Caldwell Consulting Engineers.

 The current design criteria utilized by the Regional Wastewater Treatment Plant in the determination of equivalent residential units (ERU's) and as specified in the engineering report is 350-gallons/day/ERU average dry weather flow (ADWF). This same design criterion of 350 gallons/day/ERU will be utilized in the determination of the ERU's for the sanitary sewer collection system.

The projected cost of future system additions shall be determined on the basis of the capital improvements identified in the "City of Medford Sewer Master Plan." The future system additions required to serve growth will be adjusted to current dollars and divided by the number of ERU's for which these improvements will provide service.

 The future costs of compliance with Oregon law in the determination of SDC's shall include the estimated cost of engineering, legal, planning, administrative and accounting services. Compliance costs per ERU shall be determined on the basis of projected population growth.

The calculations shall be done on a city-wide basis so that the charge reflects the cost per ERU throughout the City.

The charge for future system addition and compliance costs shall be designated an improvement fee.

[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-35, Feb. 17, 2000; Amd. Ord. No. 2008-200, Oct. 1, 2008]


3.834 Establishment of Values for Calculations of SCSDC

The values to be used in calculating the Sanitary Sewer Collection SDC according to the methodology set forth above shall be set at the rate per equivalent residential unit (ERU) shown in the following table and shall be applied to the Schedule of Charges as found in Section 3.839 (a) to determine the fee charged for the various types of buildings and facilities listed therein.  SDCs are a percentage of the Single Family residential rate based on the ERU.  This value may be updated from time to time by the City Council based on available data and planning projections.

The following rates are hereby established for one ERU:

                             July 1, 2017                 July 1, 2019
                                 $694.05                    $1,036.00
 

[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-35, Feb. 17, 2000; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2005-229, Oct. 6, 2005; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2009-126, June 4, 2009; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2016-13, Jan. 21, 2016; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2017-69, June 15, 2017, Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2019-42, June 6, 2019.]


3.835 Credits

(1) Sewer Main Extensions. When a developer extends an existing sewer main across intervening property to serve the developer's development, the developer may be reimbursed in accordance with Sections 3.900 - 3.913 of this Code.

(2) Oversize Pipe.

(a)  Where it is a condition of development approval that a developer construct a sanitary sewer main which is greater than 8 inches in diameter, the developer shall be credited an amount equal to the difference between the calculated cost of the larger pipe (installed) and that of the 8" pipe. The cost differential shall be as follows:

Pipe Size	Calculated Cost Difference	Calculated Cost Difference July 1, 2017
10"	$ 3.20 per foot	$3.53 per linear foot (LF)
12"	$ 6.70 per foot	$6.97 per linear foot (LF)
15"	$11.30 per foot	$11.74 per linear foot (LF)
18"	$20.10 per foot	$20.89 per linear foot (LF)
21"	$28.90 per foot	$30.03 per linear foot (LF)
24"	$38.70 per foot	$40.21 per linear foot (LF)Compensation for solid rock excavation shall be based and prorated on the developer's actual costs as determined by the City Engineer.

The following table establishes the values used in determining the cost differential between 8" diameter sanitary sewer pipe and larger diameter sanitary sewer pipe.
Pipe Size	Pipe Cost	Trench Cost	Total Cost	Differential Above 8"
8"	$ 2.30/LF	$22.40/LF	$24.70/LF	----------
10"	$ 3.70/LF	$24.40/LF	$27.90/LF	$ 3.20/LF
12"	$ 5.30/LF	$26.10/LF	$31.40/LF	$ 6.70/LF
15"	$ 8.00/LF	$28.00/LF	$36.00/LF	$11.30/LF
18"	$14.00/LF	$30.80/LF	$44.80/LF	$20.10/LF
21"	$20.00/LF	$33.60/LF	$53.60/LF	$28.90/LF
24"	$27.00/LF	$36.40/LF	$63.40/LF	$38.70/LF
Effective July 1, 2017

Pipe Size	Pipe Cost	Trench Cost	Total Cost	Differential Above 8"
8"	$ 2.39/LF	$23.27/LF	$25.66/LF	----------
10"	$ 3.84/LF	$25.35/LF	$29.19/LF	$ 3.53/LF
12"	$ 5.51/LF	$27.12/LF	$32.63/LF	$ 6.97/LF
15"	$ 8.31/LF	$29.09/LF	$37.40/LF	$11.74/LF
18"	$14.55/LF	$32.00/LF	$46.55/LF	$20.89/LF
21"	$20.78/LF	$34.91/LF	$55.69/LF	$30.03/LF
24"	$28.05/LF	$37.82/LF	$65.87/LF	$40.21/LF
These values are based on the following assumptions: PVC sanitary sewer pipe, 6 ft. trench excavation depth, pea gravel bedding, crushed rock backfill, no pavement removal or replacement. No additional adjustments will be made for trench depths below 6 feet.

(b)  All credits for oversize pipe construction will be paid in cash in accordance with the parameters identified below.  All cash payments will be approved administratively, per applicable expense authority limits of the City's contracting and purchasing code.  Payments shall be made to the developer who constructs the improvements unless otherwise provided for in a written agreement between the City and the developer.  Such an agreement is also subject to the restrictions of Section 3.723.  In calculating credits, no credit shall be given for the time value of money.

(c)  The total credit allowed for a single- or multi-family residential land division development shall be calculated following the construction of the improvements, or the recording of the final plat, whichever comes later, and will be prorated across the number of dwelling units to be constructed in the development.  The maximum credit to be allocated to each individual dwelling unit shall be no more than the value of the corresponding SCSDC fee which will be due for that same dwelling unit at the time the total credit valued for the development is calculated. 

(d)  Credits for commercial and industrial land divisions shall be calculated at the same point in the review process as those for residential land divisions.  Cash payments shall be made to the developer as each building permit fee is paid which has a SCSDC fee as part of said building permit.  The cash payment resulting from a new building permit in a non-residential land division shall be equal to the amount of the SCSDC fee calculated for said building permit.  Credits shall be paid out as building permits are issued, on a "first-come, first-served" basis until used up. Total credits for the development shall be reduced by the amount of each payment until: (1) all parcels in the land division are fully developed, (2) the credits are reduced to zero, or (3) the credit period expires, whichever comes first.  If credits remain after all parcels are developed, and if the credit period has not expired, the remaining credits shall be paid in cash to the developer.  

(e)  Credits for other types of developments, such as those approved by the Site Plan and Architectural Commission, shall be determined after the completion of the improvements.  Distribution or assignment of these credits shall be in accordance with Section 3.835(2)(b) above.

The value of oversize pipe credits for all developments shall be based on the date of the first submittal of the public improvement drawings to the Engineering Division for review and approval.  Oversize pipe credits for developments whose public improvement drawings were submitted to the City for review before the effective date of the change shall be determined using the old credit value.  Those submitted on or after the effective date of the change shall be determined using the new credit value.

The length of the credit period shall be ten years. For subdivisions and land partitions, the credit period shall begin with the date the final plat is recorded with the Jackson County Clerk's office. For other types of development, the credit period shall begin with the date the improvements are accepted by the City.


(3) Former Use.

(a) SCSDC credit will be given for the prior use of a building. This will be based on the type of building and the number of single-family residence equivalent units of the original facility. No refund will be given if the change of use results in a decreased sewer loading.  Credit will be given, whether the building has been vacant or occupied, regardless of the length of the vacancy.

(b) Credit may also be given for demolished or destroyed buildings previously existing on a parcel.  The burden of proof showing that there was a permitted building on the subject parcel, and the nature of its use, shall fall on the applicant.  Said building must have been connected to a City of Medford sanitary sewer main in order to be eligible for credit.  No cash credit payments may be made for excess credits due to demolished buildings.

[Added Sec. 1, Ord. 2000-35, Feb. 17, 2000; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2003-245, Sept. 4, 2003; Amd. Ord. No. 2004-107, May 20, 2004; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2005-229, Oct. 6, 2005; Amd. Ord. No. 2007-104, May 17, 2007; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2008-92, May 15, 2008; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2009-126, June 4, 2009; Amd. Sec 3, Ord. No. 2016-13, Jan. 21, 2016; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2017-69, June 15, 2017.]


3.836 Collection of Charges

The charges hereby imposed shall be collected at the time a building permit or sewer connection permit is issued.
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. 2000-35, Feb. 17, 2000.]

3.837 Exemptions

(1) All development discharging directly into RVS maintained sewer mains shall be exempt from the SCSDC.

(2) Additions to single-family and multi-family dwellings that do not constitute the addition of a dwelling unit, as defined by the Uniform Building Code, are exempt from the SCSDC.

[Added Sec. 1, Ord. 2000-35, Feb. 17, 2000; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2005-229, Oct. 6, 2005.]


3.838 Appeal Procedure

A person aggrieved by a decision required or permitted to be made by the City Engineer under this ordinance or a person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of systems development charge revenues may appeal the decision or the expenditure as provided in Section 3.729 of the Code of Medford.
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. 2000-35, Feb. 17, 2000.]

3.839 Schedule of Charges

The systems development charge for one ERU shall be the basis for calculating charges for all types of buildings according to the following table (this schedule is, and shall remain, identical to the rate schedule adopted by the Regional Rate Committee for the Sewage Treatment SDC, except for the extra strength factor applied to Wet Industrial Sewage Treatment SDC, except for the extra strength factor applied to Wet Industrial users.):

Type of Building & Sewer Use	% of ERU Rate	Unit of Measure
(1)   Single Family Residence	1.0	Each
(2)   Multiple Family Residence/Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU)	0.65	Per dwelling unit
(3)   Recreational Vehicle Space in Recreational Vehicle Park (Common building at additional rate and laundry areas at laundry rate)	0.50	Per space
(4)   Recreational Vehicle Waste Dumping Station	0.65	Per station
(5)   Schools	0.03	Per student at capacity
(6)   Churches (School uses at additional per student capacity rate.)	0.64	Per 100 seats capacity
(7)   Hospitals - general	1.00	Per bed
(8)   Convalescent Hospitals/Rest Homes/Assisted Living Facilities	0.50	Per bed
(9)   Residential Case/Boarding Facilities/Adult Foster Care
        Adult Foster Care	0.25
1.00	Per room or whichever is greater
(10) Lodging Facilities (Additional charges for restaurant or lounge at food prep/serving rate, guest laundry areas at laundry rates, and all meeting room areas and individual room kitchens/kitchenettes with fixtures at commercial rate.)	 	 
a)    Hotels and Motels	0.25	Per room or motel unit.
b)    B&B's	1.00	Each SFR, plus 0.25 per bedroom greater than 4
c)    Homeless shelters, etc.	---	(To be tied directly to the determination made by Region's Technical Advisory Group for sewage treatment on a case-by-case basis.)
(11) Food Preparation and/or Serving Areas	0.15	Per 100 sq. feet
(12) Vehicle Wash	 	 
       a) Self-Service Vehicle Wash	1.17	Per bay
       b) Full-Service Vehicle Wash	15.66	Per bay
       c) All Other Vehicle Washes	---	(See Wet Industrial)
(13) a) Laundries & Laundromats	0.30	Per 100 sq. feet
       b) Industrial Laundries	---	(See Wet Industrial)
(14) Commercial, Office, and Dry Industrial	ERUs	For each plumbing fixture to be installed.
        Bath tub w/or w/o shower	0.13	 
        Dental unit or cuspidor	0.10	 
        Dishwasher	0.10	 
        Disposal	0.10	 
        Drinking Fountain	0.05	 
        Floor Drain	0.013	 
        Fountain/Backwash	0.10	 
        Kitchen Sink	0.08	 
        Laundry Tray	0.08	 
        Lavatory	0.05	 
        Service Sink	0.08	 
        Shower (each head)	0.13	 
        Swimming Pool/Backwash	0.10	 
        Urinal	0.17	 
        Urinal Trough (for each 2-foot section)	0.17	 
        Wash Sink (for each set of faucets)	0.08	 
        Washing Machine	0.07	 
        Water Closet	0.33	 
        In case of a remodel in types 5-13 which results in no increase in the units on which the charge for a new building is calculated, there will be no additional SDC charge for the remodel even if additional plumbing fixtures are installed.	 	 
(15) Wet Industrial	 	To be tied directly to the determination made by Region's Technical Committee for sewage treatment, on a case-by-case basis.
(16) Additional Loading or Change of Use	 	Determined on basis of new use for entire facility less credit for former use.  No refunds if new use is less than former use.

Rates shall be adjusted July 1 each year thereafter by the January to January Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index (ENR-CCI), beginning July 1, 2017.

[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-35, Feb. 17, 2000; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2001-232, Dec. 6, 2001; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2003-52, Feb. 20, 2003; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2009-38, Feb. 19, 2009; Amd. Sec 4, Ord. No. 2016-13, Jan. 21, 2016; Amd. Sec. 5 Ord. No. 2017-69, June 15, 2017.]


3.840 Definitions

The following are the definitions of the classifications which will be used in establishing the Sanitary Sewer Collection System Development Charges. These definitions shall remain identical to the Sewage Treatment SDC definitions, except for the extra-strength factor:

(1) A single-family residence (SFR) is defined as a building designed and/or used to provide independent living for not more than one family, including all necessary employees of such family. Mobile homes occupying a separate lot and providing permanent housing with a separate sewer connection shall be classified as an SFR. A guest house or room is an accessory building or room designed, constructed and used to provide temporary sleeping accommodations for guests or for members of the same family as that occupying the main structure. A guest house or room contains no kitchen or kitchen facilities. A guest house shall be considered a part of the SFR and no additional fee shall be charged.  Kitchen or kitchen facilities shall be any area separate from bathing and sanitation facilities which can be utilized for food preparation and which includes a sink or plumbing for a sink, and may include any or all of the following:  a dishwasher, stove, oven or space for a refrigerator.  Any addition to an existing SFR, which does not result in an additional dwelling unit, will be exempt from additional charge.  However, any activity conducted from an SFR which requires a business license may be subject to an additional charge, depending on the nature of the activity.

(2) A multiple family residence (MFR) is defined as a building or a group of buildings housing two or more families, living independently of each other, a family being defined as one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit or household with sewer service being provided through not more than one sewer connection.   This definition included manufactured and mobile home parks.  Common buildings requiring sewer service shall be charged as commercial buildings. Buildings or portions of buildings housing common laundry facilities shall be charged as laundries and laundromats.  Buildings or portions of buildings housing food service areas shall be charged as food prep and service areas.  However, laundry facilities located in individual dwelling units shall be considered incidental to the standard multi-family charge.  An Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) is defined as a residential dwelling unit, with a kitchen or kitchen facilities, that can be used for independent living and is located on the same lot as a single-family residence (SFR).  An ADU may be a separate building or a space within an SFR.  An ADU shall be charged the same SDC as an MFR.  Any activity conducted from an MFR or ADU which requires a business license may be subject to an additional charge, depending on the nature of the activity.

(3) A Recreational Vehicle Park is defined as any area or tract of land having a sewer connection, and where sewage collection pipes are extended to two or more spaces occupied by, or intended to be occupied by a travel trailer or motor home which are defined as a vehicular type unit primarily designed as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle.  A recreational vehicle space is defined as the individual location having a sewer hookup for each such vehicle.  Recreational vehicle parks’ common buildings such as recreation halls, etc., shall be charged as commercial buildings.  Buildings housing laundry facilities shall be charged as laundries and laundromats, and food or drink service buildings shall be charged as food preparation and/or serving.

(4) A Recreational Vehicle Waste Dumping Station is defined as a building or structure used for the dumping of sanitary sewer wastes from recreational vehicle holding tanks including gray water from sinks and showers. (This excludes an individual collector installed by a home owner for his/her own use.)

(5) A School is defined as any building or group of buildings used for school purposes more than 12 hours per week, involving assemblage for instruction, education or recreation.  Schools may be public or private and may include, but is not limited to, day care/pre-schools, kindergartens, elementary schools, middle/junior high schools, senior high schools, junior colleges, continuing education facilities, professional/vocational schools, and beauty colleges.  Charge shall be based on student capacity of classrooms.  No additional charge shall be made for school gymnasiums, locker rooms, or cafeterias.  Unless other supporting data is provided by the applicant, the design capacity of classroom area, per student shall be based on the following:

     a)  Pre-school through 5th grade:      35 sf per student;

     b)  6th grade through 8th grade:       30 sf per student;

     c)  9th grade through college:            25 sf per student.

(6) A Church is defined as a building or structure whose principal use is for worship and in which the incidental use for school or recreational purposes is less than 12 hours per week. Church buildings used for school purposes in excess of 12 hours per week shall be charged at the "school" SDC rate in addition to the charge per 100 seats as a church.  No additional charge shall be made for kitchens, multi-purpose rooms, or fellowship halls and related plumbing fixtures.  Unless other supporting data is provided by the applicant, the design capacity of a church, per seat, shall be based on 15 sf per seat of sanctuary floor area (including aisles, stage, altar area, etc.)

(7) A General Hospital is defined as a building or structure used for the temporary housing of ill or injured persons and containing facilities for medical and surgical treatment of such persons. No additional charge shall be made for laundry or food and drink preparation and serving facilities included in hospitals.

(8) A Convalescent Hospital. Rest Home, or Assisted Living Facility (ALF) is defined as a building or structure used for housing of persons convalescing from illness or injury or persons requiring close personal care. No additional charge shall be made for laundry or food and drink preparation and serving facilities included in the facility.  Rooms or units containing kitchen facilities shall be charged at the MFR rate.

(9) A Residential Care, Boarding, or Adult Foster Care Facility is defined as a residential building or structure, generally located in a residential neighborhood, used for housing of persons requiring either long term supervision and general care, or any type of dependency recovery. The facility shall be considered an SFR for up to four bedrooms, with an additional charge per bedroom above four.  No additional charge shall be made for laundry or food and drink preparation and serving facilities included in the facility.  Individual bedrooms may not contain kitchen facilities.  This language distinguishes between 'assisted living facilities', which tend to be larger-scale 'businesses', and the smaller scale homes which provide more personal foster care.

(10) A Lodging Facility is defined as a building or group of buildings used for temporary housing of persons containing rooms or units intended for the use of transient persons. Included within this definition are hotels, motels, and bed and breakfast accommodations.  Homeless shelters and/or dormitory-style housing facilities shall be considered by the Regional TAG on a case-by-case basis. 

(a)  Hotels/Motels:  Any building or group of buildings with guest rooms intended or designed to be rented for temporary occupation by guests.  Those areas within hotels and motels used for commercial preparation of and serving of food and drink shall be charged at the rate for food preparation and/or serving, including guest breakfast serving and eating areas.  Kitchens or kitchenettes in individual rooms shall be charged at commercial rates based upon fixtures. Commercial areas within hotels and motels, including convention facilities, meeting rooms and other such common areas other than lobby areas, shall be charged at the rate for commercial and dry industrial areas. Areas used for guest or public laundry facilities in hotels and motels shall be charged at the area rate for laundries and laundromats. In-house laundries for use by staff shall be considered incidental to the per-room SDC rate.  Such additional charges for food and drink, commercial areas and laundry shall be in addition to the charge per room or motel unit.

(b)  Bed and Breakfast (B&B Accommodations):  A B&B is an SFR, or part thereof, other than a hotel, motel, or MFR, where traveler's accommodations and breakfast are provided for a fee on a daily or weekly room rental basis.  A B&B shall be charged at the SFR SDC-rate for the first four (4) bedrooms and at the Lodging Facility per-unit SDC rate for each additional bedroom.  No additional charge shall be made for the kitchen unless an existing kitchen is remodeled and new fixtures added, at which time it shall be charged at the rate for commercial and dry industrial areas.

(11) Food preparation and/or serving includes restaurants, lounges, taverns, delicatessens, coffee carts, kiosks, and wholesale and retail bakeries, but does not include outdoor seating areas for the above, nor canneries, dairies, cheese factories, packing houses and similar facilities, which shall be classified as "Wet Industrial" under Item 15 of these Definitions.  The entire square footage of the tenant space or building shall be included in the chargeable area.  Restroom facilities shall not be segregated out of the chargeable area for those eating and drinking establishments which occupy an entire tenant space or building.

(12) A Vehicle Wash is defined as a commercial building or structure used for washing vehicles.

a)  A Self-service vehicle wash is a coin operated facility serving the general public that requires the customer to wash the vehicle.

b)  A Full-service vehicle wash is a facility serving the public, wherein the vehicle is washed for the customer, either automatically or by attendants.

c)  A vehicle wash facility that recycles or reclaims water, and all parts washing or steam cleaning facilities that discharge to the sanitary sewer will be classified as Other Vehicle Washes and will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis by the Regional TAG.

(13)  a) Laundries and Laundromats are defined as a commercial building or structure or part of a commercial building or structure used for housing and operating laundry equipment by the general public to wash clothes and linens for personal use.
b) Industrial laundries are defined as building or structures or parts of buildings or structures used for housing and operating laundry equipment for the large scale washing of uniforms, towels, linens, etc. The anticipated volume and strength of the sewage to be generated from an industrial laundry would be considerably more than that from a commercial laundry or laundromat. Industrial laundries shall be classified as "Wet Industrial Building".

(14) Commercial Buildings are defined as all buildings used for conducting of wholesale or retail trade. Dry industrial buildings or structures are those that house light industrial activities where use of water and subsequent discharge of sewer does not occur in connection with the industrial process. A warehouse or other storage building with sewer connections is classified as a dry industrial building.

(15) A Wet industrial building is defined as a building or structure housing industrial activities where the use of water and subsequent discharge to the sewer occurs in connection with an industrial process. A facility with a discharge of 10,000 gallons per day or greater is considered to be wet industrial. Those facilities will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. The anticipated volume of the sewage to be generated from the facility in relation to the volume of sewage from an average single-family residence shall be considered when calculating SDCs.
The Sewer Collection System Development Charge (SCSDC) for the wet industrial classification shall be determined on an individual basis utilizing the formula listed below, and shall be based on the determination of the Region's Technical Advisory Committee for the Sewage Treatment SDC, minus the extra strength factor:

(System Development Charge)

 
SCSDC =	G.P.D. X SFR
 	350
G.P.D. = Anticipated volume of discharge to sewer in gallons per day.
SFR = Current SDC for an SFR.

(16) Additional loading or change of use is defined as an increased demand for capacity from an existing wet industrial building or structure. The additional loading may be the result of replacement or addition to an existing structure or facility, a change in use, or a fifteen percent (15%) or greater increase above the permitted volume of the wastewater constituents being discharged.
The Sewer Collection System Development Charge shall be determined on the basis of the number of single-family residence equivalent units with the additional loading or the new use, with credit being given for the number of single-family residence equivalent units of the original facility. No refund will be given if the change of use results in a decreased sewer loading. Any addition to an existing single-family residence which does not result in an additional dwelling will be exempt from additional charge.

(17) Other Buildings - There may be some buildings or sewer uses which do not fit neatly into one of the above categories. In such cases, the category or classification which most closely fits the building in question shall be used, as determined by the City Engineer.

[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-35, Feb. 17, 2000; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2001-232, Dec. 6, 2001; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2003-52, Feb. 20, 2003; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2009-38, Feb. 19, 2009; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2017-69, June 15, 2017 .]


3.841 Segregation and Use of Revenue

All funds collected pursuant to this ordinance shall be deposited in a special revenue fund known as the Sanitary Sewer Collection SDC Fund and shall be used only for capital improvements on the Sanitary Sewer Collection System of the City and costs incidental thereto, and to pay for the equitable share of the cost of accounting, management and government which is attributable to the fund.
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-35, Feb. 17, 2000.]

3.842 Improvement Plan

The City Council shall adopt by resolution a Sanitary Sewer Collection System Improvement Plan, a copy of which shall be kept on file in the office of the City Recorder. This document shall set forth the plan for expenditure of the funds collected pursuant to this ordinance and shall conform to the requirements of ORS 223.309. This plan may be amended from time to time by resolution, whenever the Council deems it necessary to make a change in its capital improvement planning for the Sanitary Sewer Collection System.
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-35, Feb. 17, 2000.]

3.843 Effective Date

All provisions of this ordinance shall go into effect on January 1, 2006 with subsequent rate increases, as identified in Section 3.834 to occur on July 1 of each year, thereafter.  Any complete application for a building permit for a development project which has received the required approvals, such as Site Plan and Architectural Commission or Planning Commission approval, and which is already in the City's Building Permit Review System prior to this date will be charged at the rate in effect prior to this date.  All building permit applications submitted on or after this date or which have not been entered in the City's Building Permit Review System prior to this date shall be subject to the rate in effect after the effective date.

[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-35, Feb. 17, 2000; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2005-229, Oct. 6, 2005.]


3.845 Sewage Treatment System Development Charge Imposed

A system development charge (SDC) for the Medford Regional Water Reclamation Facility (RWRF) shall be imposed on sewer users at the time of increased usage of the RWRF in accordance with the resolutions of the Regional Rate Committee establishing a methodology and a schedule of charges, subject to the exemptions set forth in Section 3.846. The charge may consist of a reimbursement fee, an improvement fee or a combination of the two.

[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2008-98, June 5, 2008.]

3.846 Buildings Subject to the Sewage Treatment SDC

All present and future buildings in the City of Medford which have sewer service now or in the future shall be divided into the following two categories and the SDC shall be applied to each category as stated below:

Category A: Buildings for which building permits were issued or which were occupied prior to January 6, 1980 and were connected to the Regional Water Reclamation Facility. Buildings of Category A are not subject to the SDC, except as described in the resolutions of the Regional Rate Committee.

Category B: Buildings for which building permits were issued on or after January 6, 1980 and will be connected to the Regional Water Reclamation Facility. Buildings in Category B are subject to the SDC.

[Added, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2008-98, June 5, 2008.]

3 Parks System Development Charges (3.870 to 3.883)

3.851 [Repealed, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2006-14, Jan. 19, 2006.]

 


3.853 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2006-14, Jan. 19, 2006.]

 


3.855 [Repealed, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2006-14, Jan. 19, 2006.]

 


3.857 [Repealed, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2006-14, Jan. 19, 2006.]

 


3.859 [Repealed, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2006-14, Jan. 19, 2006.]

 


3.861 [Repealed, Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2006-14, Jan. 19, 2006.]

 


3.870 Scope and Purposes

(1) New Development within Medford contributes to the need for capacity increases and upgrades to capital improvements for facilities and, therefore, New Development should contribute to the funding for such capital improvements. This SDC will fund a portion of the needed capacity increases for facilities as identified in the Leisure Services Plan.

 

(2) The funding provided by this Ordinance constitutes a mandatory collection method based upon ORS 223.297 through 223.314 to assure the construction of improvements to facilities as contemplated in the City’s capital improvements plans, to be funded with money collected under this Ordinance.

 

(3) System Development Charges shall be established by City Council Resolution.

 

[Added, Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2006-14, Jan. 19, 2006; Amd. Sec. 1 Ord. No. 2016-145, Dec. 15, 2016.]


3.871 Definitions

(1) "Administrator" means the City of Medford Parks and Recreation Director.

(2) "Alternative System Development Charge" means an SDC established pursuant to 3.880.

(3) "Applicant" means the person who applies for a building permit.

(4) "Condition of Development Approval" is any requirement imposed on an Applicant by the City, a City or County land use or limited land use decision, or site plan approval.

(5) "Construction Cost Index" means the Engineering News Record (Seattle) Construction Cost Index.

(6) "Credit" means the amount by which an Applicant may be able to reduce the SDC fee as provided in this Ordinance.

(7) "Improvement Fee" means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be constructed after the effective date of this ordinance.

(8) "Over-capacity" means that portion of an improvement that is built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary to serve the Applicant's New Development or mitigate for system impacts attributable to the Applicant's New Development.

(9) "Capital Improvements Plan" also called the CIP, means the City program that identifies facilities and improvements projected to be funded, in whole or in part, with SDC revenues.

(10) "Previous use" means the most intensive use conducted at a particular property within the past 18 months prior to the date of application for a building permit. Where the site was used simultaneously for several different uses (mixed use) then, for the purposes of this Ordinance, all of the specific use categories shall be considered. Where the previous use is composed of a primary use with one or more ancillary uses that support the primary use and are owned and operated in common, that primary use shall be deemed to be the sole use of the property for purposes of this Ordinance.

(11) "Proposed use," means the use proposed by the Applicant for the New Development. Where the Applicant proposes several different uses (mixed use) for the New Development then, for purposes of this Ordinance, all of the specific use categories shall be considered. Where the proposed use is composed of a primary use with one or more ancillary uses that support the primary proposed use and are owned and operated in common, that primary use shall be deemed to be the sole proposed use of the property for purposes of this Ordinance.

(12) "Qualified Public Improvement" means a capital facility or conveyance or an interest in real property that increases capacity and is:

(a) Required as a condition of development approval;

(b) Identified as a need in the capital improvements plan and list of projects used to calculate the SDC rates; and either:

(i) Not located on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval, or

(ii) Located in whole or in part on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval and required to be built larger or with greater capacity (over-capacity) than is necessary for the Applicant’s New Development or to mitigate for system impacts attributable to the Applicant’s New Development. There is a rebuttable presumption that improvements built to the City's minimum standards are required to serve the Applicant's New Development and to mitigate for system impacts attributable to the Applicant's New Development.

(13) "Reimbursement Fee" means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements that have been constructed or were under construction prior to the effective date of this ordinance.

[Added, Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2006-14, Jan. 19, 2006; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord No. 2016-145, Dec. 15, 2016.]


3.872 Application

(1) This Ordinance applies to all New Development in the City of Medford. The amount of the SDC shall be calculated according to this Section, with SDC rates as adopted by separate Resolution.

(2) Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, the SDC set forth herein shall be imposed upon all New Development for which a technically complete Application is filed on or after the effective date of this ordinance.

(3) Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, accessory dwelling units shall be charged at one-half the residential dwelling unit SDC rate.

(4) The Applicant shall at the time of Application provide the Administrator with the information requested on an SDC application form regarding the previous and proposed use(s) of the New Development, including a description of each of the previous and proposed uses for the property for which the Building Permit is being sought, with sufficient detail to enable the City to calculate the number of employees and dwelling units under the previous use and for the proposed use(s) of the New Development.

(5) For residential uses: the number of residential dwelling units for the previous and proposed use(s) of the New Development.

(6) For commercial uses: the square footage for each type of non-residential use (i.e., office, warehouse, retail, etc.) for the previous and proposed use(s) of the New Development.

(7) Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, the amount of the SDC shall be determined by calculating the SDC amount that would have been imposed for the previous use(s) of the property and the SDC amount for the proposed use(s).

(8) Notwithstanding any other provision, the dollar amounts of the Parks and Recreation SDC rates adopted by separate Resolution shall on January 1st of each year be adjusted to account for changes in the costs of acquiring and constructing facilities. The adjustment factor shall be based on:

(a) the change in average market value of vacant land within the City, according to the records of the County Tax Assessor, and

(b) the change in construction costs according to the Engineering News Record (ENR) Northwest (Seattle, Washington) Construction Cost Index (CCI).

(c) The adjustment shall be determined as follows:

Change in Land Value Multiplied by 0.50

+ Change in CCI Multiplied by 0.50

= System Development Charges Adjustment Factor

(9) The System Development Charges Adjustment Factor shall be used to annually adjust the adopted Parks SDC rates, unless the rates are otherwise adjusted by Resolution.

[Added, Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2006-14, Jan. 19, 2006.]


3.873 Partial and Full Exemptions

(1) The uses listed and described in this Section shall be exempt, either partially or fully, from payment of the SDC. Any Applicant seeking an exemption under this Section shall specifically request that exemption no later than the time of application for the Building Permit. Where New Development consists of only part of one or more of the uses described in this Section, only that/those portion(s) of the development which qualify under this Section are eligible for an exemption. The balance of the New Development which does not qualify for any exemption under this Section shall be subject to the full SDC. Should the Applicant dispute any decision by the City regarding an exemption request, the Applicant must apply for an Alternative Exemption calculation under 3.880. The Applicant has the burden of proving entitlement to any exemption so requested.

(2) Temporary uses are fully exempt so long as the New Development use or structure will be used for not more than 180 days and for no more than a single calendar year.

(3) Alteration permits for tenant improvements are fully exempt.

(4) New Development which, in the Administrator's opinion, will not create demands on the system greater than those of the present use of the property are fully exempt.

[Added, Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2006-14, Jan. 19, 2006.]


3.874 SDC Credits

(1) The City shall grant a credit against the SDC, which is otherwise assessed for a New Development, for any Qualified Public Improvement(s) constructed or dedicated as part of that New Development. The Applicant bears the burden of evidence and persuasion in establishing entitlement to an SDC Credit and to a particular value of SDC Credit.

 (2) To obtain an SDC Credit, the Applicant must specifically request a credit prior to the City's issuance of a building permit for the New Development. In the request, the Applicant must identify the improvement(s) for which credit is sought and explain how the improvement(s) meets the requirements for a Qualified Public Improvement. The Applicant shall also document, with credible evidence, the value of the improvement(s) for which credit is sought. If, in the Administrator's opinion, the improvement(s) is a Qualified Public Improvement, and the Administrator concurs with the proposed value of the improvement(s), and SDC Credit shall be granted. The value of the SDC Credits under this Section shall be determined by the Administrator based on the cost of the Qualified Public Improvement, or the value of land dedicated, as follows:

(a) For dedicated lands, the value shall be based upon a written appraisal of fair market value by a qualified, professional appraiser selected by the applicant and approved by the city, based upon comparable sales of similar property between unrelated parties in an arms-length transaction;

(b) For improvements yet to be constructed, value shall be based upon the anticipated cost of construction. Any such cost estimates shall be certified by a professional architect or engineer or based on a fixed price bid from a contractor ready and able to construct the improvement(s) for which SDC Credit is sought;

(c) For improvements already constructed, value shall be based on the actual cost of construction as verified by receipts submitted by the Applicant;

(d) The amount of the SDC Credit shall be limited to the value of the land and improvements multiplied by the percentage of the maximum allowable SDC rates adopted by Resolution.

(3) The Administrator will respond to the Applicant's request in writing within 30 days of when the request is submitted. The Administrator shall provide a written explanation of the decision on the SDC Credit request.

 (4) If the Applicant disputes the Administrator's decision with regard to an SDC credit request, including the amount of the credit, the Applicant may seek an Alternative SDC Credit calculation under 3.875. Any request for an Alternative SDC Credit calculation must be filed with the Administrator in writing within 30 calendar days of the written decision on the initial credit request.

 (5) Where the amount of an SDC Credit approved by the Administrator under this Section exceeds the amount of the SDC assessed by the City upon a New Development, the excess credit may be applied against SDCs that accrue in subsequent phases of the original development project. Any excess credit must be used not later than ten years from the date the credit is given.

(6) Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, the City may, by action of the City Council, provide a greater credit, establish a system providing for the transferability of credits, provide a credit for a capital improvement not identified in the CIP, or provide a share of the cost of a capital improvement by means other than a credit, including the process that credits in excess of the Parks SDC may be paid in cash to the developer upon completion and acceptance of the facilities and authorization by the City Council.

 

[Added, Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2006-14, Jan. 19, 2006; Amd Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2016-145, Dec. 15, 2016.]


3.875 Alternative Calculation for SDC Rate, Credit, or Exemption

(1) Pursuant to this Section, an applicant may request an alternative SDC rate calculation, alternative SDC credit determination, or alternative SDC exemption, under the following circumstances:

(a) The Applicant believes that the impact on facilities resulting from the New Development is, or will be, less than that contemplated in the SDC Methodology Report, and for that reason, the Applicant's SDC should be lower than that calculated by the City.

(b) The Applicant believes that property taxes paid by the property subject to development are, or will be, more than is provided by any credit for tax payments and for that reason, the Applicant's SDC should be lower than that calculated by the City.

(c) The Applicant believes the City improperly excluded from consideration a Qualified Public Improvement that would qualify for credit under Section 3.878, or the City accepted for credit a Qualified Public Improvement, but undervalued that improvement and therefore undervalued the credit.

(d) The Applicant believes the City improperly rejected a request for an exemption under Section 3.878 for which the Applicant believes it is eligible.

 

(2) Alternative SDC Rate Request:

(a) If an Applicant believes that the assumptions for the class of structures that includes the New Development are not appropriate for the subject New Development, the Applicant must request an alternative SDC rate calculation, under this Section, no later than the time of issuance of a Building Permit for the New Development. Alternative SDC rate calculations for occupancy must be based on analysis of occupancy of classes of structures, not on the intended occupancy of a particular New Development.

(b) In support of the Alternative SDC Rate request, the Applicant must provide complete and detailed documentation, including verifiable data, analyzed and certified by a suitable and competent professional. The Applicant's supporting documentation must rely upon generally accepted sampling methods, sources of information, cost analysis, demographics, growth projections, and techniques of analysis as a means of supporting the proposed alternative SDC rate. The proposed Alternative SDC Rate calculation shall include an explanation with particularity why the rate established in the SDC Methodology does not accurately reflect the New Development's impact on the City's capital improvements.

(c) The Administrator shall apply the Alternative SDC Rate if, in the Administrator's opinion, the following are found:

(i) The evidence and assumptions underlying the Alternative SDC Rate are reasonable, correct and credible and were gathered and analyzed in compliance with generally accepted principles and methodologies consistent with this Section, and

(ii) The calculation of the proposed Alternative SDC rate was by a generally accepted methodology, and

(iii) The proposed alternative SDC rate better or more realistically reflects the actual impact of the New Development.

(d) Within 30 days of the Applicant's submission of the request, the Administrator shall provide a written decision explaining the basis for rejecting or accepting the request.

 

(3) Alternative SDC Credit Request:

(a) If an Applicant has requested an SDC Credit pursuant to Section 3.880 and that request has been denied by the City, the Applicant may request an Alternative SDC Credit calculation, under this Section, no later than the time of application for a building permit.

(b) In support of the Alternative SDC Credit request, the Applicant must provide complete and detailed documentation, including appraisals, cost analysis or other estimates of value, analyzed and certified to by an appropriate professional, for the improvements for which the Applicant is seeking credit. The Applicant's supporting documentation must rely upon generally accepted sources of information, cost analysis, and techniques of analysis as a means of supporting the proposed Alternative SDC Credit.

(c) The Administrator shall apply the Alternative SDC Credit if, in the Administrator's opinion, the following are found:

(i) The improvement(s) for which the SDC Credit is sought are Qualified Public Improvement(s), and

(ii) The evidence and assumptions underlying the Applicant's Alternative SDC Credit request are reasonable, correct, and credible and were gathered and analyzed by an appropriate competent professional in compliance with generally accepted principles and methodologies, and

(iii) The proposed Alternative SDC Credit is based on realistic, credible valuation or benefit analysis.

(d) Within 30 days of the Applicant's submission of the request, the Administrator shall provide a written decision explaining the basis for rejecting or accepting the request.

 

(4) Alternative SDC Exemption Request:

(a) If an Applicant has requested a full or partial exemption under Section 3.878 and that request has been denied, the Applicant may request an Alternative SDC Exemption under this Section, no later than the time of application for a Building Permit for the New Development.

(b) In support of the Alternative SDC Exemption request, the Applicant must provide complete and detailed documentation demonstrating that the Applicant is entitled to one of the exemptions described in Section 3.878.

(c) The Administrator shall grant the exemption if, in the Administrator's opinion, the Applicant has demonstrated with credible, relevant evidence that it meets the pertinent criteria in Section 3.878.

(d) Within 30 days of the Applicant's submission of the request, the Administrator shall provide a written decision explaining the basis for rejecting or accepting the request.

 

[Added, Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2006-14, Jan. 19, 2006; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2016-145, Dec. 15, 2016.]


3.876 Due Date of Payment of SDC Charges

Except as may be required by ORS 223.201 – 223.295 (Bancroft Bonding Act), the SDCs required by this Ordinance are due to be paid upon issuance of the Building Permit.

[Added, Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2006-14, Jan. 19, 2006.]


3.877 Refunds

Refunds may be given by the Administrator upon finding that there was a clerical error in the calculation of the SDC. The Administrator shall keep written records of all clerical error refunds.

[Added, Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2006-14, Jan. 19, 2006.]


3.878 Dedicated Accounts and Appropriate Use of Accounts

(1) All monies derived from Improvement Fee SDCs shall be placed in SDC Improvement Fee accounts and shall be used solely for the purpose of providing capacity-increasing capital improvements and the City’s adopted capital improvement plans, and for eligible compliance and administrative costs. In this regard, these SDC revenues may be used for purposes that include, but are not limited to:

(a) design and construction plan preparation;

(b) permitting;

(c) land and materials acquisition, including any costs of acquisition or condemnation;

(d) construction of capital improvements;

(e) design and construction of new drainage facilities required by the construction of capital improvements and structures;

(f) relocating utilities required by the construction of improvements;

(g) landscaping;

(h) construction management and inspection;

(i) surveying, soils and material testing;

(j) acquisition of capital equipment that is an intrinsic part of a facility;

(k) demolition that is part of the construction of any of the improvements on this list;

(l) payment of principal and interest, necessary reserves and costs of issuance under any bonds or other indebtedness issued by the City to provide money to construct or acquire facilities;

(m) direct costs of complying with the provisions of ORS 223.297 to 223.314, including the consulting, legal, and administrative costs required for developing and updating master plans, the system development charges methodology, and capital improvement plan; and the costs of collecting and accounting for system development charges revenues and expenditures.

 

(2) All monies derived from Reimbursement Fee SDCs shall be placed in SDC Reimbursement Fee accounts and shall be used solely for the purpose of providing capital improvements identified in the City’s adopted capital improvements plans, and for eligible compliance and administrative costs.

(a) Money on deposit in any SDC Account shall not be used for:

(i) any expenditure that would be classified as a maintenance or repair expense; or

(ii) costs associated with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an incidental part of other capital improvements; or

(iii) costs associated with acquisition or maintenance of rolling stock.

 

[Added, Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2006-14, Jan. 19, 2006; Amd. Sec. 5 Ord. No. 2016-145, Dec. 15, 2016.]


3.879 Challenges and Appeals

(1) Any citizen or other interested person may challenge the expenditure of SDC revenues by filing a challenge to the expenditure with the Administrator within two years after the date of the disputed SDC revenue expenditure. The fee for filing such a challenge shall be set by Resolution.

(2) Except where a different time for an Administrator's decision is provided in this Ordinance, all Administrator decisions shall be in writing and shall be delivered to the Applicant within 30 days of an application or other Applicant request for an Administrator determination. Delivery shall be deemed complete upon the earlier of actual delivery to the Applicant or upon deposit by the Administrator by certified mail, addressed to the address for notice Applicant has designated in the Application.

(3) Any person may appeal to the City Council any decision of the Administrator per the provisions of 3.729. The notice of appeal shall be filed with the City Recorder and shall contain the following information:

(a) The name and address of the applicant;

(b) The legal description of the property in question;

(c) If issued, the date of the building permit;

(d) A brief description of the nature of the development being undertaken pursuant to the building permit;

(e) If paid, the date the system development charges were paid; and

(f) A statement of the reasons why the applicant is appealing a decision.

[Added, Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2006-14, Jan. 19, 2006.]


3.880 City Review of SDC

(1) The City shall undertake a review of the SDC Methodology Report every five (5) years.

(2) In the event that during the review referred to above, it is determined that an adjustment to the SDC is necessary for sufficient funding of adopted capital improvements, or to ensure that such improvements are not over funded by the SDC the City Council may propose and adopt by Resolution appropriately adjusted SDC rates.

 

[Added, Sec. 17, Ord. No. 2006-14, Jan. 19, 2006; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2016-145, Dec. 15, 2016.]


3.881 [Repealed, Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2016-145, Dec. 15, 2016.]


 

 

 


3.882 Implementing Regulations; Amendments

The City may adopt regulations to implement the provisions of this Ordinance.

[Added, Sec. 19, Ord. No. 2006-14, Jan. 19, 2006.]


3.883 Severability

The provisions of this Ordinance are severable, and it is the intention to confer the whole or any part of the powers herein provided for. If any clause, Section or provision of this Ordinance shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason or cause, the remaining portion of this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect and be valid as if such invalid portion thereof had not been incorporated herein. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that this Ordinance would have been adopted had such an unconstitutional provision not been included herein.

[Added, Sec. 20, Ord. No. 2006-14, Jan. 19, 2006.]

3 Systems Development Charges Storm Drainage (3.890 to 3.897)

3.890 Establishment of the Storm Drainage Systems Development Charge

New development on land outside of the Currently Developed Area (CDA) will be subject to a systems development charge (SDC) pursuant to Ordinance 4940, dated August 4, 1983, establishing the methodology and setting the charge. The value to be used in calculating the Storm Drainage SDC according to said methodology shall be set at the rate per equivalent residential unit (ERU), (which shall be defined as 3,730 square feet of impervious area) shown in the following table.  This value may be updated from time to time by the City Council, based on available data and planning projections.  See Section 4.105 for a complete set of definitions. See also Section 4.715 for a declaration of the City’s Storm Drainage Policy.

The following rates are hereby established for one ERU:

     After Termination of
    17-Transportation Surcharge                     July 1, 2017
                  $608                                                  $631.71
 
Rates shall be adjusted July 1 each year thereafter by the January to January Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index (ENR-CCI), beginning July 1, 2017.

[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2005-228, Oct. 6, 2005; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2007-105, May 17, 2007; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2009-127, June 4, 2009; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2010-46, March 4, 2010; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2016-13, Jan. 21, 2016; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2017-69, June 15, 2017.]


3.891 Credits

a) Excess Capacity Credits

The Storm Drain SDC Fund will credit a developer who is subject to the SDC, an amount equal to 25% of the calculated cost (as indicated in the following table) of all conveyance facilities which are 24 inches, or larger, in diameter as required by sound engineering design, and constructed with, or as a part of, the developer's improvement project..  Such oversize facilities are intended to provide additional capacity for flows from future upstream development.  Oversize pipes designed to carry flows generated exclusively from the developer's project, or pipes used for detention purposes related to the runoff from the developer's site, are not eligible for Storm Drain SDC credits, regardless of diameter.  Costs will be calculated from the following prices: 

Pipe	2010	After Termination of 17 - Transportation Surcharge	July 1, 2017
24"	$74.03/lf	$78.47/lf	$81.53
36"	$117.81/lf	$124.88/lf	$129.75
48"	$156.60/lf	$166.00/lf	$172.47
60"	$195.38/lf	$207.10/lf	$215.18
4'x8' Conc. Box	$449.68/lf	$476.66/lf	$495.25
Costs of other pipe sizes will be determined by interpolation.

Eligible credits for oversize pipe construction shall be paid in cash to the developer in accordance with the parameters identified below.  All cash payments will be approved administratively per applicable expense authority limits of the City's contracting and purchasing code.  For land divisions, the payment shall be made after completion and acceptance of the improvements, or the recording of the final plat, whichever comes later.  For all other improvements, payment shall be made after completion and acceptance of the improvements. 

b) Credits for Runoff Control Measures. 
(1) Upon application, a person responsible may seek a reduction of the monthly utility fee for storm drainage service and/or the systems development charge for storm drainage.  Upon submission of appropriate evidence, the City Engineer shall consider the application.  The applicant must show to the City Engineer's satisfaction:
      (a)  The amount of permanent reduction in runoff for the property due to the retention system; and/or
      (b)  The amount of stormwater being discharged directly from the property into Bear Creek.

(2)  The system development charge shall be 70% of the normal SDC determined in Section 3.890, and applies to either (a) or (b) above.  Elimination of the system development charge may only be made for (a) above.  Discharge directly to Bear Creek will not result in an elimination of the fee, but only a reduction.

(3)  Any reduction in monthly utility fee given shall continue until the property is further developed or until the City Engineer determines the property no longer qualifies for the reduction.  Upon further development of the property another application may be made by a person responsible.  Any applicant aggrieved by the City Engineer's decision may appeal to the City Council by filing with the City Recorder a written request for review as provided in Section 1.025.
 

[Added Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2005-228, Oct. 6, 2005; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2007-105, May 17, 2007; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2009-127, June 4, 2009; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2012-197, Dec. 20, 2012; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2016-13, Jan. 21, 2016; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No 2017-69, June 15, 2017 .]


3.893 Collection of Charges

This charge will be collected prior to approval of final plat for land divisions or prior to issuance of a building permit on developments not processed as a land division. 

[Added, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2005-228, Oct. 6, 2005; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2007-105, May 17, 2007; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2009-127, June 4, 2009.]
 


3.894 Effective Date

Any completed application for a building permit for a project which has received the required approvals, such as Site Plan and Architectural Commission or Planning Commission approvals, and which is already in the City's building permit review system prior to the adoption date of the ordinance, or is submitted prior to the effective dates of this ordinance, shall be charged at the existing Storm Drain SDC rate. All others shall be charged at the new rate

The Storm Drain SDC rate applied to land divisions shall be based on the date of the Final Order of the Planning Commission. Final Orders dated before the effective dates of this ordinance shall be charged at the rate in existence prior to the effective dates. Those Final Orders dated on or after the effective dates of this ordinance shall be charged at the rate in existence after the effective dates.

The effective dates for the 2007 and 2008 rate adjustments in this section shall be July 1, 2007, and July 1, 2008, respectively.

When a change in the SDC credit value for oversize pipes occurs, credits for all developments shall be applied based on the date of first submittal of the public improvement drawings to the Engineering Division for review and approval. Credits for developments whose public improvement drawings are submitted to the City for review before the effective date of the change will be credited using the old credit value. Those submitted on or after the effective date of the change will be credited using the new value.

[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2005-228, Oct. 6, 2005; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2007-105, May 17, 2007.]


3.895 Segregation and Use of Revenues

A new special revenue fund to be called the Storm Drain SDC Fund is hereby established. All revenue from Drainage Systems Development Charges collected after July 1, 1991, shall be deposited in this fund. Monies in the fund shall be expended in accordance with laws governing expenditure of systems development charge revenues and will be used to help offset the impacts of new development causes in the downstream storm system.

[Added, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2005-228, Oct. 6, 2005.]


3.896 Administrative Office Designated

The City Manager shall employ a qualified person as City Engineer. In addition to such other duties and responsibilities as may be assigned to him, the City Engineer shall be responsible for the administration of this ordinance. The City Engineer shall be responsible for developing administrative procedures for calculation and collection of fees, developing and administering capital improvement programs and related activities.

 

[Added, Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2005-228, Oct. 6, 2005.]


3.897 Improvement Plan

The City Council shall adopt by resolution a Storm Drainage System Capital Improvement Plan, a copy of which shall be kept on file in the office of the City Recorder. This document shall set forth the plan for expenditure of the funds collected pursuant to this ordinance and shall conform to the requirements of ORS 223.309. This plan may be amended from time to time by resolution, whenever the Council deems it necessary to make a change in its capital improvement planning for the Storm Drainage System.

[Added, Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2005-228, Oct. 6, 2005.]

3 Reimbursement Districts (3.900 to 3.913)

3.900 Definitions

The purpose of Sections 3.900 - 3.913 is to establish the process for creating and administering Reimbursement Districts.  Reimbursement Districts provide the means whereby a developer who finances some or all of the costs of a public street, sanitary sewer, or storm drain improvement may recover some or all of his costs for such improvement from other benefiting property owners.

For purposes of this provision, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

(A) "City" means the City of Medford.

(B) "Applicant" means a person, as defined in Subsection (F), who is required or chooses to finance some or all of the cost of a street, sanitary sewer, or storm drain improvement which is available to provide service to property, other than property owned by the person, and who applies to the City for reimbursement for the expense of the improvement. The "applicant" may be the City. The reference to applicant does not include persons building improvements for an agreed amount under a contract with a subdivider or developer.

(C) "Benefiting properties" means those properties which are, or may be, partially relieved of a cost or expense associated with development or construction of a public improvement, and which is different in degree from the value or benefit received by the general public. Benefiting property includes parcels within the City’s urban growth boundary but outside the current City limits.

(D) "Development" occurs when a person applies for and receives approval from the City for a development permit, permit for connection to public improvements, permit for new construction, or a permit for additions, repairs, alterations, or modifications exceeding 25% of the building’s value within any 12 month period.

(E) "Director of Public Works" or "Director" means the person holding the position of Director of Public Works or any officer or employee designated by the Director to perform duties stated within this chapter.

(F) "Increase the use" means:

(1) For sanitary sewer or storm drain improvements, to make a physical change, following the construction of the improvement for which the reimbursement district was formed, that requires a building or development permit on the property that increase the volume discharged into the line.

(2) For street improvements, to make a physical change, following construction of the improvement for which the reimbursement district was formed, requiring a building or development permit on the property that increases the trips on the street or creates a new entrance onto the street.

(G) "Person" means a natural person, the person’s heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns; a firm, partnership, corporation, association or legal entity, its or their successors or assigns; and any agent, employee or representative thereof.

(H) "Public improvement" means any or all of the following: a street, stormwater, or sanitary sewer improvement that will be dedicated to and accepted by the city.

(I) "Reimbursement agreement" means the agreement between the applicant and the City which is authorized by the City Council, providing for the installation of and payment for reimbursement district public improvements.

(J) "Reimbursement district" means the area which is determined by the City Council to be the aggregate of those properties defined in Subsection (C) potentially deriving a benefit from the construction of street, sanitary sewer, or storm drain improvements, financed in whole or in part by the applicant regardless of whether the properties are in the City.

(K) "Reimbursement fee" means the fee required to be paid upon development by this section for the costs of financing a public street, sanitary sewer, or stormwater improvement that serves a development. A reimbursement fee is not intended to limit or replace, and is in addition to, any other existing fees or charges collected by the city.

(L) "Sanitary Sewer Improvement" means public sanitary sewer improvements conforming to City standards, including, but not limited to, extension of a sanitary sewer line to, through, or adjacent to property, other than the applicant’s property, so that sanitary sewer service can be provided for such other property without further extension of the line. With respect to line extensions, only the costs of an eight (8) inch sanitary sewer line may be used to determine the amount of the reimbursement fee. Costs of temporary pump stations are excluded.  If System Development Charge (SDC) credits are available for the oversizing of lines, pursuant to Section 3.835, the total costs eligible for reimbursement shall be reduced by the value of the SDC credits in order to determine the actual amount to be reimbursed.

(M) "Storm Drain Improvement" means storm drain improvements conforming to City standards, including, but not limited to, extension of a storm drain line to, through, or adjacent to property, other than the applicant’s property, so that storm drain service can be provided for such other property without further extension of the line. With respect to line extensions, only the costs of storm drain lines up to and including twenty-four (24) inch diameter may be used to determine the amount of the reimbursement fee.  If System Development Charge (SDC) credits are available for the oversizing of lines, pursuant to Section 3.891, the total costs eligible for reimbursement shall be reduced by the value of the SDC credits in order to determine the actual amount to be reimbursed.

(N) "Street improvement" means a new street or street improvement conforming to City standards, and including, but not limited to, such appurtenances as paving, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, bike paths, traffic control devices, street trees, street lights and public right-of-way acquisition, all as included in the initial street construction. Reimburseable street improvements shall be limited to full-width street improvements. Construction of half-streets or half-streets plus eight (8)- or twelve (12)- feet shall not be eligible for reimbursement district. Reimbursement districts shall not be available for construction of arterial or collector streets. Arterial and collector street improvements are subject to SDC credits pursuant to section 3.815, regarding SDCs.

[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2007-84, April 19, 2007; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-92, May 15, 2008.]


3.901 Application for a Reimbursement District

(A) Any applicant who is required, or chooses, to finance some or all of the cost of a street, sanitary sewer, or storm drain improvement which is available to provide service to property, other than property owned by the applicant, may, by written application filed with the Director, request that the City establish a reimbursement district. The public improvements must be available to provide service to property other than property owned by the applicant. The City may also initiate formation of a reimbursement district. The application shall be accompanied by a fee, as established by resolution, sufficient to cover the cost of administrative review and notice pursuant to this chapter.

(B) The application shall include the following:

(1) A description of the location, type, size and cost of each public improvement that is to be eligible for reimbursement, including detailed or as-built plans or drawings showing the location, nature, and extent of the public improvement.

(2) A narrative statement explaining why the applicant believes all or part of the cost of the public improvement is eligible for reimbursement pursuant to this section.

(3) A map showing the properties to be included in the proposed reimbursement district; tax lot numbers; the zoning district for the properties; and the property or properties owned by the applicant.

(4) The estimated cost of the improvements as evidenced by bids, projection of the cost of labor and materials, or other evidence satisfactory to the Director of Public Works.

(5) A proposed methodology for calculating costs to future development in the reimbursement district.

(6) The estimated date of completion of the public improvements.

(7) The applicant may request a discretionary annual fee adjustment, which, if granted, will be administered pursuant to Section 3.903(D).

(C) The application shall be submitted to the City prior to the installation of the public improvement. However, the Director may waive this requirement upon a showing by the applicant of good cause for the delay, that the applicant did not create the delay, and that the delay was unavoidable due to unanticipated or unforeseen circumstances.

[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2007-84, April 19, 2007.]


3.902 Public Works Director's Report

The Director shall review the application for the establishment of a reimbursement district and evaluate whether a district should be established. The Director may require the submission of other relevant information from the applicant in order to assist in the evaluation. The Director shall prepare a written report for the City Council, discussing and making recommendations concerning the following factors:

(A) Whether the applicant will finance some or all of the cost of a public improvement, thereby making service available to property, other than property owned by the applicant;

(B) The area to be included in the reimbursement district;

(C) The estimated cost of the public improvement(s) within the proposed reimbursement district and the portion of the cost for which the applicant should be reimbursed for each improvement;

(D) A methodology for spreading the cost among the parcels within the reimbursement district and where appropriate defining a "unit" for applying the reimbursement fee to property which may, with City approval, be developed at some future date;

(E) The amount to be charged by the City for administration of the agreement by the City. The administration fee shall be fixed by the City Council and will be included in the resolution approving and forming the reimbursement district. The administration fee is due and payable by the Applicant to the City at the time the agreement is signed.

[Added, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2007-84, April 19, 2007.]


3.903 Amount to be Reimbursed

(A) The reimbursement fee shall be computed by the City for all the benefiting properties, including the applicant’s property. Property dedicated as public street right-of-way shall be excluded. Property owned in fee simple by the City shall be included. The fee shall be calculated separately for each type of improvement. The applicant shall not be reimbursed for the applicant’s share of the fee.

(B) The cost to be reimbursed to the applicant shall be limited to the cost of construction, engineering, and off-site right-of-way acquisition. Engineering shall include surveying and inspection and shall not exceed 13.5 percent of eligible construction cost. Right-of-way acquisition costs shall be limited to the reasonable market value of land or easements purchased by the applicant from a third party to complete off-site improvements.

If SDC credits are available for the oversizing of sanitary sewer or storm drain lines, the net amount to be reimbursed shall be determined by subtracting the value of the SDC credits from the total eligible costs, as described above, and as determined by the City Engineer.

(C) No reimbursement shall be allowed for financing costs, permits or fees required for construction permits, land or easements dedicated by the applicant, costs which are eligible for systems development charge credits, or any costs which are not clearly documented.

(D) The City Council may establish an interest rate to be applied to the reimbursement fee as a return on the investment of the applicant. The interest rate shall be fixed and computed against the reimbursement fee as simple interest and will not compound.

[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2007-84, April 19, 2007; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2008-92, May 15, 2008.]


3.904 Public Hearing

(A) After the Public Works Director has completed the report required in Section 3.902, the City Council shall hold an informational public hearing in which any person shall be given the opportunity to comment on the proposed reimbursement district. Because formation of the reimbursement district does not result in an assessment against property or lien against property, the public hearing is for informational purposes only and is not subject to mandatory termination because of remonstrances. The City Council has the sole discretion after the public hearing to decide whether a resolution approving and forming the reimbursement district shall be adopted.

(B) A second public hearing is required after the improvement has been accepted by the City if the actual costs of the improvement exceed the estimate by more than ten (10%) percent. The City Council shall not approve a cost increase over ten (10%) percent unless an exception is approved. An exception may be approved only if the applicant can show legitimate circumstances beyond the applicant’s control that caused the cost increase. If the actual costs are within 10% of the original estimate, the City Council delegates authority to the City Manager to amend the original reimbursement agreement reflecting the actual costs and fees. The applicant shall record the amended agreement in the Official Records of Jackson County and shall return the original recorded amended agreement to the City Recorder’s Office for filing. Notice of the amended agreement shall be provided to all benefiting properties within the district within ten (10) days of recordation.

[Added, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2007-84, April 19, 2007.]


3.905 Notice of Public Hearing

Not less than 14 days prior to any public hearing held pursuant to this chapter, the applicant and all record owners of property within the proposed district shall be notified of such hearing and the purpose thereof. Such notification shall be accomplished by regular mail. Notice shall be deemed effective on the date the letter of notification is mailed. Failure of the applicant or any affected property owner to be so notified shall not invalidate or otherwise affect any reimbursement district resolution or the City Council’s action to approve the same. The applicant shall provide the City with mailing labels for notice to all parties owning property within the proposed reimbursement district. The City shall mail the notices.

[Added, Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2007-84, April 19, 2007.]


3.906 City Council Action

(A) After the first public hearing held pursuant to section 3.904(A), the City Council shall approve, reject, or modify the recommendations contained in the Director’s report. The City Council’s decision shall be embodied in a resolution. If a reimbursement district is established, the resolution shall include the Director’s report as approved or modified, and specify that payment of the reimbursement fee, as designated for each parcel, is a precondition to receiving city permits for development of that parcel as provided for in section 3.910.

(B) When the applicant is other than the City, the resolution shall approve an agreement with the applicant pertaining to the reimbursement district. The agreement shall be contingent upon the improvements being accepted by the City. The agreement, at a minimum, shall contain the following provisions:

(1) The boundaries of the reimbursement district;

(2) The methodology for imposing a fee within the district;

(3) A requirement that the public improvement(s) meet all applicable city standards;

(4) The estimated total amount of potential reimbursement to the applicant;

(5) A requirement that the actual total cost of the improvement shall not exceed the estimated cost by more than ten (10%) percent;

(6) The annual fee adjustment set by the City Council, if any;

(7) A guarantee by the applicant of the public improvement(s) for a period of 12 months after the date of installation;

(8) An indemnification clause requiring the applicant to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City from any and all losses, claims, damage, judgments, or other costs or expenses arising as a result of or related to the City’s establishment of the district, including the City’s costs or expenses related to collection of the reimbursement fee pursuant to section 3.910;

(9) Acknowledgment by the applicant that the city is not obligated to collect the reimbursement fee from affected developers, and that the right to reimbursement shall be derived solely under the provisions of this section;

(10) The expiration date of the district; and

(11) Other provisions as the City Council determines necessary and proper to carry out the provisions of this section.

(C) If a reimbursement district is established by the City Council, the date of the formation of the district shall be the date that the City Council adopts the resolution forming the district.

[Added, Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2007-84, April 19, 2007.]


3.907 Notice of Adoption of Reimbursement District

The City Council shall issue a Notice of Adoption to all benefiting properties and the applicant of the adoption of a reimbursement district resolution within ten (10) days of adoption. The notice shall include a copy of the resolution, the date it was adopted, and a short explanation of when the property owner is obligated to pay the reimbursement fee and the amount of the fee.

[Added, Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2007-84, April 19, 2007.]


3.908 Recording the Resolution

The applicant shall cause record notice of the formation and nature of the reimbursement district to be recorded in the Official Records of Jackson County and shall return the original recorded agreement to the City Recorder’s office for filing so as to provide notice to potential purchasers of property within the district. Said recording shall not create a lien. Failure to make such recording shall not affect the legality of the resolution or the obligation to pay the reimbursement fee.

[Added, Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2007-84, April 19, 2007.]


3.909 Time Limit for Contesting the Reimbursement District

No legal action intended to contest the formation of the district or the reimbursement fee, including the amount of the charge designated for each parcel, shall be filed after 60 days following adoption of a resolution establishing a reimbursement district.

[Added, Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2007-84, April 19, 2007.]


3.910 Obligation to Pay Reimbursement

(A) Any person seeking an application for development of property, as defined in section 3.900(D), within any reimbursement district shall pay to the City, in addition to any other applicable fees and charges, the reimbursement fee established by the Council, together with the annual fee adjustment, if any. The obligation to pay the reimbursement fee is applicable to an application for development, as defined herein, which is filed after the date of the resolution forming the reimbursement district.

(B) The City’s determination of who shall pay the reimbursement fee is final. Neither the City nor any officer or employee of the City shall be liable for payment of any reimbursement fee, annual fee adjustment, or portion thereof as a result of this determination.

(C) A person whose property is subject to payment of a reimbursement fee receives a benefit from the construction of street improvements, regardless of whether access is taken or provided directly onto such street at any time. Nothing in this ordinance is intended to modify or limit the authority of the City to provide or require access management.

(D) No person shall be required to pay the reimbursement fee on an application or upon property for which the reimbursement fee has been previously paid, unless such payment was for a different type of improvement. No permit shall be issued for any development unless the reimbursement fee, together with the annual fee adjustment, has been paid in full. Where approval is given as specified in section 3.910(A), but no permit is requested or issued, the requirement to pay the reimbursement fee lapses if the underlying approval lapses.

(E) The date when the right of reimbursement ends shall not extend beyond ten (10) years from the district formation date.

[Added, Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2007-84, April 19, 2007.]


3.911 Public Improvements

Public improvements installed pursuant to reimbursement district agreements shall become and remain the sole property of the City.

[Added, Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2007-84, April 19, 2007.]


3.912 Multiple Public Improvements

More than one public improvement may be the subject of a reimbursement district.

[Added, Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2007-84, April 19, 2007.]


3.913 Administration

(A) The right of reimbursement is assignable and transferable after written notice is delivered to the City, advising the City to whom future payments are to be made.

(B) The City shall establish separate accounts for each reimbursement district. Upon receipt of a reimbursement fee, the City shall cause a record to be made of that property’s payment and remit the fee to the applicant, or the applicant’s designee within 90 days of receipt of the reimbursement.

(C) Upon receipt of the reimbursement fee, the City shall cause a Satisfaction of Obligation form to be prepared which the party making the payment may record with the County.

(D) The reimbursement fee does not replace or limit, and is in addition to, any other existing fees or charges collected by the City.

[Added, Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2007-84, April 19, 2007.]

4 Utilities and Sanitation 

4.105 Definitions

As used in Sections 4.110 to 4.1205, unless explicitly defined otherwise within the Code paragraph, the following words and phrases shall mean:

(1) Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU).  A detached or attached dwelling unit that is additional and auxiliary to an existing single-family dwelling, and is on the same tax lot. An ADU cannot exceed 900 square feet or more than half the square footage of the SFR, whichever is less.

(2) Commission:  The board of the Medford Water Commission of the City, its authorized agents or employees.

(3) Currently Developed Area (CDA):  All parcels within the City limits except those parcels greater than one acre which were undeveloped on August 4, 1983, as defined by the following Medford Land Use Inventory Codes: 8100, intensive agriculture; 8200, non-intensive agriculture; and 9000, undeveloped or vacant land. Such parcels are identified on a list filed in the office of the City Recorder prior to passage of Ordinance No. 4940.

(4) Customer:  An individual, firm, corporation, or governmental agency residing, operating or owning property within the City of Medford.

(5)  Detention System: A facility (such as a pond, vault, pipe, etc.) in which surface and stormwater are temporarily stored.

(6)  Developed Property: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real property including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.

(7)  Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU): An area which is estimated to place approximately equal demand on the City’s storm drainage system as a parcel containing one single-family dwelling unit. One (1) ERU shall be equal to 3,730 square feet of impervious surface.

(8) Extra Strength Sewer Service:  Industrial, commercial or hospital industrial wastes discharged into the sewer system containing a total of more than sixty (60) pounds of Biochemical Oxygen Demand, or Suspended Solids in any one (1) day and having an average strength in excess of 300 parts per million (ppm) of Biochemical Oxygen Demand, or Suspended Solids.

(9)  Home Based Business:  Business conducted entirely from a residential premise (home, garage or other outbuilding) regardless of the nature of the business.

(10)  Impervious Surface: Surface areas which either prevent or retard the absorption of water into the surface of the soil, or cause water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow compared to the natural condition of the property before development. Asphalt, concrete and roofing materials are examples of impervious materials.  Gravel surfaces used for vehicular traffic are also considered impervious.

(11) Improved Premises:  Any area which has been altered such that the runoff from the site is greater than that which historically occurred prior to development. Such a condition shall be determined by the City Engineer.

(12) NAICS Manual:  North American Industry Classification System, 2002 edition.  Published by Executive Office of the President – Office of Management and Budget.

(13)  Non-Profit:  Refers to charitable organizations that are tax exempt under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.

(14) Non-Residential Service: Service to any structure not used primarily for residential purposes.  Specific Non-Residential use definitions include the following:

(a)  Automotive:  Any facility whose primary business is providing parts or service to maintain vehicles.  This includes, but is not limited to parts stores or service facilities; gasoline stations and vehicle washes (both self-service and full-service).  Automotive dealerships and auto rental agencies are categorized under “Low Impact Retail”.

(b)  Bank:  Any facility whose primary business is the custody, loan, exchange or issue of money for the extension of credit, and for facilitating the transmission of funds.  The facility may have walk-in or drive-through customers.

(c)  Day Care Center:  Facility whose primary purpose is providing care for children normally during daytime hours.  Excludes day cares operated out of homes.

(d)  Food Service:  Any establishment with its own entrance whose primary business is the sale of prepared food or beverage to walk-in or drive-through customers.  Includes, but is not limited to bakeries, donut shops, coffee kiosks, fast food, restaurants and bars.  Excludes services whose primary business is video lottery or gaming.

(e) Fraternal Organization:  A club or other association having a limited membership and devoted to professional, religious, charitable or social activities.

(f)  Government Facility:  Facilities used primarily in the administration of city, county, state or federal government, including but not limited to office buildings, post offices, jails, libraries, military bases, maintenance yards and some social service programs.

(g)  Health Service:  Facilities that provide medical or dental care including doctor’s offices, clinics, urgent care facilities, hospitals, surgical centers, physical therapy, counseling, nursing homes and assisted living facilities.  Also includes animal veterinary care.

(h)  Industrial Service:  Premises wherein the manufacturing, processing and storing of a product is performed.  Industrial use is further defined as follows:

(i) Light Industrial:  Free-standing facilities whose primary activities are engaged in construction contracting, wholesale, as well as mail order houses, utility maintenance facilities, taxi, towing or armored car service and heavy equipment sales.

(ii) Heavy Industrial:  Establishments engaged in the transformation of materials or substances into new products.  Also includes warehouses, mini-warehouses or storage units and furniture stores.

(i)  Office:  A building or suite whose primary function is the conducting of an organization’s or a professional person’s business that typically provides a wide variety of services.  Includes professional schools that do not grant academic degrees or diplomas, such as a trade school.

 (j)  Recreation:  Generally includes all amusement, entertainment, fitness, parks, cemeteries, fraternal organization facilities and community centers.  Entertainment includes theaters, movie complexes and gaming facilities. Hotels and motels are also included in this category.

(k)  Religious: A building or structure whose principal use is for worship and in which the incidental use for school purposes is less than 12 hours per week.  Includes churches, mosques, synagogues, etc.  Schools operating more than 12 hours per week are defined in (13) (m), Schools

(l)  Retail:  Facilities specializing in the sale of groceries or products to consumers.  Excludes wholesale or automotive parts/service.  Retail is further defined as follows:

(i)  Low Impact:  Includes retail, auto dealerships and rental car agencies,  except those classified as “High Impact” or “Convenience Market”.

(ii) High Impact:  Includes grocery stores, pharmacies and video rental stores.  Excludes convenience or mini-markets.

(iii) Convenience Market:  Mini-markets that sell limited food, newspapers, magazines, tobacco and/or alcohol.  May have up to two gasoline pumps.

(m) School:  Any building or group of buildings used for instructional purposes more than 12 hours per week, involving assemblage for instruction, education or recreation. Schools may be public or private.  Professional schools that do not normally grant an academic degree or diploma shall be included in the “Office” category.

(n) Transportation:  Includes airports, park-n-ride, bus terminals and freight/shipping facilities where goods are transferred between trucks and other transportation mode, such as a truck terminal.


(15) Open Drainageway:  A natural or man-made path, ditch or channel on the land surface which has the specific function of transmitting natural stream water or storm runoff water.

(16)  Pass-by Trip:  An intermediate stop on the way from an origin to a primary trip destination without a route diversion.

(17) Recreational Vehicle Dumping Station:  A facility connected to the sewage collection system and accepts liquid wastes dumped from holding tanks of recreational vehicles such as travel trailers, motor homes and campers regardless of whether the wastes are accepted by the dumping station operator with or without charge.

(18)  Residential Service:  Service to any structure used primarily for residential purposes.  Residential use is further defined as follows:

(a) Single-Family Residential Service:  Service to one structure that provides complete single-family living facilities in which the occupant normally cooks meals, eats, sleeps and carries on the household operations incident to domestic life.  Detached single family residences, unit ownership (such as townhouses, pad lots, etc.), and condominiums, etc. are included in this definition. 

(b) Multi-Family Residential Service:  Service to a structure which consists of two or more separate living facilities in which the occupants normally cook meals, eat, sleep and carry on the household operations incident to domestic life.  Also includes a single-family residential structure with an ADU, whether attached or detached.  Excludes commercial transient housing such as hotel and motel suites.

(c) Mobile Home Parks: An area under unified ownership or management in which manufactured homes are situated and used for human habitation; or in which four or more spaces are improved, designed or offered for such use. A space is the individual location having a sewer hookup for each dwelling. Units within a mobile home park shall be treated as multi-family for utility fees unless otherwise specified.

(d)  Congregate Living:  Independent living developments that provide centralized amenities such as dining, housekeeping, transportation and organized social/recreational activities.  May provide limited medical and retail support services.


(19) Responsible Party:  The person paying the City utility charges or the person (s) having the right to occupy the property if there is no water service to the property.  If the City is not able to identify the responsible party, the owner of record shall be the responsible party.

(20)  Retention System: A system which is intended to retain and infiltrate surface water either partially or completely to groundwater.

(21)  Runoff Control:  Any means approved by the City Engineer by which the peak rate and volume of storm runoff from developed land surfaces is reduced to its predeveloped state for storms up to the 25-year event.

(22)  Trip Generation:  The average number of weekday vehicle trips as determined by the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) by reference to the 8th edition of the ITE manual.

(23)  Water System:  All or any part of the public water system owned and operated by the Medford Water Commission, including all service lines to and including the water meters.

[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2010-46, Mar. 4, 2010; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2012-196, Dec. 20, 2012; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2013-104, July 11, 2013; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2015-48, May 7, 2015; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2016-45, April 21, 2016.]
 
4 Water System (4.110 to 4.120)

4.110 Authority of Water Commission; Adoption of Rules and Regulations

The commission shall have full power and authority to maintain, operate, repair, and extend and other powers necessary to fully manage and operate the water system as is necessary for the needs of the city. The commission is hereby authorized to adopt rules and regulations necessary to carry out the duties and powers which it has under the city charter or this code.

4.120 Penalty

Violation of the rules and regulations adopted by the commission shall be a violation and shall be punished as provided in Section 1.100 of this code.
[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2000-55, April 6, 2000.]

4 Franchises & Privilege Taxes (4.200 to 4.280)

4.200 Solid Waste Collection Franchises

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, for profit or gain, to transport, store or dispose of any solid waste collected from another person, unless the person engaging in such collection, transport, storage or disposal is franchised by the City Council. This provision does not apply to:
(a) collection, storage or transportation for purposes of material recovery by a charitable, fraternal or non-profit organization where the funds for such material will be used for charitable purposes,
(b) collection, storage or transportation for purposes of material recovery where no charge is made for such service,
(c) the recycling of used beverage containers on which a deposit was paid by the consumer,
(d) transporting solid waste material through the City that is neither collected nor disposed of within the City, (e) a contractor employed to demolish, construct or remodel a building or a landscape contractor or arborist who is hauling lawn and garden waste,
(f) a dealer disposing of equipment traded in on the purchase of other equipment from such dealer,
(g) a department or agency of the City of Medford,
(h) collection of used motor oil and anti-freeze from service stations and garages,
(i) collection and disposal of junk car bodies and components,
(j) collection and disposal of used Christmas trees, or
(k) the collection and transportation of clean wood waste to be reprocessed and recycled into useable fuel.

(2) As used herein "solid waste" means all putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, whether in solid or liquid form, except liquid-carried industrial wastes or sewage hauled as an incidental part of a septic tank or cesspool-cleaning service; the term includes but is not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, swill, demolition and construction wastes, vehicle tires, discarded home and industrial appliances, manure, vegetable or animal solid or semi-solid wastes, and the following source-separated recyclable materials: newspapers, ferrous and non-ferrous scrap metal, container glass, aluminum, corrugated cardboard and kraft paper, and high-grade office paper. (3) Any person or company which collects and transports clean wood waste to be reprocessed and recycled into useable fuel shall file a quarterly report with the City of Medford of the volume of wood waste collected within the City of Medford.

[Added Ord. No. 5684, June 19, 1986; Amd. Ord. No. 5780, Dec. 18, 1986; Amd. Ord. No. 6119, May 19, 1988; Amd. Ord. No. 7293, Jan. 21, 1993.]

4.205 Franchise Application

(1) A person seeking a new franchise required by '4.200 or to amend an existing franchise shall apply in writing to the City Council. The application shall show the need for the proposed service and the applicant`s ability to provide adequate service. The Council shall hold a public hearing on the application after publishing a notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 3 days prior to the hearing and mailing notice thereof to all existing solid waste franchise holders at least 10 days prior to the hearing.

(2) After the hearing, the Council shall grant the franchise to allow the proposed service if it finds from the record and the evidence submitted at the hearing that:
(a) The applicant is fit, willing and able to properly perform the service proposed;
(b) The level of service is at least equal to that being provided by any existing franchise holder;
(c) The service proposed, to the extent authorized, is required by the public convenience and necessity; and
(d) The rates and charges proposed by the applicant are just and reasonable and adequate to provide necessary collection service.

(3) Upon approval of the franchise, the City and the applicant shall enter into a franchise agreement setting forth the terms and conditions of the franchise. The agreement shall provide for compliance with the requirements of Chapter 459, Oregon Revised Statutes. The agreement shall provide a public hearing and council approval of any changes in the services provided or rates charged before the changes go into effect. Procedures for approving changes in rates or services shall be as set forth in subsections (1) and (2) above. Provided, however, that a franchise agreement may allow a rate adjustment based on a consumer price index published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics without a hearing or Council approval.

(4) No solid waste franchise may be assigned, subcontracted or otherwise transferred without the prior approval of the City Council. The application and hearing procedure shall be as set forth in subsection (1) above. The application for assignment or other transfer shall be approved if the council finds that it is in the public interest.

(5) No exclusive franchises shall be granted under this section. No franchise shall have a term of more than ten years.

(6) The effective date of this section is July 1, 1986. Solid waste franchises in existence on the effective date shall remain in effect until they expire or are otherwise terminated. Modifications or transfers of existing franchises shall be processed in accordance with this section. No new solid waste franchise shall be granted after the effective date except in compliance with this section.

[Added Ord. No. 5684, June 19, 1986; Amd. Ord. No. 8125, June 20, 1996.]

4.250 Payment of Privilege Tax Required

(1) For the purposes Sections 4.250 through 4.280, "utility" shall mean any electric cooperative, people's utility district, privately-owned public utility or heating company. "Telecommunications utility" has the meaning given that term in ORS 759.005

(2) Any utility other than a telecommunications utility using or occupying any street, alley or highway within the corporate limits of the City without a franchise shall pay a privilege tax for the use and occupancy of any such street, alley or highway as provided in this subsection. The privilege tax imposed under this subsection shall be 5 percent of the utility's gross revenues earned within the corporate limits of the City for each month. The privilege tax shall be computed as of the commencement of business or upon the expiration of any franchise under which the utility formerly operated. The privilege tax shall be due and payable so long as the utility operates within the City and uses or occupies the streets, alleys or highways.

(3) Any telecommunications utility using or occupying a street, alley or highway within the corporate limits of the City without a franchise shall pay a privilege tax for the use and occupancy of any street, alley or highway. The privilege tax imposed under this subsection shall be 7 percent of the telecommunications utility's gross revenues earned within the corporate limits of the City for each month. For the purposes of this paragraph, "gross revenues" shall mean all revenues derived from exchange access services, as defined in ORS 401.710, less uncollectibles from such revenues. The privilege tax shall be computed as of the commencement of business or upon the expiration of any franchise under which the telecommunications utility formerly operated. The privilege tax shall be due and payable so long as the telecommunications utility operates within the City and uses or occupies the streets, alleys or highways.

(4) In the event a franchise is granted to any utility subject to the privilege tax herein required and the franchise becomes effective, then the privilege tax shall cease to apply from the effective date of the franchise. The franchise holder shall pay the proportionate earned amount of the privilege tax for the current month. The privilege tax for each calendar month shall be due and payable on the 16th day of the following month, and if not paid, collectible as provided in Section 4.265.

[Added Ord. No. 7308, Feb. 4, 1993.]

4.255 Privilege Tax Applicable to Other Cases

The terms of Sections 4.250 through 4.280 shall immediately apply to any utility using or occupying a street, alley or highway within the corporate limits of the City upon the expiration of the utility's franchise.
[Added Ord. No. 7308, Feb. 4, 1993.]

4.260 Report of Earnings

(1) Each utility and telecommunications utility subject to the privilege tax as provided in Section 4.250 shall file with the Finance Department of the City of Medford an audited statement of the revenues earned within the corporate limits of the City for each month.

(2) The monthly report shall be filed on or before the payment date of privilege tax.

(3) If a franchise is granted to a utility which is otherwise subject to the provisions of Section 4.250 the utility shall file a report with the Finance Department of the City of Medford within 10 days after the franchise becomes effective showing the gross revenues earned for the proportionate period of the month prior to the franchise being granted.

[Added Ord. No. 7308, Feb. 4, 1993.]

4.265 Payment of the Privilege Tax

(1) Payment under Section 4.250 shall be made monthly on or before the 15th of each month for the gross revenues earned the preceding calendar month.

(2) If a utility or telecommunication utility fails to pay the privilege tax as required in Sections 4.250 through 4.280, the City Attorney is authorized to institute an action in the Circuit Court of the State of Oregon for Jackson County to recover the amount of the privilege tax due the City.

[Added Ord. No. 7308, Feb. 4, 1993.]

4.270 No Waiver or Estoppel

Acceptance of payment of the privilege tax does not confer any continuing rights or privileges. Nothing in Sections 4.250 through 4.280, or in any ordinance granting a franchise or right to any utility or telecommunications utility, nor anything done or performed or monies expended under ordinance, shall estop or prevent the City from requiring the utility to cease using or occupying the streets, alleys or highways within the corporate limits of the City upon the expiration or other termination of such franchise or right to use or occupy the streets, alleys or highways or at any time that a valid franchise is not in effect.
[Added Ord. No. 7308, Feb. 4, 1993.]

4.275 Credits Allowable

Any amount which any utility or telecommunications utility may have paid to the City under the terms of any revocable permit or other authority for using the street shall be credited against the amount or amounts which have accrued or shall have accrued under Section 4.250.
[Added Ord. No. 7308, Feb. 4, 1993.]

4.280 Restricted to City Business

The privilege tax levied by Section 4.250 shall not be applicable to earnings from interstate business or to earnings from business outside the corporate limits of the City.
[Added Ord. No. 7308, Feb. 4, 1993.]


4 Sewer Connections (4.300 to 4.401)

4.300 Definitions Pertaining to Sewer Connection Regulations

As used in Section 4.305 to 4.425, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and phrases shall mean:
(1) Sewer System: The sanitary sewer system of the city.
(2) House Sewer: The sewer service line from a building to the point of connection with the sewer main or trunk lateral sewer.

4.305 Application for Sewer Connection

Subject to the provisions of Sections 4.310 to 4.355, a person desiring to connect property which abuts upon a public sewer of the city, with the city sewer system, may have the property connected to the sewer upon application to the city manager for a permit and payment to the city of the fees provided for in Section 4.400.

4.310 Sewer Permits or Connections Outside City Limits

No sewer permit shall be issued or sewer connection allowed for property located outside the city limits without city council approval. Such approval may be given under the following circumstances:

(1) Where there are prior city commitments made during negotiations for right-of-way acquisition, or

(2) When required by the Camp White Trunk Line Agreement of March 3, 1969, or

(3) Upon request of a homeowner when the following findings are made:
(a) Service could be provided in a logical and efficient manner by connection to the city system, and
(b) Service could be for the benefit of a dwelling unit located within the Urban Growth Boundary which   existed in that location prior to September 30, 1978, and
(c) A "danger to public health," as defined in ORS 222.850, has been verified, and
(d) There is no other reasonable solution which would serve to alleviate the danger to public health, and
(e) There is a demonstrable reason why such property cannot be immediately annexed to the city; or
 
(4) Upon request by Rogue Valley Sewer Services for the purpose of providing service to property within the boundaries of RVS when
(a) Such service cannot be efficiently provided by RVS, and
(b) Service can be efficiently provided by the city, and
(c) Such property lies within the Urban Growth Boundary, and
(d) There is a demonstrable reason why such property cannot be annexed to the city. Unless required by the Camp White Trunk Line Agreement, no extension of sewer service outside the city limits shall be made until and unless the recipient property owner agrees in writing to the annexation of the subject property to the City of Medford at such time as the city shall determine that such annexation is in the best interests of the city. Such consent to annex shall be an irrevocable covenant running with the title to the land and shall be binding upon all heirs and assigns.

4.315 Sewer Permits for Connection Inside City

No sewer permits shall be issued or connection allowed for property located inside the city but not located or abutting on a street or alley having a trunk lateral sewer.

4.320 Connection to Sewer System

No person, other than a person authorized by the city manager or authorized under the city and state law licensing plumbers, shall connect a house sewer to the sewer system.

4.325 Construction and Repair of On-Site Sewerage System

(1)  Except as provided in subsections (2) and (3) below, no person shall repair, replace or increase the capacity of an existing on-site sewerage system, nor construct a new on-site sewerage system in order to avoid connection to a public sewer collection system.

(2)  An existing on-site sewerage system may be repaired or replaced provided the building(s) served is more than 300 feet from a public sewer, measured by the shortest distance, or connection to a public sewer is physically impractical due to topographic or man-made features. 

(3)  An on-site sewage system may be expanded, or a new system installed, provided the following conditions are met:
 

(a)  The subject parcel is more than 300 feet from the nearest existing public sewer.

(b)  No more than one single family residence exists or is proposed for the parcel.

(c)  The new or expanded system receives approval from the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality and/or any other agencies with authority to regulate on-site sewerage systems.

(d)  A financial guarantee is provided to the City in the amount of 125 percent of the City Engineer’s estimate of the costs for extending a public sewer through the property.  This guarantee must be accepted by the City prior to the issuance of any permits for the property.  Said financial guarantee shall be held until one of the following conditions has been met:

(i)  The public sewer improvements have been constructed by the property owner, at which time the guarantee may be released in whole or in part; or,

(ii) The required sewer improvements have been constructed as part of a Local Improvement District, in which case the deposit shall be applied to the proportional share of the property owner’s obligation and the remainder, if any, returned.

(iii)  The sewer improvements are constructed by the owner of the public sewer, in which case the guaranty shall be applied as a proportional share toward the necessary extension.  If the subject property’s proportional share of the improvement project is less than the amount of the guarantee, the difference shall be released.

 (4)  New development which does not meet the criteria of (2) and (3) above, including partitions or subdivisions on which there exists an existing septic system, are required to connect to the public sewer as described in Medford Municipal Code Chapter 10.

[Amd. Ord. No. 2003-306, Dec. 18, 2003; Amd. Ord. No. 2013-161, Nov. 7, 2013.]


4.326 Use of Portable Toilets

(1) The use of portable toilets is prohibited, except as specifically permitted by this section.

(2) Portable toilets may be located at a construction site for the use of construction workers only. Upon completion of construction work, the toilet must be removed from the premises.

(3) When a permit for a special event is approved by the City Council, City Manager or authorized city staff, portable toilets can be used at the locations and for the times specified in the permit.

(4) Portable toilets may be used for a City-approved athletic league or camp, at sites approved by the City Manager or authorized staff, for the duration of the activity.

(5) Where, on the date of adoption of this section, one or more portable toilets are being used as a part of a facility's ongoing service to its employees or customers, the portable toilets may remain in use for a limited period of time as follows:
 
(a) Within six months of written notification by the city to the occupant of the premises, the toilets shall be removed unless plans and specifications are submitted and a building permit obtained from the city to construct permanent toilet and sewer facilities.
 
(b) If a permit is issued for construction of permanent toilet facilities, the portable toilets may remain in use until completion of such facilities or until one year after issuance of the building permit, whichever comes first.
 
(6) Portable toilets may be used in Semi-Permanent Pods as outlined in Section 10.829A(F)(2)(b).
 
[Added, Ord. No. 7665, June 16, 1994, Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2019-116, Nov. 7, 2019.]

4.330 Sewer Connection between Premises

No person shall connect a sewer located on property described in the application required under Section 4.305 with a house sewer located on other premises.

4.335 Disconnection of Private Connections

The city official charged with the supervision of the sewers shall disconnect any private connection with any trunk or lateral sewers from any property in the city not located or abutting on a street having a trunk or lateral sewer, when in the judgment of the council it is deemed advisable in order to give the property owners abutting on any trunk or lateral sewer the reasonable or necessary use of the sewer installed for their use or benefit.

4.342 Unauthorized Connections to Sewer

No person shall discharge or cause discharge of any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof run-off, sub-surface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, swimming pool water or unpolluted industrial process water to any sanitary sewer.

4.345 Sewers in Public Street

That part of the house sewer connection within a street, from the sewer main to the street right-of-way line, shall be constructed under the direction of the city manager and shall become a part of the city sewer system; provided, however, that the owner/user shall be responsible for maintaining the house sewer connection from the house or other building to the point of connection with the sewer main.

4.400 Connection Fees

(1) A person desiring to connect property which abuts upon a public sewer of the city with the city sewer system may have the property connected to the public sewer upon application to the City Engineer for a permit and payment to the City of the fees provided for in this section.

(2) Where the sewer connection serving the property has previously been paid for by the owner or developer, a permit must be obtained but no fee shall be charged under subsection (3) of this section.

(3) Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, a person desiring to connect abutting property to a public sewer shall pay the appropriate connection fee provided in the most recent schedule approved by resolution of the City Council. The fee shall not exceed the average cost of inspecting the connections.

(4) When a sanitary sewer, either trunk or lateral, is constructed by the city on a local assessment basis, and the cost thereof is determined, and it appears to the council that areas not included in the proposed assessment district may at some future date be connected to the sewer, the council, after considering the recommendation of the city manager, shall determine the amount which should be recovered from the unassessed area by fees in lieu of assessment calculated on the same basis as the assessments on property in the assessment district. The amount to be recovered by fees in lieu of assessment shall be deducted from the total amount to be assessed for the sewer. In order to obtain a permit for a sewer connection in the area designated as "in lieu of assessment," the applicant shall pay a fee equal to the amount that would have been assessed to a parcel of like dimension and nature within the original assessment district plus interest on that amount at the rate of five percent (5%) per annum compounded annually from the date of assessment to the date of permit application. Fees in lieu of assessment recovered under this Subsection (4) shall be applied to the reimbursement of public funds advanced for the cost of the sewer.

[Amd. Ord. No. 6907, June 20, 1991; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2005-165, Aug. 18, 2005.]


4.401 Special Connection Fees to Reimburse Private Developers

Any person or property desiring to connect to a public sanitary sewer for which there exists a Reimbursement District, as defined in Section 3.900 of this Code, shall, in addition to the fee prescribed by Section 4.400(3), pay a special connection fee as prescribed in Section 3.910 of this Code.

[Amd. Ord. No. 6924, June 27, 1991; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2008-92, May 15, 2008.]

4 Sewer Rates (4.405 to 4.450)

4.405 Sewer Rates

(1) Monthly rates and charges are hereby established and determined for the use of sewage facilities operated by the City of Medford. Unless otherwise specified, rates are comprised of two components, a base charge and a gallonage charge. The base charge is a flat rate per month. The gallonage charge shall be based upon water consumption from service to the premises by a municipal water supply. Where the premises have an additional water source from a well, the users shall be required to install, and maintain, or permit the installation and maintenance of a meter on the source and the water thus measured shall be added to the amount measured from the municipal water supply to determine total gallonage. Access to the meter shall be a condition of continued water and sewer service to the premises. Where the premises only receives water from an unmetered source, e.g., well, monthly rates are established in accordance with Section 4.405(3) or 4.405(5)(c).

(2)  The base and gallonage charges are established by two different entities.  The portion of the rate used for the operation and maintenance of the City’s sewage collection system is established by the City of Medford.  The portion of the rate used for operation and maintenance of the Regional Water Reclamation Facility (RWRF) is established by the Regional Rate Committee.  The monthly sewer rate is the sum of these two parts as shown in sub-sections (3) through (8).

(3)  Single-Family Residential Sewer Service.
The rate per account per month shall be a flat rate.
 
                                              2017        2018        2019        2020       
City of Medford                     $13.21     $14.66    $16.27     $17.89    
Regional Rate Committee    $7.26       $7.81       $8.39      $8.39      


(4)  Multiple-Family Residential Sewer Service.
The rate per account per month shall be the total of the Base and Gallonage charges as follows.  The rates per month in (a) and (b) shall also include each mobile home space in a mobile home park.
 
(a)  Base Charge - The rate per month shall be: 
 
                                               2017        2018        2019        2020       
City of Medford                     $18.12     $20.11      $22.32     $24.55     
Regional Rate Committee    $2.62       $2.82        $3.02       $3.02      
 
(b)  Gallonage Charge - For each 1,000 gallons of water delivered to the premises as determined in (c), the rate shall be:
 
                                              2017          2018        2019        2020       
City of Medford                     $0.78         $0.86       $0.95       $1.04      
Regional Rate Committee    $0.74         $0.80       $0.86       $0.86      
 
(c)  Gallonage shall be determined once each year during the month of March for each such account and the amount of the charge so determined shall be charged for each month for the following 12-month period.  The charge shall be determined for each account by applying the above gallonage rate to the average monthly water consumption during the December, January and February billing periods to the closest 1,000 gallons and using a minimum of 1,000 gallons for each such month for each dwelling unit.  In the case of a service which commences after the December billing period, the average shall be determined by a reasonable comparison with the use of water by other customers receiving the same class of service and under similar circumstances and conditions.

(5)  Non-Residential Service.
The rate per account per month shall be total of Base and Gallonage charges as follows:

(a) Base Charge – The rate per month shall be:  
 
                                              2017        2018        2019        2020        
City of Medford                     $18.12     $20.11    $22.32     $24.55     
Regional Rate Committee    $2.62       $2.82      $3.02       $3.02        
 
(b) Gallonage Charge - For each 1,000 gallons of water delivered to the premises with the exceptions described in (d) below, the rate shall be:
 
                                            2017            2018          2019         2020       
City of Medford                   $0.78           $0.86         $0.95        $1.04       
Regional Rate Committee  $0.74           $0.80         $0.86        $0.86        
 
(c)  In the case of an account with no meter, the gallonage charge per month shall be determined by the water usage of similar businesses. If the business is a mobile food vendor in a semi-permanent pod that met the criteria as defined in Section 10.829A(Q)(1), the rate shall be the same as a Single Family Residence.
 
(d)  For schools, hospitals, residential care/boarding facilities, parks and churches, the gallonage shall be determined once each year during the month of March for each such account and the amount of the charge so determined shall be charged for each month for the following 12-month period.  The charge shall be determined for each account by applying the above gallonage rate to the average monthly water consumption during the December, January and February consumption for each such account.  In the case of a service which commences after the December billing period, the average shall be determined by making a reasonable comparison of water usage by other customers receiving the same class of service and under similar circumstances and conditions.
 
(e)   All vehicle and parts washing or steam cleaning facilities that discharge to the sanitary sewer, other than self- or full-service vehicle washes that serve the general public, will have charges determined on a case-by-case basis.

(6)  Extra Strength Commercial, Hospital and Industrial Sewer Service Surcharge.
The rate per sewer service per month shall be as follows:  

  
                                              2017        2018        2019        2020       
City of Medford                     $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00      
Regional Rate Committee    $0.32       $0.34       $0.36       $0.36      
 

per each 300 ppm of biochemical oxygen demand, (BOD) or suspended solids (SS) or fraction thereof, in excess of the first 300 parts per million (ppm) of BOD or SS, per 1,000 gallons of water delivered to the premises.  The rate shall be for the higher concentration of either BOD or SS, but not assessed for both.  Such charge shall be in addition to the charge for sewer service listed in Subsection (5) above.

 
(7)  Recreation Vehicle Waste Dumping Station.
The rate for each recreational vehicle waste dumping station shall be as follows: 

   
                                            2017        2018         2019        2020         
City of Medford                    $27.50     $30.52      $33.87     $37.25     
Regional Rate Committee   $29.67     $31.90      $34.29     $34.29      
 

per dumping facility  per month, in addition to other sewer charges as prescribed in Subsection (6) above, for commercial or industrial sewer service to the location. 


(8)  When Rates Apply.
The sewer charges described shall apply for each month, or part thereof, during which the water services to the premises are active, but shall not apply to any premises not connected to a public sewer.  The term "water service" includes a well, supplying water to a system served by the sewer, as well as service from a public water system.

(9)  Review of Rates.
The sewer charges established in this section of the City Code shall be reviewed as necessary.  The rates may be revised to reflect actual costs of operation, maintenance, replacement and financing of the treatment works and sewage collection system.  Charges are to be equitable with regard to each user's contribution to the total wastewater loading rate.  The sanitary sewer rate changes listed above shall become effective July 15 for all services.

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5528, Oct. 3, 1985; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5537, Oct. 17, 1985; Amd. Ord. No. 7277, Dec. 17, 1992; Amd. Ord. No. 7306; Feb. 4, 1993; Amd. Ord. No. 7388, May 20, 1993; Amd. Ord. No. 7538, Dec. 9, 1993; Amd. Ord. No. 7667, June 16, 1994; Amd. Ord. No. 7937, Aug. 3, 1995; Amd. Ord. No. 8196, Sept. 19, 1996 - Fees Effective Oct. 1, 1996; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8544, Nov. 20, 1997; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 1999-27, Feb. 18, 1999; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-246, Dec. 21, 2000; Amd. Ord. No. 2003-31, Feb. 6, 2003; Amd. Ord. No. 2004-182, Sept. 2, 2004; Amd. Ord. No. 2005-232, Oct. 6, 2005; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2010-46, March 4, 2010 and Ord. No. 2010-47, March 4, 2010; Amd. Ord. No. 2012-194, Dec. 20, 2012; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2013-104, July 11, 2013; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2014-144, Nov. 20. 2014; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2015-48, May 7, 2015; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord No. 2018-32, June 21, 2018; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2019-116, Nov. 7, 2019.]


4.415 Premises Outside the City Served by Sewer

Properties outside the City served by City sewer shall be served and shall be charged at the same rates as those charged premises within the City in the same classifications.

[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2013-104, July 11, 2013.]

4.420 Collection and Payment of Rates

The utility fees provided for in Section 4.405 shall be applied to each user of water from the City's water system that has sewer connections to the sewer system.  See Section 4.1200 for billing, collection and enforcement of sewer utility fees. 

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2008-55, March 20, 2008; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2010-46, March 4, 2010.]


4.425 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-55, March 20, 2008.]

 


4.450 Septic Tank Sludge

(1) Authority to accept at plant. The city manager or his designated department head is authorized to accept domestic septic tank sludge at the sewage treatment plant between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. daily, subject to the restrictions hereinafter contained. Until otherwise designated by the city manager, the administrative functions hereof shall be carried out by the director of public works and the plant operators in his department, and all such persons are collectively referred to as "the director."

(2) Permit required; bond provisions; forfeiture and cancellation. No person shall be permitted to dump domestic septic tank sludge at the sewage treatment plant without first securing a permit to do so from the director. All such permits shall be issued for a period expiring December 31 next following the issuance of the permit, and shall be subject to general termination or suspension by the director on a finding that the plant is not functioning adequately or its capacity is otherwise committed, and subject to revocation by the director upon breach of any of the conditions found in Subsection (3), or upon cancellation of the bond required hereunder. The application for the permit shall be on a form prescribed by the director and must include a description of the equipment to be used by the permittee, the names and addresses of the owners of such equipment and of all persons who will be operating the same, and a specific undertaking, signed by the owners of such equipment and of all persons who will be operating the same, and a specific undertaking, signed by the owners of the equipment that they, and all their agents and employees, shall keep and perform the conditions set forth herein. The applicant shall also submit surety bond in the penal amount of $10,000 in form and with sureties approved by the city attorney, which bond shall be available to the city for recovery to the extent of any loss caused by permittee's violation of any of his duties hereunder. The bond shall be so written that surety's liability in the aggregate for any and all losses under the bond shall not exceed the total amount of $10,000, and the bond may be cancelable on 90 days' notice; but in the event that the bond is thus cancelable, the director shall, upon receiving notice of cancellation, forthwith revoke the permit on which the bond is based and no further permit shall be issued until a sufficient and effective bond complying with the terms hereof has been substituted therefor. The director may refuse to issue, reissue, or renew a permit to any applicant who has had a previous permit revoked under Subsection (3).

(3) Required conditions. Violation of any of the following by a permittee shall be grounds for revocation of a permit and for the recovery from the sureties on the permittee's bond for any loss to, or amount due, the city by reason thereof: (a) The discharge of any sewage or sludge into any sewer system within the jurisdiction of the cities of Medford, Phoenix, or Central Point, or Rogue Valley Sewer Services, other than at the dumping facility specifically designated by the director for such purpose. (b) The dumping or discharge, or the attempted dumping or discharge, of any sewage or sludge of the following character: caustic, acid, oil tank bottom contents, grease or oil trap sludges, plating or metal finishing waste, digested sewage sludge, animal manure, food processing wastes, including skins, shells, seeds, blood, hair, bones, grease, or feathers, the contents from chemical toilets, industrial sumps, or holding tanks for other than domestic wastes. (c) The dumping or discharge of any sludge or sewage which is known to the permittee, or to his employer or agent, to contain waste other than domestic septic tank sludge, whether or not such material is described in (b) above. (d) The failure to accurately certify the source of the load of sewage or sludge prior to dumping, in the form required by the director. (e) The failure to pay all charges for dumping sewage sludge within 30 days after the end of the calendar month during which such sludge was dumped. (f) The failure to clean the immediate area of the dumping facility after dumping so as to leave the area in a clean and sanitary condition. (g) The failure to conform with the load-handling procedures established by the operator in charge of the plant, approved by the director and posted at the plant.

(4) Dumping fees. The director shall establish the procedure for controlling the dumping process and shall collect from the permittees, on monthly statements, fees for the dumping of septic tank sludge. The fees shall be determined as follows: (a) Typical domestic septic tank sewage: The rates for typical domestic septic tank sewage are: Trunk Capacity up to: Dumping Rate: 1,000 gallons $120.00 1,500 gallons 180.00 2,000 gallons 240.00 2,500 gallons 300.00 3,000 gallons 360.00 3,500 gallons 420.00 4,000 gallons 480.00 (b) Atypical or extra-strength septic tank sludge may be received for treatment, at the discretion of the operator in charge of the plant, and fees computed in ratio of strength of atypical domestic septic tank sludge under (a) above to the atypical or extra-strength sludge as determined by standard tests generally accepted by treatment plant operators. Any misrepresentation of the character or amount of such material shall be basis for revocation of permit.

(5) Funds; priorities. After payment of the cost of constructing a facility for receiving the material, all monies collected by the city shall be paid into the common fund maintained by the City of Medford under Section II, Part B, of the contract of March 1969, which fund is used only for the purposes therein set forth, namely: to pay principal and interest on the bonded indebtedness for the construction of the plant, and for the operation and maintenance of the sewage treatment plant. A current record of the outstanding permits and the revenues received thereunder shall be maintained by the director and available to the regional rate committee under said agreement for the purpose of carrying out its rate-making function and also for the purpose of keeping the participating entities informed of the volume and nature of the material thus received at the plant for treatment. It is understood that the primary purpose of the plant is to process sewage collected from the sewer systems of the participating entities; that nothing herein is construed to create a vested right or enforceable privilege to use it to process septic tank sludge, and the city acting in its own behalf and in behalf of the other participating entities does not hereby authorize any commitment to any person but retains full right to suspend, terminate, or restrict all septic tank disposal permits at any time.

[Amd. Ord. No. 7278, Dec. 17, 1992. Fees effective January 1, 1993; Amd. Ord. No. 7525; Nov. 18, 1993; Amd. Ord. No. 7589, March 17, 1994.]


4 Systems Development Charges [Repealed]

4.500 [Repealed, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6918, June 27, 1991 effective July 1, 1991.]

 


4.501 [Repealed, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2008-98, June 5, 2008.]

 


4.502 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-98, June 5, 2008.]

 


4.504 [Repealed, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2008-98, June 5, 2008.]

 


4.506 [Repealed Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6918, June 27, 1991.]


4.508 [Repealed Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6918, June 27, 1991.]


4.509 [Repealed Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6918, June 27, 1991.]

4 Wastewater Discharge [Repealed - See Chapter 11]

4.600 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.602 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.604 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.608 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.610 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.612 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.614 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.616 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.618 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.620 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.624 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.626 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.628 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.630 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.632 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.634 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.636 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.638 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.640 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.642 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.644 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.646 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.648 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.650 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.652 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.654 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.656 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.658 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.660 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.662 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.664 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.666 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.668 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.670 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.672 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.674 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.676 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.678 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.680 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.682 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.684 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.686 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]


4.692 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6311, Mar. 16, 1989.]

4 Drainage Utility (4.700 to 4.750)

4.700 [Repealed, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2010-46, March 4, 2010.]

 


4.705 Storm Drainage Policy

(1) Pursuant to the general laws of the State of Oregon and the powers granted in the charter of the City of Medford, the Council of said City does hereby declare its intention to acquire, own, construct, equip, operate and maintain within and without the City limits of the City of Medford, Oregon, open drainageways, underground storm drains, equipment and appurtenances necessary, useful, or convenient for a storm drainage system; and also including maintenance, extension and reconstruction of the present storm drainage system of said City.

(2) The improvement of both public and private storm drainage facilities through or adjacent to a new development shall be the responsibility of the developer. Said improvements shall comply with all applicable City ordinances, policies and standards.

(3) No portion of this ordinance or statement herein or subsequent Council interpretation or policies shall relieve the property owner of assessments levied against their property for public facility improvement projects.

(4) It is the policy of the City to participate in improvements to storm drainage facilities when authorized by the City Council. To be considered for approval by Council, a facility must:

(a) be public; and

(b) be a major benefit to the community;

(c) if a piped system, be a design equivalent to larger than a 24 inch diameter circular concrete pipe.  Participation shall be in accordance with the criteria set forth in Section 3.891; or

(d) if a detention system, be placed and sized in conformance with the storm drain master plan; or

(e) be a rehabilitation/replacement of existing public facilities.

(5) The city shall manage public storm drainage facilities located on city-owned property, city right-of-way, and city easements. Public facilities to be managed by the city include but are not limited to:

(a) open drainageways serving a drainage basin of at least 100 acres, including Bear Creek and its tributaries;

(b) a piped drainage system and its related appurtenances which has been designed and constructed expressly for use by the general public and accepted by the city;

(c) roadside drainage ditches along unimproved city streets;

(d) flood control facilities (levees, dikes, overflow channels, detention basins, retention basins, dams, pump stations, groundwater recharging basins, etc.) that have been designed and constructed expressly for use by the general public and accepted by the city.

(6) Facilities not to be managed by the city include but are not limited to:

(a) facilities not located on city-owned property, city right-of-way, or city easement;

(b) private parking lot storm drains;

(c) roof, footing, and area drains;

(d) drains not designed and constructed for use by the general public;

(e) drainage swales which collect storm water from a basin less than 100 acres;

(f) driveway and access drive culverts.

[Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2005-228, Oct. 6, 2005.]


4.710 Monthly Storm Drainage Charges

The monthly rates and charges are hereby established and determined for any improved premises within the City of Medford, or within any area under contract to be annexed to the City of Medford, for storm drainage system operation and maintenance. The City Council has determined that property not used for single family dwelling purposes is furnished service in proportion to the amount of the property's impervious surface.  Each 3,730 square feet of impervious surface is equivalent to that furnished to a single family unit (Equivalent Residential Unit, or ERU).   The minimum service charge per tax lot shall be that established for a single family unit.

[Added Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2000-34, Feb. 17, 2000; Amd. Ord. No. 2002-145, Aug. 15, 2002; Amd. Ord. No. 2005-231, Oct. 6, 2005; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2010-46, March 4, 2010, and Ord. No. 2010-49, March 4, 2010; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2012-195, Dec. 20, 2012; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2013-104, July 11, 2013; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2016-45, April 21, 2016.]


4.715 Credit for Runoff Control Measures

(1) Upon application, a person responsible may seek a reduction or elimination of the monthly charge for storm drainage service.  Upon submission of appropriate evidence, the City Engineer shall consider the application. The applicant must show to the City Engineer's satisfaction:

(a) The amount of permanent reduction to the runoff for the property due to the retention system; and/or

(b) The amount of storm water being discharged directly from the property into Bear Creek.

(2)  Elimination of the monthly charge may only be made for (a) above.  Discharge directly to Bear Creek will not result in an elimination of the fee, but only a reduction.

(3) Any reduction or elimination given shall continue until the property is further developed or until the City Engineer determines the property no longer qualifies for the reduction or elimination granted. Upon further development of the property another application may be made by a person responsible. Any applicant aggrieved by the City Engineer's decision may appeal to the City Council by filing with the City Recorder a written request for review as provided in Section 1.025.

(4)  The owner of any property for which the storm drain fee has been reduced or eliminated consents to entry and inspection by the City or its agents as necessary to confirm that the fee adjustment is warranted.

[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 7618, Apr. 21, 1994; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2005-228, Oct. 6, 2005; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2012-195, Dec. 20, 2012.]


4.718 Basis for Determining Storm Drain Fee

(1)  The basis for determining the monthly Storm Drain fee is as follows:

(a)Single family residential properties will be charged 1 ERU per month.
 
(b) Mobile Home Parks will be charged 6 ERUs per acre per month.
 
(c) The number of ERUs to be charged for all other properties not included in (a) or (b) above will be determined by measurement of the impervious area divided by 3,730.  Area measurements may be determined from City building permit applications or aerial mapping records.

(2)  Effective July 15 of each year below, the monthly rate per ERU for residential accounts with no runoff control measures shall be as follows:
 
2013       2015         2016         2017         2018         2019          2020
$7.71      $8.87        $9.49       $10.15      $10.25      $10.25       $7.85
 
(3)  Effective July 15 of each year below, the monthly rate per ERU for non-residential accounts with no runoff control measures shall be as follows:
            2013    2015    2016    2017    2018    2019    2020
            $7.71   $8.87   $9.49   $10.15 $10.25 $10.25 $10.25

(4) Effective July 15 of each year below, the monthly rate per ERU for residential accounts with runoff control measures shall be as follows:
 
2013       2015       2016     2017      2018      2019      2020
$5.41      $6.22      $6.66    $7.12     $7.19     $7.19     $5.51

(5) Effective July 15 of each year below, the monthly rate per ERU for non-residential accounts with runoff control measures shall be as follows:
            2013    2015    2016    2017    2018    2019    2020
            $5.41   $6.22   $6.66   $7.12   $7.19   $7.19   $7.19

[Added, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2012-195, Dec. 20, 2012; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2014-144, Nov. 20, 2014; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord No. 2018-32; June 21, 2018; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2020-85, Jun. 18, 2020.]

4.720 Billing of Monthly Drainage Charges

See Section 4.1200 for billing, collection and enforcement of drainage utility fees.

[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2008-55, March 20, 2008.]


4.725 [Repealed, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2008-55, March 20, 2008.]

 


4.730 [Repealed, Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2005-228, Oct. 6, 2005.]

 


4.735 New Development and Annexation

(1) Monthly storm drainage utility fees for new development will commence upon final building approval or Certificate of Occupancy, whichever occurs first.   Areas that are annexed to the City or under contract to annex shall become subject to the storm drain utility fee and storm drainage SDC on the date of annexation or the date of the annexation contract, whichever comes first.

(2) At the time of new development, the person applying for a building permit shall submit a reduced site plan for use in determining storm drain utility fees and SDCs. The plan shall show the entire property, including the existing and proposed improvements. The drawing shall be done to the following specifications: Size: 8 1/2" x 11" or 11" x 17" sheet Scale: 1 inch = 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, or 100 feet.

[Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 7618, Apr. 21, 1994; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2014-144, Nov. 20, 2014; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2018-32, June 21, 2018.]

4.740 Drainage Utility Fund

Monies in the Drainage Utility Fund shall be used only for construction, maintenance and administration of facilities for storm water management and control as provided in this ordinance. Expenditures from this fund need not be identified to any particular revenue source.

[Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2005-228, Oct. 6, 2005.]


4.745 Unlawful Discharge of Polluting Elements into Stormwater System

No person shall throw, drain, run or otherwise discharge into the stormwater system of the City or into the stormwater system of any development within the City, or to cause, permit or suffer to be thrown, run, drained, allowed to seep or otherwise discharged into such stormwater systems, any organic or inorganic matter that shall cause or tend to cause impairment of the function of stormwater conveyance, treatment, or infiltration facilities or cause or tend to cause pollution of waters which receive the discharge from stormwater systems. The discharge of organic or inorganic matter shall be considered to cause or tend to cause pollution of receiving waters when such matter contains oil or other petroleum products sufficient to allow accumulation in amounts sufficient to be unsightly or deleterious, or produces color, odor or other conditions sufficient to be a nuisance, or contains materials or combinations of materials which are toxic or harmful to human, animal, plant or aquatic life either by virtue of the nature of the matter itself or the effect the volume of such matter has on the receiving waters of a stormwater system.

[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2003-320, Dec. 18, 2003; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2010-46, March 4, 2010.]

 


4.750 Penalty

(1)  Except as provided in subsection (2) below, a violation of a provision of this Chapter 4 constitutes a violation.  Each day in which a violation is caused or permitted to exist constitutes a separate violation.

(2)  A violation of Section 4.745 is a crime and is punishable by a fine of $1,000 per occurrence and imprisonment not exceeding one year.

[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2000-55, April 6, 2000; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2003-320, Dec. 18, 2003; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2010-46, March 4, 2010.]

4 Street Utility (4.751 to 4.950)

4.751 Creation of utility; purpose

There is hereby created a Street Utility Fund ("the Fund") for the purpose of providing for the operation and maintenance of city streets. The Council hereby finds, determines and declares the necessity of providing operation and maintenance of the city's streets and related facilities as a comprehensive Street Utility, with such operation and maintenance to include such activities as are necessary in order that streets and related facilities may be properly operated and maintained and that the health, safety and welfare of the city and its inhabitants may be safeguarded.
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6891, May 16, 1991.]

4.753 Administrative officer designated

The City Manager shall employ a qualified person as Public Works Director. In addition to such other duties and responsibilities as may be assigned to the Director, the Public Works Director shall be responsible for the administration of this fund. The Public Works Director shall be responsible for developing administrative procedures for the fund, administration of fees (including the pedestrian-scale street light fee), developing maintenance programs, establishing standards for the operation and maintenance of streets and related facilities, and all other activities related to the purpose of the Street Utility Fund.
[Added Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6891, May 16, 1991; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2002-201, Nov. 21, 2002.]

4.755 Establishment and revision of street utility fee

The City Council hereby establishes a street utility fee to be paid by the responsible party for each developed property within the corporate limits of the city. Such fee shall not be imposed in amounts greater than that which is necessary, in the judgment of the City Council, to provide sufficient funds to properly maintain city streets. Fees for individual properties shall be based upon traffic generation and developed use of the property. Collection of the fee for each property shall be made by a monthly charge which shall commence on the first day of March, 1992. The City Council may, from time to time, by ordinance, change the fee based upon revised estimates of the cost of properly maintaining streets, revised categories of developed use, revised traffic generation factors or other factors.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 6891, May 16, 1991; Amd Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2002-18, Feb. 7, 2002.]

4.757 Moneys to be paid in Street Utility Fund

All fees collected by the city, including the pedestrian-scale street light fee, and such other moneys as might be available to the city for the purposes of this ordinance shall be paid into the Street Utility Fund. Such revenues shall be used for the purposes of the operation and maintenance of the street network of the city. It shall not be necessary that the operations and maintenance expenditures from the Fund specifically relate to any particular property from which the fees for said purposes were collected. To the extent that the fees collected are insufficient to properly operate and maintain streets, the cost of the same may be paid from such other city funds as may be determined by the City Council, but the City Council may order the reimbursement to such fund if additional fees are thereafter collected. All amounts on hand in the Street Utility Fund shall be invested by the Chief Financial Officer in investments proper for city funds. The fees paid and collected by virtue of this ordinance shall not be used for general or other governmental or proprietary purposes of the city, except to pay for the equitable share of the cost of accounting, management and government which is attributable to the Fund, which shall not exceed 5% of the gross revenues of the Fund during any fiscal year. Other than as described above, the fees and charges shall be used solely to pay for the cost of operation, administration, maintenance, repair, improvement, renewal, replacement and reconstruction of the streets of the city and costs incidental thereto.
[Added Sec. 4, Ord. No. 6891, May 16, 1991; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2002-201, Nov. 21, 2002.]

4.759 City to maintain streets; exception

The city intends to maintain all accepted streets within city-owned land, city rights-of-way and city easements and may maintain other accepted streets within or adjacent to the city. Such streets specifically exclude private streets and streets not yet accepted by the city for maintenance. The City Engineer shall develop and implement a maintenance plan for accepted city streets to the end that the street system shall be maintained and that the city's investment therein shall be preserved, insofar as possible to do so with funds available and in accordance with policies adopted by the Council.
[Added Sec. 5, Ord No. 6891, May 16, 1991.]

4.761 Imposition of Utility Fee

(1)  Subject to the provisions of Section 4.763, there is hereby imposed upon the responsible party for each and every developed lot or parcel of land within the city a monthly street uti­lity fee calculated as follows:

(a)  The rate per account per month shall be the Monthly Fee, which is equal to the Quantity x (Modified Average Daily Trips x Pass-By Trip Factor) x the Rate. 

(i)  Quantity is the unit of measure defined by the Institute of Traffic Engineer’s (ITE) manual and is usually gross square footage (GFA) of the building, number of dwelling units, etc.

(ii)  Modified Average Daily Trips is determined per Section 4.763 and Table 4.1

(iii)  Pass-By Trip Factor is determined per Section 4.763 and Table 4.1

(iv) The Rate is per (d) below.


            (b)  Effective July 1, 2013, there shall be two customer groups:

                        (i) Residential

                        (ii) Non-Residential

(c)  Customers classified as non-profit, houses of worship and fraternal organizations shall receive a 50% reduction in their Modified Average Daily Trip-End where the building or unit's primary purpose is administration.  The reduction applies to the headquarters or main administrative offices only; satellite or auxiliary facilities operated by these organizations at other sites shall not receive the discount. Government offices directly concerned with the delivery of social services to individuals and families are not eligible for the discount.

(d)  Effective July 15 of each year below, except as noted, the rates shall be as follows:

 
                                                             2015        03/15/2016        2016        2017
                        Residential                     $0.960     $0.670               $0.727     $0.768
                        Non-Residential              $0.601     $0.420               $0.456     $0.482
 

(e)  In the event the Monthly Fee as calculated in (a) above for Non-Residential customers is less than the Monthly Fee for Single Family customers, the monthly street fee shall be equal to the Single Family monthly street fee for each applicable ITE bundle assigned to the account.

(f) The Home-Based Business utility fee is discontinued effective September 15, 2016.

(2)  This fee is deemed reasonable and is necessary to pay for the operation, and maintenance of streets within the City.

[Added Sec. 6, Ord. No. 6891, May 16, 1991; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 7855, April 6, 1995; Amd. Ord. No. 1998-156, July 16, 1998; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-180, Dec. 21, 2000; Amd. Ord. No. 2005-230, Oct. 6, 2005; Amd. Ord. No. 2007-106, May 17, 2007; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2010-46, March 4, 2010; Amd. Ord. No. 2010-48, March 18, 2010; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2012-193, Dec. 20, 2012; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2013-104, July 11, 2013; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2014-144, Nov. 20, 2014; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2016-45, April 21, 2016; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2016-112, September 1, 2016.]


4.763 Determination of Utility Fee

(1) The City Engineer shall determine the fee for each utility account in accordance with the customer’s classification and the average daily trip-ends for that classification as set forth in the 8th edition of the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) manual.  In the absence of a specific classification from within the ITE manual for a particular developed use, the City Engineer shall determine the appropriate classification by interpreting the ITE manual and assigning the category which most accurately reflects the traffic generated by the particular developed use. 

(2)  In determining the customer’s classification, the following principles shall be used as a guide.

(a)  Classification shall be made according to the 2002 edition of the North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS) manual in so far as possible.  In cases where the NAICS and ITE manuals disagree, the ITE manual definition shall prevail.  An example would be a shop in a hotel; each has their own NAICS classification, but one ITE manual classification (Hotel).

(b)   Each street utility account is to be classified according to the primary activity of the establishment that will, or does, occupy the building or suite. 

(c)   Where distinct and separate economic activities are performed at a single physical location, or in a single building, each activity may be treated as a separate establishment and classified individually provided each business operates in different suites, each with its own entrance.

(d)  Separate buildings of a single establishment (business) at a single physical location may be classified separately if the employment is significant for each building and the primary activity of each building serves other establishments of the same company.  An example would be a manufacturer with a separate warehouse.

(3)  ITE classifications shall be bundled into groups of similar enterprises or traffic generation for billing purposes as defined in Section 4.105(13) and (17), as well as Table 4.1 below.  
 
(4)  The determination of whether or not a classification qualifies for a pass-by adjustment shall be made by the City Engineer based on the ITE manual.  Pass-by rates may be adjusted by the City Engineer to reflect traffic patterns within the City.
 
(5)  If the use of a property changes such that its impact on the transportation system either increases or decreases, the person responsible for the property must notify the City Engineer within 30-days to obtain a new determination regarding the fee for that property.  The new fee will be applied with the next City services billing.  If the person responsible for the property neglects to notify the City, and the change would result in a lower monthly street utility fee, no refund will be made for the time between when the change was made and when the City became aware of the change.  If the change would result in a higher monthly street utility fee, the City will calculate the additional amount owed in accordance with Section 4.1205, Adjustment for Billing Error.

(6)  An appeal of a decision regarding the customer’s classification shall be made in writing to the Public Works Director.  A further appeal of the Public Works Director's administrative decision regarding street fee classification may be made in accordance with Section 1.025.  An appeal of the modified average daily trip-end value or pass-by trip factor shall be determined as provided in Section 3.813.
 

TABLE 4.1
ITE Bundles and Formulas for Determining Trip-Ends

 
Bundle	ITE Codes	Unit of Quantity	Quantity
Range	Modified Average Daily Trip-End Formula	Pass-By Factor
AUTOMOTIVE	 	 	 	 	 
A. Automotive Parts & Service	843, 848, 849, 941-943	KSF	0.1–39.999
40.0 & up	(39.22-((39.22-20.77)/40) x Qty)
20.77	   1.00
B. Gasoline Stations	944-946	Fuel Positions	1 – 13
14 & up	(121.96-((121.96-86.96)/14) x Qty)
86.96	   0.43
C. Car Wash	947-948	Wash Stalls	1 – 4
5 & up	(170.16 – ((170.16-88.15)/5) x Qty)
88.15	   1.00
 	 	 	 	 	 
BANKS	911-912	    KSF	0.1-29.999
30.0 & up	(128.23-((128.23-53.23)/30) x Qty)
53.23	   0.53
 	 	 	 	 	 
FOOD	 	 	 	 	 
A. Bakeries, Donuts, Bagel Shops	939-940	    KSF	0.1-1.999
2.0 & up	(187.50-((187.50-167.50)/2.0) x Qty)
167.50	   1.00
B.  Coffee Kiosks, No Indoor Seating	938	    KSF	All	1800.00	   0.11
C. Fast Food, Coffee w/ Indoor Seating	933-937	    KSF	0.1-2.999
3.0 & up	(325.50-((325.50-180.80)/3.0) x Qty)
180.80	   0.50
D. Restaurants and Drinking Places	925, 931, 932	    KSF	0.1-9.999
10.0 & up	(127.15-((127.15-92.15)/10.0) x Qty)
92.15	   0.57
 	 	 	 	 	 
GOVERNMENT FACILITIES	 	 	 	 	 
A. Government Administration	 571, 730-733	    KSF	0.1-49.999
50.0 & up	(60.00-((60.00-84.00)/50.0) x Qty)
84.00	   1.00
B. Library	590	    KSF	All	28.75	   1.00
C. Military – Armory & Support	501	    KSF	All	0.76	   1.00
D. Government Maintenance Facilities	110, 170	    KSF	0.1-
99.999
100.0 & up	(15.00-((15.00-8.00)/100.0) x Qty)
8.00	   1.00
 	 	 	 	 	 
HEALTH SERVICES	 	 	 	 	 
A. Medical Offices/Clinics	630, 640, 720	    KSF	0.1-39.999
40.0 & up	(40.16-((40.16-23.16)/40) x Qty)
23.16	   1.00
B. Acute Care, Full Service Hospital	610	    KSF	All	28.00	   1.00
C. Nursing Home/Foster Care	254, 620	    Beds	All	4.25	   1.00
 	 	 	 	 	 
INDUSTRIAL	 	 	 	 	 
A. Light Industrial/Maintenance Yards	110, 130, 170, 860	    KSF	0.1-99.999
100.0 & up	(15.00-((15.00-8.00)/100.0) x Qty)
8.00	   1.00
B. Heavy Industrial, Warehousing, Furniture	120, 140, 150-152, 890	    KSF	0.1-89.999
90.0 & up	(15.63–((15.63-8.13)/90.0) x Qty)
8.13	   1.00
 	 	 	 	 	 
OFFICE	710, 714, 715, 750, 760, 770	    KSF	0.1-49.999
50.0 & up	(35.68-((35.68-17.68)/50) x Qty)
17.68	   1.00
 	 	 	 	 	 
RECREATION	 	 	 	 	 
A. Outdoor Recreation –e.g., Golf	414,-418, 420, 430-435, 452-454, 480-481, 490	    Acres	0.1-249.999
250.0 & up	(13.25-((13.25-5.75)/250) x Qty)
5.75	   1.00
B. Entertainment & Fitness	437, 441, 443-445, 465, 491-493, 495	    KSF	0.1-39.999
40.0 & up	(35.50-((35.50-18.50)/40) x Qty)
18.50	   1.00
C. Parks & Cemetery	411-413, 488, 566	    Acres	0.1-99.999
100.0 & up	(9.40-((9.40-3.65)/100) x Qty)
3.65	   1.00
D. Lodge/Fraternal Organization	591	    KSF	All	25.45	   1.00
E. Hotel/Motel	310-312, 320, 330	Rooms/Units	All	10.04	   1.00
F. Night Club/Gaming	440, 473	    KSF	All	134.30	   1.00
G. Arena	460	Acres	All	33.0	1.00
 	 	 	 	 	 
RELIGION–HOUSES OF WORSHIP	560-561	    KSF	All	10.84	   1.00
 	 	 	 	 	 
RESIDENTIAL	 	 	 	 	 
A. Single-Family/Condo, Townhome	210, 224, 230-233	Dwelling Units	All	9.57	   1.00
B. Apartments/SFR w/ADU, Duplex	220, 223, 265, 270	Dwelling Units	All	6.75	   1.00
C. Mobile Home Park	240	Acres	All	39.61	   1.00
D. Congregate Care	251-253, 255, 260	Dwelling Units	All	4.25	   1.00
 	 	 	 	 	 
RETAIL	 	 	 	 	 
A.  Low Impact	812-818, 820, 823, 841, 857, 861-869, 872, 875, 876, 879, 918, 920	    KSF	0.1-99.999
100.0 & up	(82.42-((82.42-50.42)/100) x Qty)
50.42	   0.70
B. High Impact	850, 854, 880, 881, 896	    KSF	0.1-74.999
75.0 & up	(93.50-((93.50-67.96)/75) x Qty)
67.96	   0.57
C. Convenience Market	851-853	    KSF	0.1-4.499
4.500 & up	(130.0-((130.0-145.0)/4.5) x Qty)
145.00	   0.89
 	 	 	 	 	 
SCHOOLS; DAY CARE CENTERS	 	 	 	 	 
A.  School	520, 522, 530, 534, 536, 540, 550	Students	1-1,499
1,500 & up	(1.85-((1.85-1.70)/1,500) x Qty)
1.70	   1.00
B. Day Care Center	565	    KSF	All	79.26	   1.00
TRANSPORTATION	 	 	 	 	 
A. Freight/Shipping	30, 93	    Acres	All	81.90	   1.00
B. Park-n-Ride/Bus Terminal	90	   Acres	All	11.66	   1.00
C. Commercial Airport	21	Avg Flights/Day	All	93.5	   1.00
Table 4.1 – continued
(1) Where units are “square feet”, this refers to the gross floor area (GFA) of the entire building as defined below.  Where the units are “acres”, this refers to the total improved area of the site.  KSF equals 1,000 square feet.

(2) Gross Floor Area (GFA):  The gross floor area of a building is the sum (in square feet) of the area at each floor level, including cellars, basements, mezzanines, penthouses, corridors, lobbies, stores and offices that are included within the principal outside faces of exterior walls, not including architectural setbacks or projections.  Included are all stories or areas that have floor surfaces with clear standing head room (6 feet, 6 inches, minimum) regardless of their use.  Where a ground level area, or part thereof, within the principal outside faces of the exterior wall is left unenclosed, the gross floor area of the unenclosed portion is said to be considered as a part of the overall square footage of the building.  For purposes of the trip-end calculation, the gross floor area of any vehicle parking areas within the building shall not be included within the gross floor area of the entire building.

[Added Sec. 7, Ord. No. 6891, May 16, 1991; Amd. Ord. No. 7131, May 21, 1992; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 7855, April 6, 1995; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2000-180, Dec. 21, 2000; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2004-217, Nov. 4, 2004; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2012-193, Dec. 20, 2012; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2013-104, July 11, 2013; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2016-45, April 21, 2016; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2016-112, September 1, 2016.]

4.765 Billing and collection of street utility fee

See Section 4.1200 for billing, collection and enforcement of street utility fees.

[Added Sec. 8, Ord. No. 6891, May 16, 1991; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 7618, Apr. 21, 1994; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2002-18, Feb. 7, 2002; Amd Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2002-201, Nov. 21, 2002; Amd. Ord. No. 2003-250, Sept. 18, 2003; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2008-55, March 20, 2008.]


4.767 [Repealed, Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2008-55, March 20, 2008.]

 


4.769 [Repealed, Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2010-46, March 4, 2010.]

 


4.771 [Repealed, Sec. 11, Ord. No. 7855, April 6, 1995.]


4.801 Establishment and Purpose of Pedestrian-Scale Street Light Utility Fee

In accordance with Section 10.495(B)(1)(c), the City Council hereby establishes a pedestrian-scale street light fee for the purpose of providing for the operation and maintenance of pedestrian-scale street lights located in the public right-of-way within the city limits of Medford. Such fee is to be paid by the responsible party for each utility account serving benefiting properties and shall not be imposed in amounts greater than that which is necessary, in the judgment of the City Council, to provide sufficient funds to properly maintain the pedestrian-scale street lighting system. The City Council may, from time to time, by ordinance, change the fee based upon revised estimates of the cost of properly maintained pedestrian-scale street lights or other factors.

[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2002-201, Nov. 21, 2002; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2012-196, Dec. 20, 2012.]

4.803 Benefiting Properties

Benefiting properties are any and all parcels lying within a land partition, subdivision or other development whose conditions of approval include the installation of pedestrian-scale street lights, except those parcels which front on or take direct access onto an arterial or collector class street.
[Added, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2002-201, Nov. 21, 2002.]

4.805 Dedication of Funds

All fees collected by the City and such other moneys as might be available to the City for the purposes of this ordinance shall be paid into the City's Street Utility Fund and shall be used only for the maintenance, administration, and operation of pedestrian-scale street lights, and for no other purpose. It shall not be necessary that the operations and maintenance expenditures from the Fund specifically relate to any particular property from which the fees for said purposes were collected.
[Added, Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2002-201, Nov. 21, 2002.]

4.807 Imposition of Pedestrian-Scale Street Light Fee

There is hereby imposed upon the responsible party for each and every City utility account of a single-family residential subdivision or for each pedestrian street light in a multi-family or commercial development that meets the criteria for a benefiting property, as described in Section 4.803. This fee is deemed reasonable and is necessary to pay for the operations and maintenance of pedestrian-scale street lights within the City. The effective starting date of this fee will be March 1, 2003, and will first appear on utility bills delivered in April 2003.

3/1/2003        3/1/2006        3/1/2007        3/1/2008
$4.50              $4.75             $5.00            $5.34

[Added, Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2002-201, Nov. 21, 2002; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2012-196, Dec. 20, 2012; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2014-144, Nov. 20, 2014; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2018-32, June 21, 2018.]

4.809 Rate Adjustment

An annual rate adjustment may be made based on the Consumer Price Index (CPI-U) for the Portland, Oregon MSA and index period 1982-1984 = 100. The adjustment shall be the percent change in the CPI for the calendar year ending December 31 of each year. The adjustment shall be made to the customer’s utility bill beginning the following March. The first adjustment shall be made in March 2004.

[Added, Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2002-201, Nov. 21, 2002; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2012-196, Dec. 20, 2012.]

4.811 Billing and Collection of Pedestrian-Scale Street Light Utility Fee

See Section 4.1200 for billing, collection and enforcement of pedestrian-scale street light utility fees.

[Added, Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2002-201, Nov. 21, 2002; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2008-55, March 20, 2008.]


4.850 [Renumbered to Section 4.745, Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2010-46, March 4, 2010.]

 


4.900 [Renumbered to Section 4.750, Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2010-46, March 4, 2010.]

 


4.950 [Repealed, Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2010-46, March 4, 2010.]

 

4 Park Utility (4.1001 to 4.1021)

4.1001 Creation of Utility, Purpose

There is hereby created a Park Utility Fund ("the Fund") for the purpose of providing for the construction, operation and maintenance of parks, facilities, beautification and right-of-way areas.  The beautification and right-of-way areas are part of the City maintenance responsibilities for arterial and collector streets as defined within the Medford Municipal Code. The Council hereby finds, determines and declares a) the necessity of providing operation and maintenance of the City's parks, facilities, beautification and right-of-way areas as a comprehensive Park Utility; and b) such construction, operation, and maintenance pursuits must include such activities as are necessary in order that the parks, facilities, beautification and right-of-way areas and related facilities may be properly operated and maintained and that the health, safety and welfare of the City and its inhabitants may be safeguarded.

[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2005-120, June 16, 2005; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2006-276, Dec. 21, 2006; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2020-85, Jun. 18, 2020.]


4.1003 [Repealed, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2016-45, April 21, 2016]

 
 


4.1005 City to Maintain Parks, Facilities, Beautification and Right-of-Way Areas; Exception

The City intends to maintain all accepted parks, facilities, beautification and right-of-way areas within City-owned land, City rights-of-way and City easements and may maintain other accepted areas within or adjacent to the City. Such areas specifically exclude private areas and private areas not yet accepted by the City for maintenance. The City Parks Superintendent shall develop and implement a maintenance plan for accepted City parks, facilities, beautification and right-of-way areas to be maintained and that the City's investment therein shall be preserved, insofar as possible to do so with funds available and in accordance with policies adopted by the Council.

[Added, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2005-120, June 16, 2005; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2006-276, Dec. 21, 2006.]


4.1007 Administrative Officer Designated

The City Manager shall employ a qualified person as Parks and Recreation Director. In addition to such other duties and responsibilities as may be assigned to the Director, the Parks and Recreation Director shall be responsible for the administration of this Fund. The Parks and Recreation Director shall be responsible for developing administrative procedures for the Fund, administration of fees, developing maintenance programs, establishing standards for the operation and maintenance of parks, facilities, beautification and right-of-way areas and related facilities, and all other activities related to the purpose of the Park Utility Fund.

[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2005-120, June 16, 2005; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2006-276, Dec. 21, 2006.]


4.1009 Establishment and Revision of Park Utility Fee

The City Council hereby establishes a Park Utility Fee to be paid by the responsible party for each developed property within the corporate limits of the City. Such fee shall not be imposed in amounts greater than that which is necessary, in the judgment of the City Council, to provide sufficient funds to construct facilities and to properly operate and maintain parks, facilities, beautification and right-of-way areas. Collection of the fee for each property shall be made by a monthly charge which shall commence on the first day of August, 2005. The City Council may, from time to time, by ordinance, change the fee based upon revised estimates of the cost of constructing, operationg, and properly maintaining parks, facilities, beautification and right-of-way areas, or other factors identified in the ordinance.
[Added, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2005-120, June 16, 2005; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2006-276, Dec. 21, 2006; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2020-85, Jun. 18, 2020.]


4.1011 Imposition of Utility Fee

There is hereby imposed upon the responsible party for each developed parcel in the City, a monthly Parks Utility Fee for each residential dwelling unit, business unit or tenant space existing on that parcel. This fee is deemed reasonable and is necessary to pay for the construction, operation, and maintenance of parks, facilities, beautification and right-of-ways within the City. 

Effective July 15 of each year below, the monthly rate per unit or tenant space shall be:
 
            2007 to 2019**           2020
                $2.95                       $5.35
 
**This fee was effective July 1, 2007.
 [Added, Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2005-120, June 16, 2005; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2006-276, Dec. 21, 2006; Amd. Ord. No. 2007-139, June 21, 2007; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2020-85, Jun. 18, 2020.]


4.1013 Rate Adjustment

An annual rate adjustment may be made based on the Consumer Price Index (CPI-U) for the Portland, Oregon MSA and index period 1982-1984 = 100. The adjustment shall be the percent change in the CPI for the calendar year ending December 31 of each year. The adjustment shall be made to the customer’s utility bill beginning the following March. The first adjustment shall be made in March 2008.

[Added, Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2005-120, June 16, 2005; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2006-276, Dec. 21, 2006; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2012-196, Dec. 20, 2012.]


4.1015 Billing and Collection of Park Utility Fee

See Section 4.1200 for billing, collection and enforcement of park utility fees.

[Added, Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2005-120, June 16, 2005; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2008-55, March 20, 2008.]


4.1017 [Repealed, Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2008-55, March 20, 2008.]

 


4.1019 Moneys to be Paid in Park Utility Fund

All fees collected by the city shall be paid into the Park Utility Fund. Such revenues shall be used for the purposes of the construction, operation, and maintenance of the parks, facilities, beautification and right-of-way areas of the City. It shall not be necessary that the construction, operations, and maintenance expenditures from the Fund specifically relate to any particular property from which the fees for said purposes were collected. To the extent that the fees collected are insufficient to properly construct, operate, and maintain parks, facilities, beautification and right-of-way areas, the cost of the same may be paid from such other City funds as may be determined by the City Council, but the City Council may order the reimbursement to such fund if additional fees are thereafter collected. All amounts on hand in the Park Utility Fund shall be invested by the Chief Financial Officer in investments proper for City funds. The fees paid and collected by virtue of this ordinance shall not be used for general or other governmental or proprietary purposes of the City, except to pay for the equitable share of the cost of accounting, management and government which is attributable to the Fund, which shall not exceed 5% of the gross revenues of the Fund during any fiscal year. Other than as described above, the fees and charges shall be used solely to pay for the cost of construction, operation, administration, maintenance, repair, improvement, renewal, replacement and reconstruction of the parks, facilities, beautification and right-of-way areas of the City and costs incidental thereto.

[Added, Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2005-120, June 16, 2005; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2006-276, Dec. 21, 2006; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2020-85, Jun. 18, 2020.]


4.1021 Appeal Procedure

A person aggrieved by a decision required or permitted to be made by the Parks Director under this ordinance may appeal the decision or the expenditure to the City Council as provided in Section 1.025.

[Added, Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2005-120, June 16, 2005.]


4 Public Safety Fee (4.1101 to 4.1121)

4.1101 Creation of Utility; Purpose

There is hereby created a Public Safety Utility Fund ("the Fund") for the purpose of providing funding for public safety. The Council hereby finds, determines and declares the necessity of providing funding for both the police and fire departments.

[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2006-274, Dec. 7, 2006.]


4.1103 [Repealed, Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2016-45, April 21, 2016]

 
 


4.1107 Administrative Officer Designated

The City Manager shall be responsible for the administration of this Fund. The City Manager shall be responsible for developing administrative procedures for the Fund, administration of fees, and all other activities related to the purpose of the Public Safety Fund.

[Added. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2006-274, Dec. 7, 2006.]


4.1109 Establishment and Revision of Public Safety Fee

The City Council hereby establishes a Public Safety Fee to be paid by the responsible party for each developed property within the corporate limits of the City. Such fee shall not be imposed in amounts greater than that which is necessary, in the judgment of the City Council, to provide sufficient funds for public safety. Collection of the fee for each property shall be made by a monthly charge which shall commence on the first day of January, 2007. The City Council may, from time to time, by ordinance, change the fee based upon revised estimates of the costs, or other factors identified in the ordinance.

[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2006-274, Dec. 7, 2006.]


4.1111 Imposition of Utility Fee

There is hereby imposed upon the responsible party for each developed parcel in the City, a Public Safety Fee for each residential dwelling unit, business unit or tenant space existing on that parcel, which  shall be as follows:

                   1-15-2014             3-15-2016            7-15-2019
                     $4.60                       $7.41                  $9.42

 

This fee is deemed reasonable and is necessary to fund public safety.  The January 15, 2014, $2.00 per-unit increase and the March 15, 2016 $2.82 per-unit increase are to provide funding for the public safety facilities.    When sufficient funds have been collected to complete the public safety facilities, the charge shall be reduced by $4.82 per unit.

[Added, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2006-274, Dec. 7, 2006; Amd. Ord. No. 2013-144, Oct. 3, 2013; Amd. Sec. 7. Ord. No. 2016-45, April 21, 2016, Amd., Ord. No. 2019-44, June 6, 2019.]
 


4.1113 Rate Adjustment

An annual rate adjustment may be made based on the Consumer Price Indexes Pacific Cities (CPI) and US City Average. The adjustment shall be the percent change in the CPI for the calendar year ending December 31 of each year. The adjustment shall be made to the customer’s utility bill effective the following July 15, subject to counsel approval. The first adjustment shall be made in March 2010.

[Added, Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2006-274, Dec. 7, 2006; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2012-196, Dec. 20, 2012; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2019-44, June 6, 2019.]


4.1115 Billing and Collection of Public Safety Fee

See Section 4.1200 for billing, collection and enforcement of public safety utility fees.

[Added, Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2006-274, Dec. 7, 2006; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2008-55, March 20, 2008.]


4.1117 [Repealed, Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2008-55, March 20, 2008.]

 


4.1119 Moneys to be Paid in Public Safety Fund

All fees collected by the city shall be paid into the Public Safety Fund. Such revenues shall be used for funding police and fire personnel and the associated equipment. It shall not be necessary that the operations and maintenance expenditures from the Fund specifically relate to any particular property from which the fees for said purposes were collected. To the extent that the fees collected are insufficient, other City funds as may be determined by the City Council, but the City Council may order the reimbursement to such fund if additional fees are thereafter collected. All amounts on hand in the Public Safety Fund shall be invested by the Chief Financial Officer in investments proper for City funds. The fees paid and collected by virtue of this ordinance shall not be used for general or other governmental or proprietary purposes of the City, except to pay for the equitable share of the cost of accounting, management and government which is attributable to the Fund, which shall not exceed 5% of the gross revenues of the Fund during any fiscal year. Other than as described above, the fees and charges shall be used solely to pay for the cost of operation, administration, maintenance, repair, improvement, renewal, replacement and reconstruction of public safety areas of the City and costs incidental thereto.

[Added, Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2006-274, Dec. 7, 2006.]


4.1121 Appeal Procedure

A person aggrieved by a decision required or permitted to be made by the City Manager under this ordinance may appeal the decision or the expenditure to the City Council as provided in Section 1.025.

[Added, Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2006-274, Dec. 7, 2006.]

4 Utility Fees (4.1200 to 4.1206)

4.1200 Billing, Collection and Enforcement of Utility Fees

(1) The City Manager shall designate a City department or the Medford Board of Water Commissioners as agent for billing the monthly charges imposed under sections 4.405 (Sewer), 4.710 (Storm Drainage), 4.761 (Street Utility), 4.807 (Pedestrian-Scale Street Light), 4.1011 (Park Utility Fee) and 4.1111 (Public Safety). These charges shall be referred to as "Utility Fees" in this section.

(2) Utility fees commence upon connection to the water system; or completion, occupancy or use of the improvements, whichever comes first. Areas that are annexed to the City or under contract to annex shall become subject to utility fees on the date of annexation or the date of the annexation contract, whichever comes first.

(3) Street, sewer and parks utility fees shall not be assessed during any period when the account is closed and the premises are unoccupied and unused. 

(a)  Street and park fees will not be assessed to a vacant unit within a commercial, non-residential property provided the property owner has notified the City that the unit is vacant.  Vacancy certifications are valid for three (3) months; if the unit remains vacant, the property owner shall be responsible for renewing the vacancy certification.  The responsible party shall notify the City within 10 days of the property or unit becoming occupied again.
 

[Added, Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2008-55, March 20, 2008; Amd. Ord. No. 2010-197, Sept. 2, 2010; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2013-104, July 11, 2013; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2014-123, Sept. 18, 2014; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2014-144, Nov. 20, 2014; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2016-45, April 21, 2016; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2018-32, June 21, 2018.]


4.1201 Responsible Party

Unless another responsible party has agreed in writing to pay and a copy of that writing is filed with the City, the person(s) having the right to occupy the property shall be designated as the responsible party and shall pay the utility fees. If the City is not able to identify any other responsible party, or if the
person(s) having the right to occupy the property refuses to pay the City's utility charges, the owner of record shall be the responsible party.

[Added, Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2008-55, March 20, 2008; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2013-104, July 11, 2013.]


4.1202 Rendering and Payment of Bills

(1) Regular bills for utility fees will be rendered monthly or at the time an account is closed.

(2) Bills are due and payable 15 calendar days from date of billing. Such bills are the first notice to the responsible party that the amount shown is due and payable and when not timely paid, will become past due.

(3) Partial payments of utility fees shall be allocated on a pro rata basis to the balances due on the various charges on the bill. The responsible party shall not be allowed to specify a different allocation.

(4) If all or any portion of the amount to be paid is not honored, the City or its designee may bill the unpaid amount to the responsible party’s subsequent service or to another present service for the same responsible party. The responsible party shall be deemed to have consented to such billing. Nonpayment of the amount so billed shall constitute nonpayment of the service or billing and will be subject to the provision for collection of delinquent accounts.

(5)  A late fee of $5 or 1% of the outstanding balance, whichever is greater, shall be assessed on past-due balances.  The late fee will be assessed 28 calendar days after the bill date.

(6) If all or any portion of an amount paid must be refunded by the City, such refund may be made at the City’s option by check or draft, or as credit on the responsible party’s monthly utility bill.

(7)  An annual billing plan is available with one yearly payment which includes a 3.5% discount.  The bill is calculated based on the past year's utility fees as applicable to the current applicant for non-residential customers, and current utiity fees for residential customers.  This is an estimated billing, which is not adjusted for rate or other account changes.   Customers receive a monthly statement showing current charges and remaining credit balance.

[Added, Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2008-55, March 20, 2008; Amd. Ord. No. 2010-185, Aug. 19, 2010; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2013-104, July 11, 2013; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2014-123, Sept. 19, 2014; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2016-45, April 21, 2016; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2019-116, Nov. 7, 2019.]


4.1203 Recovery of Unpaid Charges; Enforcement

(1)  Any charges which are not paid when due may be recovered from the responsible party in an action at law by the City.  Any user of City utilities who fails to pay said charges promptly when due is subject to discontinuance of water service and the Water Commission Manager is hereby empowered to enforce this provision against such delinquent users. The Board of Water Commissioners or the City may use other means of collection provided by the laws of the State of Oregon or permitted by the charter and code. The employees of the City and the Water Commission shall, at all reasonable times, have access to any premises served by the City for inspection or the enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance.

(2)  Accounts are considered delinquent if they are 60 days past due.  Delinquent utility accounts that have not had water shut off for non-payment of City utility fees shall be subject to the following collections procedures.

(a) Sewer and Penalty fees:

(i) Accounts with delinquent sewer and associated penalties shall receive written notice requesting remittance by the twenty-fifth day of the month, and will include account number, amount in arrears, date payment is due, and balance due, including assessed late penalties.

(ii)  Interest will continue to accrue at the current assessed late penalty.

(iii)  Should all collection steps fail, the City may enforce the collection of delinquent sewer charges by any means provided by state and local law, and any delinquency may be certified to the Jackson County Department of Assessment and Taxation for collection in the manner provided by state and local law.  Thereafter, property owner will be mailed a “Notice of Tax Certification” requesting remittance prior to the date of certification and include account number, amount in arrears date payment is due, and the Administrative Fee amount, which is $10 or 10% of the amount to be referred to Jackson County, whichever is greater.

(iv)  All accounts with outstanding balances of 90 days or more and that have been properly noticed will result in the unpaid sewer balances, including penalties and administrative fee, certified to the county tax assessor to be collected as other taxes are collected. 

 
(b) Street, Storm Drain, Parks, Public Safety and Pedestrian Street Light fees:
Delinquent utility accounts that have not had water shut-off for non-payment of utility fees shall be referred to a collection agency after a notice to that effect has been sent by the City to the last known address of the last known responsible party.  Such notification shall provide for payment in full to be made within 15 days of the date notification was mailed.  Accounts referred to collection shall have the costs for collection and interest added to the delinquent utility balance.
 
(3)  Violation of this section constitutes a violation and shall be punished as provided in section 1.100 of this Code.  Each day that an account remains delinquent constitutes a separate violation.



[Added, Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2008-55, March 20, 2008; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2013-104, July 11, 2013; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2014-123, Sept. 18, 2014; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2016-45, April 21, 2016.]


4.1204 Estimated Utility Fees

When regular, accurate water meter readings are not available or the water usage has not been accurately measured, the City or its designee may estimate the responsible party’s water usage for billing purposes on the basis of information including, but not limited to, available meter readings, records of historical use, and/or the general characteristics of the responsible party’s load and operation.

[Added, Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2008-55, March 20, 2008; Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2013-104, July 11, 2013.]


4.1205 Adjustment of Bills for Billing Error

Billing error is an error that results in incorrect billing charges to the responsible party. Billing errors may include incorrect meter reads, clerical errors by a City representative such as applying the wrong rate or an incorrect calculation, or failure of a building occupant to report a change of use in the building as required in section 3.807(2) that results in a utility under or over charge. Where a responsible party is overcharged as the result of a billing error, the City may render an adjusted bill for the amount of the error without interest, and shall issue a credit to the customer for the amount of the overcharge, without interest, in accordance with the procedures and limitations set forth below. Where a responsible party is undercharged as the result of a billing error, the City may render an adjusted bill for the amount of the error without interest, in accordance with the procedures and limitations set forth below.

(1) If a utility fee is found to have been overcharged due to a billing error, the City shall calculate the amount of the overcharge for credit to the responsible party, for a period of two years. However, if it is known that the period of billing error was less than two years, the overcharge shall be calculated for only those months during which the billing error occurred.

(a)  If a home-based business utility fee is found to have been overcharged due to a billing error, the City shall calculate the amount of the overcharge for credit to the responsible party beyond the two years in section (1) above, up to $200 per address, when proof is provided by the customer that a billing error was made.

(2) If a utility fee is found to have been undercharged due to a billing error, the City shall calculate the amount of the undercharge and may bill the responsible party for the amount of the undercharge for a period of two years. However, if it is known that the period of billing error was less than two years, the undercharge shall be calculated for only those months during which the billing error occurred.

[Added, Sec. 17, Ord. No. 2008-55, March 20, 2008; Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2013-104, July 11, 2013; Amd. Ord. No. 2014-37, March 20, 2014.]


4.1206 Establishing Credit

(1) A customer may establish satisfactory credit through one of the methods below.
(a)  Has paid City utility fees for at least one (1) year and maintained their account in good standing; or
(b) Furnishes a letter of reference from another utility; or
(c)  Receives a "no credit risk" report from the ONLINE Utility Exchange; or           
(d)  Provides the City with a cash deposit equal to a two-month estimated billing, not to exceed $500.
Any outstanding bills for previous service charges at any location by the responsible party shall be paid before an application will be accepted.

(2)  A deposit may be required whenever, in the opinion of the City, there is a financial risk of non-payment.  The deposit is based on the average two-month bill.  A deposit is not a payment on account.  If at any time a bill to a customer is not paid within 15 days after presentation, the deposit may be applied on the account thereof.  Financial risk may be evidenced by, but is not limited to, the following:
(a)  A customer without established credit with the City.
(b)  A customer who established previous service as the responsible party under a different name.
(c)  A customer who poses a credit risk according to the ONLINE Utility Exchange report.
(d) A customer refusing to give information requested by the City for the purpose of   clarifying the customer’s identity or credit worthiness.
(e)  A customer who has a history of delinquent payments with the City.
(f)  A customer who has been referred to a collection agency for failure to pay bills when due.
 
(3)  Upon discontinuance of service, the deposit will be applied to any closing bills and any remaining balance will be refunded.

(4)  The City may, after the deposit has been held for 12 consecutive months, and provided service has been continuous and all bills for such service have been paid promptly, apply the deposit to the depositor’s account.

(5)  No interest shall be paid on deposits held by the City.


[Added, Ord. No. 2012-186, Dec. 6, 2012; Amd. Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2013-104, July 11, 2013; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2014-144, Nov. 20, 2014.]


5 Offenses

5.005 Application of this Chapter

(1) Except as provided by sections 5.105 to 5.990 or as the context requires otherwise, the Oregon Criminal Code of 1970, as now constituted, relating to criminal liability, defenses, burden of proof, parties to crime, justification and responsibility, governs the construction of offenses defined in section 5.105 to 5.990.

(2) Sections 5.105 to 5.990 shall not apply to or govern the construction or punishment for an offense defined in the Medford Code committed before the date of passage of Ordinance No. 4497. Such an offense shall be construed and punished according to the Code provision existing at the time of the commission of the offense.

(3) When all or part of a section or provision of Chapter 5, Code of Medford, is amended or repealed by Ordinance No. 4497, Ordinance No. 5993, or Ordinance No. 6028, the code provision amended or repealed remains in force for the purpose of authorizing the accusation, prosecution, conviction and punishment of a person who violated the code provision before the effective date of the amending or repealing ordinance.

[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 6028, Dec. 3, 1987.]

5.105 Assault

No person shall intentionally, knowingly or recklessly cause physical injury to another or, with criminal negligence, cause physical injury to another by means of a deadly weapon.

5.110 Menacing

No person shall intentionally attempt, by word or conduct, to place another person in fear of imminent physical injury.

5.115 Recklessly Endangering a Person

No person shall recklessly engage in conduct which creates a substantial risk of serious physical injury to another person.

5.120 Disorderly Conduct

(1)  A person commits the crime of disorderly conduct if, with intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, the person:
(a)  Engages in fighting or violent, tumultuous, or threatening behavior; or
(b)  Makes unreasonable noise; or
(c)  Obstructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic on a public way; or
(d)  Fails or refuses to comply with a lawful order of the police to disperse from a public     place; or
(e)  Creates a hazard to person or property by any act which the actor is not licensed or privileged to do.
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-18, Feb. 15, 2018]
 

5.125 Public Urination

(1) No person shall urinate or defecate in public view or in a public place other than a restroom.

(2) Violation of this section constitutes a violation.

[Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000.]

5.130 Harassment

(1) No person, acting with intent to harass, frighten, or cause physical injury to another, shall subject another person to offensive physical contact.

(2) No person shall publicly insult, threaten, or challenge another person with intent to provoke a violent or disorderly response.

5.150 [Repealed, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6028, Dec. 3, 1987.]


5.152 Carrying Concealed Weapon

Except where ORS Ch. 166 provides to the contrary, any person who carries concealed upon the person any knife having a blade that projects or swings into position by force of a spring or by centrifugal force and commonly known as a switchblade knife, any dirk, dagger, ice pick, slung shot, metal knuckles, nunchaku sticks, or any similar instrument by the use of which injury could be inflicted upon the person or property of any other person, commits a crime punishable as prescribed in Section 5.990(3).
[Added Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6028, Dec. 3, 1987.]

5.154 Unlawful Possession of Firearm

(1) Except where ORS Ch. 166 provides to the contrary, a person commits the crime of unlawful possession of a firearm if the person knowingly:
(a) Carries any firearm concealed upon the person; or
(b) Possesses a handgun that is concealed and readily accessible to the person within any vehicle.

(2) This section does not prohibit any citizen of the United States over the age of 18 who resides in or is temporarily sojourning within this state, and who is not within the excepted classes prescribed by ORS 166.270, from owning, possessing or keeping within the person's place of residence or place of business any pistol, revolver or other firearm capable of being concealed upon the person, and no permit or license to purchase, own, possess or keep any such firearm at the person's place of residence or place of business is required of any such citizen. As used in this subsection, "residence" includes a recreational vessel or recreational vehicle while used, for whatever period of time, as residential quarters.

(3) Firearms carried openly in belt holsters are not concealed within the meaning of this section.

(4) "Firearm" means a weapon, by whatever name known, which is designed to expel a projectile by the action of powder and which is readily capable of use as a weapon.

(5) "Handgun" means any pistol or revolver using a fixed cartridge containing a propellant charge, primer and projectile, and designed to be aimed or fired otherwise than from the shoulder.

(6) Unlawful possession of a firearm is a crime punishable as prescribed by Section 5.990(1).

[Added Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6028, Dec. 3, 1987; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2000-46, March 16, 2000.]

5.160 Discharge of Weapons

(1) No person other than a peace officer shall use, fire or discharge a slingshot, crossbow, bow and arrow, blowgun, or weapon that is designed for and readily capable of expelling a projectile at the time it was discharged by force of spring or pressurized air or gas or gun powder or other explosive within the city or in a city-owned public park.

(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to or affect:
(a) A person discharging a firearm in the lawful defense of person or property.
(b) A person discharging a firearm on a public or private shooting range, shooting gallery or other area designed and built for the purpose of target shooting.

(3) Violation of this section constitutes a violation.

[Amd. Ord. No. 1998-215, Oct. 1, 1998; Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000; Amd. Ord. No. 2002-28, Feb. 21, 2002.]

5.170 Resisting Arrest

(1) A person commits the crime of resisting arrest if he intentionally resists a person known by him to be a peace officer in making an arrest.

(2) "Resists," as used in this section, means the use or threatened use of violence, physical force or any other means that creates a substantial risk of physical injury to any person.

(3) It is no defense to a prosecution under this section that the peace officer lacked legal authority to make the arrest, provided he was acting under color of his official authority.

[Added Ord. No. 4922, July 12, 1983.]

5.175 Interfering with Peace Officer

(1) A person commits the crime of interfering with a police officer if the person, knowing that another person is a peace officer:
(a) intentionally acts in a manner that prevents, or attempts to prevent, a peace officer from performing the lawful duties of the peace officer with regards to another person; or
(b) refuses to obey a lawful order by the peace officer.
 
(2) This section does not apply in situations in which the person is engaging in
(a) activity that would constitute resisting arrest under MC 5.170; or
(b) passive resistance.
 
(3) Interfering with a peace officer is a crime punishable as prescribed in Section 5.990(1).

[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2000-46, March 16, 2000.]

5.178 Unlawful Laser Light Pointing

(1) A person commits the offense of unlawful directing of light from a laser pointer if the person knowingly directs light from a laser pointer at another person without the consent of the other person and the other person is:
(a) a peace officer as defined in ORS 161.015 who is acting in the course of official duty; or
(b) A uniformed private security officer as defined in ORS 181.870 who is on duty.

(2) Unlawful laser light pointing is a crime punishable as prescribed in Section 5.990(1).

(3) As used in this section, Alaser pointer@ means a device that emits light amplified by the stimulated emission of radiation that is visible to the human eye.

[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-47, March 16, 2000.]

5.180 Giving False Information to a Peace Officer for a Citation

A person commits the crime of giving false information to a peace officer for issuance or service of a citation or for arrest on a warrant if the person knowingly uses or gives a false or fictitious name, address or date of birth to any peace officer for the purpose of the officer's issuing or serving the person a citation under authority of this Code or the officer's arresting the person on a warrant.

[Added Ord. No. 5024, Dec. 1, 1983; Amd. Ord. No. 2008-33, Feb. 21, 2008.]


5.185 Initiating a False Report

No person shall knowingly initiate a false alarm or report to be transmitted to a fire department, law enforcement agency or other organization that deals with emergencies concerning danger to life or property.

5.190 Unattended Children in Vehicles

(1) No person having custody or control of a child under ten years of age shall leave the child unattended in any vehicle on a public street or alley, or a parking area that is open to the public. For the purposes of this section, to leave a child unattended means to leave a child without the custody or control of a person 14 years of age or older.

(2) Violation of this section constitutes a violation.

[Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000.]

5.215 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8000, Dec. 7. 1995.]


5.220 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8000, Dec. 7, 1995.]


5.221 Prohibited Conduct in Business Offering Nude Entertaining

(1) No person, while performing in a nude show, shall intentionally come into physical contact with any patron.

(2) No performer, while performing in a nude show, shall accept any gratuity or allow any gratuity to be placed on the person of the performer by any patron.

(3) No person who performs in a nude show, while not entertaining, shall intentionally come into physical contact, while in a state of nudity, with any patrons, or appear while in a state of nudity in any area to which patrons have access.

(4) No person, other than another performer, shall intentionally come into physical contact with any person engaged in a nude show during any part of the show.

(5) No person shall intentionally place any gratuity in the hand or on the person of a performer in a nude show during the show.

(6) A nude show must be performed in an area separated from the audience by a distance of at least 4 feet. No person shall perform in a nude show in violation of this subsection. No owner or manager of an establishment shall knowingly allow any nude show to be performed in such establishment in violation of this subsection.

(7) No owner or manager of an establishment shall knowingly allow any employee, agent or contractor of the establishment to touch a patron's covered or uncovered genitalia, pubic area, buttocks or female breast.

(8) No employee, agent or contractor of an establishment shall intentionally touch a patron's covered or uncovered genitalia, pubic area, buttocks or female breast.

(9) No owner or manager of an establishment shall knowingly allow any employee, agent or contractor of the establishment to appear in any public area of the establishment in a state of nudity, except while performing in a nude show in accordance with this section.

(10) No employee, agent or contractor of an establishment shall appear in any public area of the establishment in a state of nudity, except while performing in a nude show in accordance with this section.

(11) "Nude show" means a show in which a performer appears for any part of the show in a state of nudity.

(12) "State of nudity" means appearing with any of the following exposed to view:
(a) if a male, his genitalia or buttocks;
(b) if a female, her genitalia, buttocks or any part of either breast below the top of the areola.

(13) "Exposed to view" means without a covering consisting of an opaque material which does not simulate the organ covered.

(14) "Establishment" means a business principally engaged in providing food, drink, alcoholic beverages, entertainment, or any combination of the foregoing, for consumption or viewing on the premises of the business.

[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8000, Dec. 7, 1995.]

5.225 Unnecessary Noise

(1) No person shall make, continue, cause, or permit to be made or continued any noise disturbance. The following are declared to be noise disturbances in violation of this section, but this enumeration is not exclusive:

(a) Barking dogs or other noisy animals which disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity.

(b) Use of sound producing or reproducing equipment that is plainly audible within a dwelling unit that is not the source of the sound, or use of such equipment on public property or on a public right-of-way so as to be plainly audible 50 feet or more from the source of the sound. The city manager or his designee may grant an exemption from this subsection to allow a person reasonable use of public property or the right-of-way to broadcast music or speech.

(c) Parking a motor vehicle of 10,000 pounds GVW (gross vehicle weight) or more with the motor or auxiliary equipment in operation on a public right-of-way or on private property between the hours of 10 p.m. and 7 a.m., if the noise so produced is plainly audible within a dwelling unit. This subsection shall not apply to commercial construction equipment, to the normal operation of vehicles designed and used for commercial transportation of passengers, or to other vehicles being loaded or unloaded.

(d) Alteration, demolition, erection, or repair of any structure between the hours of 6 p.m. and 7 a.m. The City Manager or his designee may grant an exception to a person from this subsection if the manager or his designee determines that the public interest requires it or that there are no persons in the area who would be disturbed by the work.

(e)  Operation of mechanically powered lawn equipment, garden tools, chainsaws, blowers or similar devices in a residentially zoned neighborhood between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

(f)  Operation of any motor vehicle in excess of 10,000 pounds GCWR (Gross Combination Weight Rating) in any residential zone of the city or within 300 feet of any dwelling unit, school, hospital, library, or business with an engine braking device engaged; except in an emergency situation to avoid imminent danger to a person or to property.

(2) Violation of this section constitutes a violation. Every day in which a noise disturbance as defined in this section is made, continued, caused, or permitted to be made or continued constitutes a separate violation.

[Amd. Ord. No. 6129, June 2, 1988; Amd. Ord. No. 7710, Aug. 18, 1994; Amd. Ord. No. 7729, Oct. 6, 1994; Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000; Amd. Ord. No. 2003-215, Aug. 7, 2003; Amd. Ord. No. 2003-270, Oct. 16, 2003.]


5.240 Definitions

For purposes of sections 5.240 to 5.250, unless the context requires otherwise, the following mean:

"Dwelling." A building which regularly or intermittently is occupied by a person lodged in it at night, whether or not a person is actually present.

"Enter or remain unlawfully." To enter or remain in or upon premises when the premises, at the time of the entry or remaining, are not open to the public or when the entrant is not otherwise licensed or privileged to do so; or, to fail to leave premises that are open to the public after being lawfully directed to do so by the person in charge.

"Open to the public." Premises that, by their physical nature, function, custom, usage, notice or lack of notice, or other circumstances at the time, would cause a reasonable person to believe that no permission to enter or remain is required.

"Person in charge." A person, his representative, or his employe who has lawful control of premises by ownership, tenancy, official position or other legal relationship. It includes, but is not limited to, the person or holder of a position designated as the person or position holder in charge by the Governor, board, commission or governing body of any political subdivision of this state.

“Premises." Includes any building and any property, whether privately or publicly owned.


5.245 Trespass - Dwelling

No person shall enter or remain unlawfully in a dwelling.

5.247 Trespass - Motor Vehicle

(1) No person shall unlawfully enter or remain in a motor vehicle.

(2) Trespass in a motor vehicle is a crime punishable as prescribed in Section 5.990(4).

[Added Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2000-47, March 16, 2000.].

5.250 Trespass - Premises

No person shall enter or remain unlawfully in or on premises.

[Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2011-218, Nov. 3, 2011.]

5.255 Hours of Park Closure

(1) No person shall be in Prescott Park, any other city public park, the I.O.O.F./Eastwood Cemetery or vehicle parking area of those parks or cemetery at any time between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6 a.m., except that this section shall not apply to:
(a) pedestrians crossing the Mini Park or Library Park on a paved path;
(b) participants or spectators of an athletic contest in park areas lit by park flood lights for those contests;
(c) persons attending a scheduled event in a park or park building designated for community recreation or instruction;
(d) city employees or other government employees during the course of official activities.
 
(2) Violation of this section constitutes a violation.

[Amd. Ord. No. 5994, Oct. 15, 1987; Amd. Ord. No. 2000-39, March 2, 2000; Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000.]

5.256 Civil Exclusion

(1) Civil Exclusion Zones.  Civil exclusion zones are designated to protect the public from those whose illegal conduct poses a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare.  In accordance with the provisions of this section, the Chief of Police or designee may exclude any person who is cited to appear, arrested, or otherwise taken into custody for any offense listed in subsection (2) of this section within a civil exclusion zone.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the exclusion of any person lawfully exercising free speech rights or other rights protected by the Oregon or federal constitution.  However, a person engaged in such protected activity who commits acts that are not protected shall be subject to exclusion as provided by this section. Civil exclusion zones include the following places:
(a) City Property. Any property owned or managed by the City, including but not limited to parks, greenways, buildings, parking lots, or other land or physical structures.  A person shall only be excluded from the city property that the person receives a notice of exclusion for.
(b) The Downtown District.  Comprises the area bound by Bear Creek, the north right-of-way of Sixth Street, the west right-of-way of Oakdale Avenue, the north right-of-way of West Main Street, the west right-of-way of Laurel Street, the south right-of-way of West Eighth Street, the west right-of-way of Oakdale Avenue, and the south right-of-way of West Tenth Street (as shown on Map A).
(2) Offenses; Penalty.  A person is subject to civil exclusion for a period of 90 days from entering or remaining within a civil exclusion zone if that person has been cited to appear, arrested or otherwise taken into custody within a civil exclusion zone for any of the following offenses:
(a) alcoholic liquor violations as provided in the Oregon Liquor Control Act, or Medford code sections 5.310, 5.350, 5.360, or 5.361;
(b) any sexual offense, as provided by ORS 163.355 through 163.465;
(c) arson or related offenses as provided in ORS 164.315 through 164.335;
(d) assault as provided in ORS 163.160, ORS 163.165, ORS 163.175, ORS 163.185, or Medford code section 5.105;
(e) criminal mischief as provided in ORS 164.345 through 164.365 or Medford code section 5.270;
(f) disorderly conduct as provided in ORS 166.025 or Medford code section 5.120;
(g) discharge of weapons as provided in Medford code section 5.160
(h) failure to control dangerous dog as provided in Medford code section 5.603.
(i) graffiti offenses as provided in ORS 164.381 through ORS 164.386 or Medford code section 5.519;
(j) harassment as provided in ORS 166.065 or Medford code section 5.130;
(k) intimidation as provided in ORS 166.155 through 166.165;
(l) marijuana-related offenses as provided in the Control and Regulation of Marijuana Act, the Oregon Medical Marijuana Act, or Medford code sections 5.652, 5.653, 5.705, 5.710, or 5.715;
(m) menacing as provided in ORS 163.190 or Medford code section 5.110;
(n) possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses as provided in ORS 167.203, ORS 475.005 through 475.285, and ORS 475.752 through 475.980;
(o) prostitution or related offenses as provided in ORS 167.007 through ORS 167.017;
(p) public urination as provided in Medford code section 5.125, except if the conduct involves only urination on a permeable surface in a park or greenway;
(q) recklessly endangering another person as provided in ORS 163.195 or Medford code section 5.115;
(r) strangulation as provided in  ORS 163.187;
(s) theft as provided in ORS 164.015 through 164.140 or Medford code sections 5.291 through 5.298.
(3) Violation. (a) If a person excluded from a civil exclusion zone is found within the boundary of the civil exclusion zone during the exclusion period, that person may be arrested for Trespass-Premises as provided in Medford code section 5.250.  A person is not considered to be within a civil exclusion zone if the person is within an exclusion zone and the person is: 
(i) passing through the exclusion area;
(ii) in the act of obtaining social, medical, or like services;
(iii) in the act of seeking employment or performing work directly related to lawful employment;
(iv) attending a public meeting;
(v) attending a court hearing, meeting with an attorney or criminal justice personnel, or engaged in any activity ordered by a court;
(vi) in the act of filing an appeal to an exclusion notice issued under this section;
(vii) attending religious services or otherwise exercising a constitutional right.
(b) A person shall not be issued an exclusion notice for prohibited camping or for otherwise sleeping within an exclusion zone.
(4) Exclusion Notice.  The Chief of Police is designated as the person in charge of civil exclusion zones for the purpose of issuing exclusion notices in accordance with this ordinance, and may authorize employees of the police department to issue exclusion notices. Written notice shall be given to any person excluded from a civil exclusion zone.  The notice shall specify the area from which the person is excluded, the length of exclusion, the offense(s) the person is accused of violating, and a description of the offending conduct.  Warnings of consequences for failure to comply shall be prominently displayed on the notice.  The notice shall inform the excluded person of the right to appeal to the municipal court, and shall include information on the time limit to file an appeal and place to deliver the appeal. Unless otherwise provided in the exclusion notice, the term of exclusion shall take effect upon issuance. 
(5) Appeal. A person receiving an exclusion notice shall have the right to a hearing to have the exclusion rescinded, the period of exclusion reduced, or to request a variance. 
(a) The hearing request must be filed in writing to the Municipal Court Clerk at Medford City Hall within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice of exclusion. The hearing shall be conducted by the municipal court judge within ten (10) days of  receipt of a request filed pursuant to this section; excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. 
(b) The hearing may be rescheduled for good cause shown, but shall be scheduled no later than five (5) additional business days from the rescheduled request. If an appeal is timely filed, the period of exclusion shall be stayed, pending the outcome of the appeal.  If the exclusion is affirmed, the remaining period of exclusion shall be effective immediately upon issuance of the municipal court’s decision.
(c) The City shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence the validity of the exclusion.  If the municipal court finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the exclusion was based upon the conduct proscribed by subsection (2), and if the exclusion is otherwise in accordance with law, the municipal court shall uphold the exclusion.  However, if the municipal court finds that the City has not met its burden of proof, or that the exclusion is otherwise unlawful, then the municipal court shall enter an order rescinding the exclusion.  In the event that the municipal court finds that the City has met its burden of proof, but that the length or scope of the exclusion is unreasonable under the circumstances, the municipal court may issue an order shortening the length of exclusion or allowing for a variance.  The decision of the municipal court is final.
(6) Variance. (a) The Court may in its discretion grant a variance to an excluded person at any time during the period of exclusion if the person:
(i) presents a plausible need to engage in any non-criminal activity that is not associated with the behavior supporting the person's exclusion;
(ii) establishes that he or she resides within an exclusion zone;
(iii) presents a plausible need to obtain goods and services not otherwise available outside the exclusion zone to satisfy the person’s essential needs.
(b) The variance shall be in writing, for a specific period of time and only to accommodate a specific purpose, all of which shall be stated on the variance. The excluded person shall keep the variance document on his or her person at all times the person is within the exclusion area.
 
[Added, Ord. No. 2011-217, Nov. 3, 2011; Replaced Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2017-40, May 4, 2017; Amd. Ord. No. 2017-143, Dec. 21, 2017.]


IMAGES FOR THIS CODE

MAP A
(Click on an image to see a larger version)

5.257 Prohibited Camping

(1) As used in this section:
 
(a) "To camp" means to set up or to remain in or at a campsite.
 
(b) "Campsite" means any place where any bedding, sleeping bag, or other material used for bedding purposes, or any stove or fire is placed, established or maintained for the purpose of maintaining a temporary place to live, whether or not such place incorporates the use of any tent, lean-to, shack, or any other structure, or any vehicle or part thereof.
 
(2) It is found and declared that:
 
(a) From time to time persons establish campsites on sidewalks, public rights-of-way, under bridges, and so forth;
 
(b) Such persons, by such actions create unsafe and unsanitary living conditions which pose a threat to the peace, health, and safety of themselves and the community; and,
 
(c) The enactment of this provision is necessary to protect the peace, health, and safety of the city and its inhabitants.
 
(3) No person shall camp in or upon any sidewalk, street, alley, lane, public right-of-way, park, or any other publicly-owned property or under any bridge or viaduct, unless otherwise specifically authorized by this code or by declaration of the Mayor in emergency circumstances.

(4) Prior to removing homeless individuals from an established camping site, law enforcement officials shall post a notice, written in English and Spanish, 24 hours in advance.
 
(a) At the time the notice is posted, law enforcement officials shall inform local agencies that deliver social services to homeless individuals that the notice has been posted. Any local agency, providing service within the City limits of Medford, desiring to be on this notification list must provide its name, address, telephone number, and name of contact person to the Medford Police Department, in writing, requesting notification.

(b) The local agencies may arrange for outreach workers to visit the camping site where a notice has been posted to assess the need for social service assistance in arranging shelter and other assistance.
 
(5) All unclaimed personal property shall be given to law enforcement officials whether 24-hour notice is required or not. The property shall be stored for 30 days during which it will be reasonably available to any individual claiming ownership. Any personal property that remains unclaimed for 30 days may be disposed of. For purposes of this paragraph, "personal property" means any item that is reasonably recognizable as belonging to a person and that has apparent utility. Items that have no apparent utility or are in an unsanitary condition may be immediately discarded upon removal of the homeless individuals from the camping site. Weapons, drug paraphernalia, and items that appear to be either stolen or evidence of a crime shall be given to law enforcement officials.

(6) The 24-hour notice required under subsection (4) of this section shall not apply:

(a) When there are grounds for law enforcement officials to believe that illegal activities other than camping are occurring.
 
(b) In the event of an exceptional emergency such as possible site contamination by hazardous materials or when there is immediate danger to human life or safety.
 
(7) A person authorized to issue a citation for unlawful camping may not issue the citation if the citation would be issued within 200 feet of the notice described in this section and within two hours before or after the notice was posted.

(8) Violation of this section constitutes a violation.  Every day in which prohibited camping as defined in this section occurs constitutes a separate violation.

[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6226, Nov. 3, 1988; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2000-46, March 16, 2000; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-115, Sept. 20, 2018.]

5.258 Prohibited Solicitation

Purpose. It is the intent of this Chapter to impose reasonable place and manner limitations on solicitation, as defined herein, in order to protect the safety of the general public against abusive solicitation while respecting the constitutional right of free speech. This ordinance balances protecting free expression with providing public safety protection, protecting the public’s vehicular and pedestrian movement from being impeded by solicitors, and protecting a captive audience from solicitors.

(1) Abusive Solicitation. No person shall engage in abusive solicitation as defined in this section. A person shall not be deemed to be in violation of this section when he or she passively displays a sign unless that person takes action to obtain and/or retrieve an item of value from another person caused by the sign being displayed.

(2) Definitions. The following words or phrases as used in this Chapter shall have the following meanings:

(a) "Solicitation" means an in-person request made to obtain an immediate donation of money or other item of value.

(b) "Abusive Solicitation" means  engaging in conduct, including but not limited to the following listed conduct, intentionally, recklessly or knowingly, with the effect of either placing the solicited person in reasonable apprehension of imminent physical harm, or with the effect of provoking or likely to provoke an imminent violent or disorderly response from the person being solicited: 

(1) Continuing to solicit once the person being solicited has declined the request;

(2) Blocking or impeding the passage of the person solicited;

(3) Following the person solicited by proceeding behind, ahead or alongside of him or her after the person solicited has declined the request;

(4) Touching the solicited person without the solicited person’s consent;

(5) Using words, gestures, and/or actions which are offensive or threatening.

(3) Penalties. Any violation of the provisions of this ordinance constitutes a misdemeanor.

(4) Severance. If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall in no way effect the validity of any remaining portions of this law.

[Added, Ord. No. 2007-235, Nov. 1, 2007; Amd. Ord. No. 2009-08, Jan. 9, 2009; Amd. Ord. No. 2010-92, May 6, 2010.]


5.260 Defacing Streets or Sidewalks

(1) No person shall mark, deface, or paint an alley, street, sidewalk, bicycle path, or any part of the public right-of-way except as permitted by the council.

(2) Violation of this section constitutes a violation.

[Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000.]

5.265 Smoking in Public Buildings, Parks and Facilities

(1)  Definitions.  For purposes of this section, unless the context requires otherwise, the following words shall mean:

Smoke Free. Possessing or to possess a lighted tobacco product, lighted tobacco paraphernalia, or any other lighted weed or plant (including but not limited to, a lighted pipe, lighted hookah pipe, lighted cigar, or lighted cigarette of any kind).  Also includes any device that simulates the smoking of tobacco that produces a smoke or vapor. 

Tobacco.  Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, or any other preparation of tobacco.

Tobacco & Smoke Free Facilities.  All Parks and Recreation Department management properties including the surrounding pedestrian rights-of-way.

(2) No person shall smoke in a building or room owned or occupied by a public or governmental agency if the person in control of the building or room has posted notice at the principal entrance stating "NO SMOKING". For purposes of this section, the City Manager is in control of the Medford City Hall.

(3) All parks and facilities managed and maintained by the Parks and Recreation Department are designated as tobacco and smoke free.  These facilities include the pedestrian rights-of-way that surround each property.
 
(4)  Exception to this code is a designated smoking area within U.S. Cellular Community Park. 

(5)  Penalties.  Violation of this section constitutes a violation under Medford Code Section 5.990.
 
[Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000; Amd. Ord. No. 2014-34, March 20, 2014.]

5.270 Mischief

(1) No person, having no right to do so nor reasonable ground to believe that he has such right, shall intentionally damage the property of another.

(2) No person, acting with intent to cause substantial inconvenience to the property owner or to another person and having no right to do so nor reasonable ground to believe that he has such right, shall mistreat, mark, deface, or tamper with the property of another.

(3) Violation of subsection (2) of this section that does not result in property damage exceeding $500 constitutes a violation.

[Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2009-266, Dec. 17, 2009, effective Jan. 1, 2010.]


5.275 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 5235, Aug. 16, 1984 - Superseded by Section 6.360.]


5.280 Persons Obstructing Sidewalks and Streets

(1) No person shall stand or gather with others upon any street, street crossing, or sidewalk in a manner that obstructs the free passage of pedestrians or vehicular traffic.

(2) Violation of this section constitutes a violation.

[Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000.]

5.282 Solicitation in Violation of Signs

(1) Any owner or occupant of a private residence may post a plainly visible sign at its principal entrance bearing the words "NO SOLICITORS" in letters at least one and one-half inches in height.

(2) Any person who solicits at a private residence where a sign is posted in accordance with subsection (1) of this section is guilty of a violation.

(3) The term "solicit" as used in this section means to go on the premises of a private residence for the purpose of selling anything of value without having been requested or invited to do so by an occupant of such premises.

[Added Ord. No. 6241, Nov. 17, 1988; Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000.]

5.285 Offensive Littering

(1) No person shall create an offensive odor or degrade the natural appearance of property by:

(a) discarding or depositing any junk, garbage, scrap or debris upon public or private property without lawful permission of the owner;
 
(b) draining or allowing a flow of any waste water, toxic chemical solution, or effluent from a septic tank, cesspool, recreation vehicle, holding tank, or other source upon public or private property without lawful permission of the owner;
 
(c) discarding any garbage or debris from a vehicle which the person occupies, except this last provision does not apply to a person operating a vehicle transporting passengers for hire subject to regulation by the Interstate Commerce Commission or the Public Utility Commission of Oregon and to a person operating a school bus subject to ORS 485.010 to 485.060.
 
(2) Violation of this section constitutes a violation.

[Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000.]

5.290 [Repealed Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5993, Oct. 15, 1987.]


5.291 Theft

(1) A person commits theft when, with intent to deprive another of property or to appropriate property to the person or to a third person, the person:
 
(a) Takes, appropriates, obtains or withholds such property from an owner thereof; or

(b) Commits theft of property lost, mislaid or delivered by mistake as provided in subsection (2); or
 
(c) Commits theft by receiving as provided in subsection (3).
 
(2) A person who comes into control of property of another that the person knows or has good reason to know has been lost, mislaid or delivered under a mistake as to the nature or amount of the property or the identity of the recipient, commits theft if, with intent to deprive the owner thereof, the person fails to take reasonable measures to restore the property to the owner.

(3) A person commits theft by receiving if the person receives, retains, conceals, or disposes of property of another, knowing or having good reason to know that the property was the subject of theft. Receiving means acquiring possession, control or title, or lending on the security of the property.

[Added Sec. 2, Ord. No. 5993, Oct. 15, 1987.]

5.292 Theft in the Third Degree

(1) A person commits the crime of theft in the third degree if, by means other than extortion, the person:

(a) Commits theft as defined in Section 5.291; and

(b) The total value of the property in a single or aggregate transaction is less than $100.

(2) Theft in the third degree is a crime punishable as prescribed in Section 5.990(4).

[Added Sec. 2, Ord. No. 5993, Oct. 15, 1987; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2009-266, Dec. 17, 2009, effective Jan. 1, 2010.]


5.294 Theft in the Second Degree

(1) A person commits the crime of theft in the second degree if, by means other than extortion, the person:

(a) Commits theft as defined in Section 5.291; and

(b) The total value of the property in a single or aggregate transaction is $100 or more and less than $1,000.  

(2) Theft in the second degree is a crime punishable as prescribed in Section 5.990(1).

[Added Sec. 2, Ord. No. 5993, Oct. 15, 1987; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2000-46, March 16, 2000; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2009-266, Dec. 17, 2009, effective Jan. 1, 2010.]


5.295 [Repealed Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5993, Oct. 15, 1987.]


5.296 Theft of Services

(1) A person commits the crime of theft of services if:

(a) With intent to avoid payment therefor, the person obtains services that are available only for compensation, by force, threat, deception or other means to avoid payment for the services; or

(b) Having control over the disposition of labor or of business, commercial or industrial equipment or facilities of another, the person uses or diverts to the use of the person or a third person such labor, equipment or facilities with intent to derive for the person or the third person a commercial benefit to which the person or the third person is not entitled.

(2) As used in this section, "services" includes, but is not limited to, labor, professional services, toll facilities, transportation, communications service, entertainment, the supplying of food, lodging or other accommodations in hotels, restaurants or elsewhere, the supplying of equipment for use, and the supplying of commodities of a public utility nature such as gas, electricity, steam and water. "Communication service" includes, but is not limited to, use of telephone, computer and cable television systems.

(3) Absconding without payment or offer to pay for hotel, restaurant or other services for which compensation is customarily paid immediately upon the receiving of them is prima facie evidence that the services were obtained with intent to avoid payment therefor. Obtaining the use of any communication system the use of which is available only for compensation, including but not limited to telephone, computer and cable television systems, or obtaining the use of any services of a public utility nature, without payment or offer to pay for such use is prima facie evidence that the obtaining of the use of such system or the use of such services was gained with intent to avoid payment therefor.

(4) Theft of services is:

(a) A crime punishable as prescribed in Section 5.990(4) if the aggregate total value of services that are the subject of the theft is less than $100; and

(b) A crime punishable as prescribed in Section 5.990(1) if the aggregate total value of services that are the subject of the theft is $100 or more and less than $1,000.

[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5993, Oct. 15, 1987; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2009-266, Dec. 17, 2009, effective Jan. 1, 2010.]


5.297 [Repealed Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5993, Oct. 15, 1987.]


5.298 Attempted Theft

(1) A person commits the crime of attempted theft when the person intentionally engages in conduct which constitutes a substantial step toward commission of the crime of theft.

(2) Attempted theft of property or services is a crime punishable as prescribed in Section 5.990(3) if the aggregate total value of property or services that are the subject of the attempted theft is $100 or more and less than $1,000.  

(3) Attempted theft of property or services is a violation if the aggregate total value of property or services that are the subject of the attempted theft is under $100.

[Added Sec. 2, Ord. No. 5993, Oct. 15, 1987; Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2009-266, Dec. 17, 2009, effective Jan. 1, 2010.]


5.305 Inhaling Toxic Vapors

(1) No person shall inhale a substance or vapor containing ketones, aldehydes, organic acetates, ether or chlorinated hydrocarbons in a quantity to cause intoxication, stupefaction or hallucination, while the person is in or on a street, sidewalk, alley, public right-of-way, public park, other publicly-owned facility, or premises open to the general public for the use of motor vehicles, whether the premises are publicly or privately owned and whether or not a fee is charged for the use of the premises.

(2) Violation of this section constitutes a violation.

[Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000.]

5.310 Drinking in Public

(1) Except as provided in this Section, no person shall consume alcoholic beverages in or on a street, sidewalk, alley, public right-of-way, public park, other publicly-owned facility, or premises open to the general public for the use of motor vehicles, whether the premises are publicly or privately owned and whether or not a fee is charged for the use of the premises.  For purposes of this Section, "premises open to the public for the use of motor vehicles" does not include an area of a parking lot fenced off for an event.

(2)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold and consumed at a sidewalk cafe permitted under Section 10.358(c) of this Code and in accordance with a license issued by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission.

(3) With the advance approval of the City Manager or designee, and pursuant to the requirements outlined in subsection (4) and (5), below, alcoholic beverages may be sold and consumed in an area open to the general public at a public or private event sponsored by an organization or individual.

(4) The following conditions shall apply to events approved under subsection (3) of this section:

(a) The applicant shall submit a Special Event Permit application to the City Manager, as described in Code Section 2.185, and pay a fee of $50.00 for events at which alcohol will be served.

(b) The applicant shall comply with all requirements of Sections 2.185 and 2.190 of this Code.

(c) The applicant must comply with all applicable rules and regulations of the Oregon Liquor Control Commission, including but not limited to obtaining a permit to serve alcohol from the Oregon Liquor Control Commission.

(d) The applicant must provide licensed private security guards or Medford police officers in sufficient numbers to maintain order. The Chief of Police or designee shall recommend to the City Manager or designee the number of officers reasonably needed to maintain order under the circumstances existing.

(e) Alcoholic beverages may only be sold and consumed within a fence or other enclosure.

(f) The City Manager or designee shall grant the permit only if the Manager or designee finds that the noise created by the event would not be unreasonable considering the hours and location.

(g) The City Manager or designee may prescribe any additional conditions which the Manager or designee deems necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

(5) Alcoholic beverages may be consumed on a commercial pedicab, as defined in subsection (a), subject to all the following conditions listed in subsection (b):

            (a)  For the purposes of this section, “Pedicab” means any of the following:

(i) A bicycle that has three or more wheels, that transports, or is capable of transporting, passengers on seats attached to the bicycle, that is operated by a person, and that is being used for transporting passengers for hire.

(ii) A bicycle that pulls a trailer, sidecar, or similar device, that transports, or is capable of transporting, passengers on seats attached to the trailer, sidecar, or similar device, that is operated by a person, and that is being used for transporting passengers for hire.

(iii) A four-wheeled device that is primarily or exclusively pedal-powered, has a seating capacity for eight or more passengers, cannot travel in excess of 15 miles per hour, and is being used for transporting passengers for hire.

(b)  The business license of any pedicab operator which permits consumption of  alcohol on a pedicab may be subject to revocation if the pedicab operator fails to satisfy the following conditions:

(i)  Steering and braking shall be under the exclusive control of an employee or owner of the business operating the pedicab (the “operator”), who shall not consume alcohol while on the job and shall not have an alcohol concentration of 0.04 or greater while operating the pedicab;

(ii)  Alcoholic beverages shall not be provided by, served by, sold by, or in control of the operator of the pedicab. Alcoholic beverages may only be supplied by the passengers of the pedicab. All alcoholic beverages supplied by passengers of the pedicab shall be transported to the community cooler of the pedicab only in enclosed, sealed containers, including sealed wine or beer bottles, sealed growlers, and unopened cans.

(iii)  Alcoholic beverages may be consumed by a passenger of the pedicab only while he or she is physically on board and within the pedicab.

(iv)  All passengers shall be 21 years of age or older if alcohol is consumed by any passenger during the operation of the pedicab.
                       
(v) Passengers of a pedicab may only consume alcohol from an unbreakable cup or can, including drinking vessels made of plastic, metal, or silicone.  Glass is prohibited with the exception of growlers and bottles kept in the trunk or cooler of the pedicab.  At all times the passengers of the pedicab, not  the operator of the pedicab, shall have ownership and control of the alcohol.  Passengers’ cups may be filled from glass containers only when the pedicab is stationary.

 (vi)  The operator of the pedicab shall at all times be able to establish financial responsibility in a minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) general liability insurance coverage on a per-occurrence basis and an aggregate in a minimum amount of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00).

(vii)  The only types of alcohol which may be consumed onboard a pedicab are beer, wine, and cider.  Hard alcohol or mixed drinks containing hard alcohol are not permissible.

(viii)  When passengers depart the pedicab, opened or partly-empty growlers and wine bottles must be closed before departing the pedicab.  All other alcohol remaining in open containers must be disposed of instead of carried in public.

 (ix)  The operator must comply with all applicable rules and regulations of  the Oregon Liquor Control Commission, including but not limited to rules and regulations regarding advertisement of the business.

(x)  All routes of travel must be preapproved by the Medford Police Department.

(xi)  If a passenger becomes visibly intoxicated or disorderly, the operator shall eject said passenger from the pedicab.

(6) Violation of this section constitutes a violation punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.

[Amd. Ord. No. 6448, September 25, 1989; Amd. Ord. No. 7182, August 6, 1992; Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000; Amd. Ord. No. 2010-91, May 6, 2010; Amd. Ord. No. 2014-153, Dec. 4, 2014; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2017-24, March 16, 2017; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-82, July 5, 2018.]


5.315 [Repealed, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2016-59, May 19, 2016]

 

5.330 Misrepresentation of Age

(1) No person being less than a certain, specified age shall represent himself to be of any age other than his true age with the intent of securing a right, benefit or privilege which by law is denied to persons under that certain, specified age.

(2) No person being unmarried shall represent that he is married with the intent of securing a right, benefit or privilege which by law is denied to unmarried persons.

(3) Violation of this section constitutes a violation.

[Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000.]

5.340 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 4859, May 5, 1983.]


5.341 Prohibition of Unaccompanied or Unemancipated Minors from Being in Public Places During Certain Hours

No minor shall be in or upon any street, highway, park, alley or other public place between the hours of 12 midnight and 4 a.m. of the following morning, unless:

(1) Such minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person 18 years of age or over and authorized by the parent or by law to have care and custody of the minor;

(2) Such minor is then engaged in a lawful pursuit or activity which requires his presence in such public places during the hours specified in this section; or;

(3) The minor is emancipated pursuant to ORS 109.550 to 109.565.

(4)  Violation of this section constitutes a violation.

[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 4859, May 5, 1983; Amd. Ord. No. 2008-144, Aug. 7, 2008.]


5.342 Prohibition of Parents, Guardians or Custodians from Allowing Minors to be in Public Places During Curfew Hours

No parent, guardian or person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 18 years shall allow such minor to be in or upon any street, highway, park, alley or other public place between the hours specified in section 5.341, except as otherwise provided in that section.
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 4859, May 5, 1983.]

5.350 Purchase or Possession of Alcoholic Beverages by Minor

(1) A person under the age of 21 years may not attempt to purchase, purchase or acquire alcoholic beverages, nor may a person under the age of 21 years personally possess alcoholic beverages while the person is operating a motor vehicle.

(2) Except when such minor is in a private residence accompanied by the parent or guardian of the minor and with such parent's or guardian's consent, aperson under the age of 21 years may not have personal possession of alcoholic beverages.

(3) Violation of this section constitutes a violation.

(4) When a person violates this section, the court shall order that the person’s driving privileges and right to apply for driving privileges be suspended pursuant to ORS 809.260 and 809.280.  The court notification made to the Department of Transportation under this paragraph may include a recommendation that the person be granted a hardship permit under ORS 807.240 if the person is otherwise eligible for the permit.

[Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000; Amd. Ord. No. 2008-32, Feb. 21, 2008; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2018-18, Feb. 15, 2018.]


5.360 Furnishing Liquor to Minors; Allowing Consumption by Minor on Property

(1)  No one other than the person’s parent or guardian may sell, give or otherwise make available any alcoholic liquor to a person under the age of 21 years.  A parent or guardian may give or otherwise make alcoholic liquor available to a person under the age of 21 years only if the person is in a private residence and is accompanied by the parent or guardian.  A person violates this subsection who sells, gives or otherwise makes available alcoholic liquor to a person with the knowledge that the person to whom the liquor is made available will violate this subsection.  Notwithstanding section 5.990, a person who violates this subsection shall be subject to at least the mandatory minimum fine applicable to ORS 471.410(2)

(2)  (a) A person who exercises control over private real property may not knowingly allow any other person under the age of 21 years who is not a child or minor ward of the person to consume alcoholic liquor on the property, or allow any other person under the age of 21 years who is not a child or minor ward of the person to remain on the property if the person under the age of 21 years consumes alcoholic liquor on the property.  Notwithstanding section 5.990, a person who violates this subsection shall be subject to at least the mandatory minimum fine applicable to ORS 471.410(3)(a).

       (b) This subsection:

(A) Applies only to a person who is present and in control of the location at the time of the consumption occurs;
         
(B) Does not apply to the owner of rental property, or the agent of an owner of rental property, unless the consumption occurs in the individual unit in which the owner or agent resides; and
                   
(C) Does not apply to a person who exercises control over a private residence if the liquor consumed by the person under the age of 21 years is supplied only by an accompanying parent or guardian.

(3)  This section does not apply to sacramental wine given or provided as part of a religious rite or service.

(4)  Nothing in this section prohibits any licensee from allowing a person who is visibly intoxicated from remaining on the licensed premises so long as the person is not sold, served or allowed to consume any alcoholic liquor.
 
(5)  For the purposes of this section, the terms “licensee” and “licensed premises” have the meanings set out on ORS 471.001.

(6)  Violation of subsection (2) of this section constitutes a violation.

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2011-219, Nov. 3, 2011.]
 
              
 

5.361 Providing Liquor to Intoxicated Person; Allowing Visibly Intoxicated Person to Consume Alcoholic Beverages

(1)  A person may not sell, give or otherwise make available any alcoholic liquor to any person who is visibly intoxicated.

(2)  No licensee or permittee shall knowingly allow a person to consume or to continue to consume alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises after observing that the person is visibly intoxicated.

(3)  A licensee or permittee is not in violation of subsection (2) of this section if the licensee or permittee makes a good faith effort to remove any unconsumed alcoholic liquor from the person’s possession when the licensee or permittee observes that the person is visibly intoxicated.

(4)  Nothing in this section prohibits any licensee from allowing a person who is visibly intoxicated from remaining on the licensed premises so long as the person is not sold, served or allowed to consume any alcoholic liquor.

(5)  Violation of subsection (2) of this section constitutes a violation.

(6)  For the purposes of this section, the terms “permittee,” “licensee” and “licensed premises” have the meanings set out on ORS 471.001. 

[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2011-219, Nov. 3, 2011.]

5.365 Possession of Tobacco by a Minor

(1)  No person under 18 years of age shall possess tobacco products or an inhalant delivery system as defined in ORS 431A.175. 
(2)  Any person who violates subsection (1) of this section commits a violation.
[Added, Ord. No. 2008-44, March 6, 2008; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2018-18, Feb. 15, 2018.]
 

 

 


5.370 Sale of Tobacco Products or Inhalant Delivery System

(1)  No person shall knowingly sell tobacco products or an inhalant delivery system to a person under 21 years of age.  For the purposes of this section, tobacco products and inhalant delivery systems are those described in ORS 431A.175.

(2)  A person who sells tobacco products or inhalant delivery systems described in subsection (1) shall display a sign clearly stating that the sale of such items to persons under 21 years of age is prohibited by law.

(3)  Violation of subsection (1) of this section constitutes a specific fine violation punishable by a fine of $50.

(4)  Violation of subsection (2) of this section constitutes a violation punishable as provided in section 5.990 (5).

[Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2018-18, Feb. 15, 2018.]
 

5.380 Intent and Purpose of Sections 5.380 to 5.390

The City Council of the City of Medford finds and declares that the health and welfare of the citizens of the City of Medford are promoted by limiting the availability of cigarettes and tobacco products to children under the age of 21 years, through the means of restricting the location of vending machines dispensing cigarettes or tobacco products.
[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2018-18, Feb. 15, 2018.]
 

5.385 Definitions

(1)  Accessible to persons under the age of 21 years means, in reference to premises, that no prohibition exists to the entry upon premises, or a discrete portion of premises, by persons who have not attained the age of 21 years.
(2)  Cigarette has the meaning set out in ORS 323.010(1).
(3)  In direct view means that a person in charge of the tobacco vending machine, while at the person's primary work station, can see the facial features of a person who causes the tobacco vending machine to dispense cigarettes or any tobacco product.
(4)  Primary work station means the place or area where a person spends substantially all of the person's time while in charge of the tobacco vending machine.
(5)  Tobacco products has the meaning set out in ORS 323.500(14).
(6)  Tobacco vending machine means any self-service device offered for public use which, upon insertion of a coin, coins, currency or token, or by other means, dispenses cigarettes or any tobacco product, either in bulk or package, without the necessity of replenishing the device between each vending operation.
(7)  Under control of a person in charge means that the tobacco vending machine is:
(a)  in direct view of, and
(b)  within 25 feet of, a person who owns the tobacco vending machine or who has the right to control the use of premises where the tobacco vending machine is located; or, an employee of either who is charged with the duty to prevent persons under 21 years of age from obtaining cigarettes or tobacco products from the tobacco vending machine.
[Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2018-18, Feb. 15, 2018]
 

5.390 Tobacco Vending Machines Prohibited

(1)  Except as provided in subsection (2), it shall be unlawful
(a)  for any person in possession of any premises located within the City of Medford to place or allow to be placed on said premises any tobacco vending machine, or
(b)  for any person who owns or controls a tobacco vending machine to place or allow to be placed such tobacco vending machines at premises within the City of Medford.
(2)  The prohibitions of subsection (1) shall not apply to premises or to tobacco vending machines on premises that are:
(a)  licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages or as a retail liquor store;
(b)  maintained for the use of employees and not open to the public;
(c)  not accessible to persons under the age of 21 years;
(d)  under the control of a person in charge of the tobacco vending machine; or
(e)  configured in a way that will allow a blind person, as that term is defined in ORS 346.110(2), who has training and skills that enable the blind person to determine if a person obtaining cigarettes or any tobacco product from a tobacco vending machine is under 21 years of age, and which blind person is in control of the tobacco vending machine.
(3)  Violation of this section constitutes a violation.
[Added Ord. No. 6590, April 5, 1990; Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2018-18, Feb. 15, 2018.]
 

5.500 Unlawful Accumulation of Junk

(1) No person shall cause or allow an unsightly or malodorous accumulation of junk, garbage, animal feces, scrap metal, scrap lumber, used tires, discarded building material, appliances or fixtures, or dismantled machinery on public or private property unless the property is in lawful use for junk storage or recycling in compliance with applicable state and federal laws and this Code.

(2) A violation of this section constitutes a violation. Every day in which the accumulation exists constitutes a separate violation. In a prosecution for violation of this section, the property owner shown on the tax records of Jackson County, the lessee, or other person in control of the property shall be presumed to have caused or allowed the accumulation unless that presumption is rebutted by either party.

(3) The unlawful accumulation of junk is declared to be a public nuisance, and may be abated in the manner provided in section 5.520.

[Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000.]

5.502 Owners to Provide Garbage Receptacles

(1) Effective January 1, 1997, the owner of any dwelling who rents, leases, or lets dwelling units for human habitation shall provide, in a location accessible to all dwelling units, one (1) 30-gallon receptacle for each dwelling unit, or, if a multiple family unit, a receptacle with a combined capacity of 30 gallons per dwelling unit, into which garbage and rubbish from the dwelling units may be emptied for storage between days of collection. Receptacles and lids shall be watertight and provided with handles. All receptacles shall be maintained free from holes and covered with tight-fitting lids at all times. The owner of the units shall subscribe to and pay for weekly garbage removal service for the receptacles with a City of Medford refuse collection franchise holder.

(2) Violation of this section constitutes a violation.

[Added Ord. No. 8147, Sept. 5. 1996; Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000.]

5.505 Unlawful Storage of Vehicles

(1) For purposes of this section, the following mean: "Vehicle." A device in, or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, excluding a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and including, but not limited to, a body, an engine, a transmission, a frame or other major part. "Neglected or discarded vehicle." A vehicle that is or appears to be inoperative, wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled. "Wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle." A vehicle that is inoperative and cannot be made mechanically operative without the addition of vital parts or mechanisms and the application of a substantial amount of labor to effect repairs.

(2) No person shall store or permit to be stored a neglected or discarded vehicle upon private or public property within the city for more than five days unless the vehicle is completely enclosed within a legally permitted building, or unless it is stored by a licensed business enterprise dealing in junked vehicles lawfully conducted within the city.

(3) A violation of this section constitutes a violation. Every day the vehicle or part is stored or permitted to remain unlawfully constitutes a separate violation.

(4) Storing vehicles in violation of this section is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated in the manner provided in section 5.520. In addition to the notice to the property owner provided in section 5.520, if it is determined that the owner of the real property and the owner of the vehicle constituting the nuisance are not the same person and if any indication of vehicle ownership is available, notice of the City's intent to remove and dispose of the vehicle shall also be sent to the owner of the vehicle.

(5) If the owner of property on which a discarded vehicle is located denies responsibility for the presence of the vehicle or vehicle part on the property, and the Council determines that the vehicle was placed on the property without the consent of the property owner and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the Council shall not assess the cost of abatement and removal against the property or attempt to collect the cost of abatement and removal from the property owner.

(6) If the Council determines that the owner of real property on which a neglected or discarded vehicle is located is not liable for the cost of removal and disposal, the cost, including costs of administration, shall be collected from the last registered owner of the vehicle unless the owner in the transfer of ownership has complied with ORS 481.405.

[Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000.]

5.509 Maintenance of Vacant Buildings

In the event of the vacancy of non-residential buildings, the owner shall maintain the facilities and grounds, including structures, landscaping, parking lots and stormwater facilities, to ensure the development does not become a public nuisance.

[Added, Ord. No. 2008-05, Jan. 3, 2008.]


5.510 Ice and Snow Removal

(1) An owner or occupant of property abutting a sidewalk shall remove snow accumulated upon the sidewalk, and shall make an ice-covered sidewalk safe by removing the ice or covering the ice with a suitable material allowing safe travel, within the first two hours of daylight following the snow accumulation or ice formation.

(2) Violation of this section constitutes a violation.

[Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000.]

5.511 [Repealed Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2017-42, May 4, 2017.]

 

5.512 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2017-42, May 4, 2017.]

 

5.513 [Repealed Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2017-42, May 4, 2017.]

 

5.514 [Repealed Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2017-42, May 4, 2017.]

 

5.515 [Repealed Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2017-42, May 4, 2017.]

 

5.516 [Repealed Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2017-42, May 4, 2017.]

 

5.517 [Repealed Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2017-42, May 4, 2017.]

 

5.518 [Repealed Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2017-42, May 4, 2017.]

 

5.519 Unlawful Graffiti Nuisance on Private Property

(1) No owner or person in charge of property may permit graffiti, as defined below, to remain on said property for a period in excess of ten (10) days.

(2) This section shall not apply to markings which:
 
(a) are a part of the general color scheme of the building or structure; and

(b) do not contain words or symbols; and

(c) were applied by the owner or person in charge, or an agent thereof; or

(d) are a part of a sign, which has been previously approved by the City, with the painting or marking reviewed by the City Planning Department or Commission, pursuant to Medford Code Sections 10.1000 through 10.1810.
 
(3) Graffiti is found to be a nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to the provisions of Medford Code Sections 5.520 through 5.535.

(4) Definitions:
 
(a) “Graffiti”. Any unauthorized markings of paint, ink, chalk, dye, or other similar substances, and/or the unauthorized etching or scratching of property and the structures appurtenant thereto, including but not limited to, buildings, structures, fences, walls, and poles, where the markings are visible from premises open to the public such as the public right of way, sidewalks, or other publicly owned property.

(b) “Permit”. To suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent, or expressly assent or agree to the doing of an act.

(c) “Person in Charge”. Any person, in actual or constructive possession of a property, including but not limited to, an owner of record, and an occupant under the owner’s dominion, ownership or control, who has control over the property or premises.

(d) “Person”. Any natural person, agent, association, firm, partnership or corporation capable of owning, occupying or using property in the City of Medford. (e) “Property”. As defined in MC 5.511.

[Added, Ord. No. 2000-198, Oct. 5, 2000.]

5.520 Nuisance Abatement

(1) When the City Manager, through a city department, has knowledge that a public nuisance exists, unless summary abatement is authorized, he shall require notice to be posted on the property liable for abatement of a nuisance, directing the removal of the nuisance.

(2) At the time of posting, the City Recorder shall cause a copy of the notice to be mailed to the owner of the property, or his agent, at the address last shown on the records of the Jackson County Tax Assessor.

(3) The person posting and the person mailing the notice shall file a certificate with the City Recorder stating the date that the notices were posted and mailed.

(4) The notice to abate shall contain:
 
(a) A description of the property, by street address or otherwise, on which the nuisance exists;

(b) A description of the nuisance;

(c) A direction to remove and abate the nuisance within ten days of the date of notice or show that no nuisance exists, as provided by section 5.525;

(d) A statement that unless the nuisance is removed or a hearing requested under section 5.525, the City, on expiration of ten days from the date of notice, shall remove the nuisance and assert a lien on the property for the cost of removal plus 25 percent or $15, whichever is greater, for administrative costs;

(e) A statement that failure to abate the nuisance may warrant imposition of a fine.
 
(5) An error in the name or address of the owner or agent shall not make the mailed notice void, and in such case the posted notice shall be sufficient.

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5235, Aug. 16, 1984; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7852, April 6, 1995; Amd. Ord. No. 2000-196, Oct. 5, 2000.]

5.525 Abatement by Owner

(1) Within ten days after posting and mailing the notice described in section 5.520, the owner or owner`s agent shall remove or abate the nuisance or file with the City Recorder a written statement that no nuisance exists and request a hearing. If a written statement is filed, the City Recorder shall set the matter for an administrative hearing within 30 days of receiving the request.

(2) On receipt of the written statement, the City Recorder at the time specified shall hear the owner or agent and may hear other persons and consider other matters relevant to the issue of whether a nuisance in fact exists. The City Recorder shall make a determination of the issue without being bound by technical rules of evidence.

(3) If the City Recorder determines that a nuisance in fact exists, the owner or his agent shall abate the nuisance within ten days of the City Recorder's findings and if not, the nuisance shall be abated by the City in the manner provided in section 5.530.

(4) The owner or owner's agent may appeal the City Recorder's findings to the City Council. A written notice of appeal shall be filed with the City Recorder within ten days after the City Recorder's decision is mailed. The City Recorder shall set the matter for public hearing at the next regular meeting of the City Council. If the City Council determines that a nuisance exists, the owner or owner's agent shall abate the nuisance within ten days of the Council's decision; or the nuisance shall be abated by the City in the manner provided in Section 5.530.

[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 7852, April 6, 1995.]

5.530 Abatement by the City

(1) If the nuisance described in the notice has not been removed or abated within the time allowed, or cause shown as specified in section 5.525, the City Manager or his agent shall cause the nuisance to be abated.

(2) Notwithstanding other provisions of this Code, whenever, in the judgment of the City Manager or his agent, there is reasonable cause to believe that a clear and immediate danger to the public health, welfare, or safety or to the environment exists from the public nuisance, the City Manager or his agent without hearing or prior notice may cause the summary abatement of such public nuisance.

(3) The City Manager or his agent shall cause a record to be kept of the cost incurred in abating the nuisance, including a charge of 25 percent or $15, whichever is greater, for administration, and shall file a statement of costs with the City Recorder, who may then assess the costs on the property as provided in section 5.535.

[Amd. Ord. No. 5005, Nov. 17, 1983.]

5.535 Assessment of Costs

(1) The City Recorder shall mail notice of the assessment for the cost of nuisance abatement to the property owner or his agent, stating:

(a) The date the notice is mailed;

(b) The cost of abatement;

(c) That the cost will be assessed to and become a lien against the property for the amount indicated;
 
(d) That objections to the proposed assessment must be made in writing and filed with the Recorder not more than 15 days after mailing the notice.

(2) Not less than 15 days after the date of the notice, objections to the proposed assessment shall be heard and determined by the Council in its regular course of business.

(3) An assessment for the cost of abatement as determined by the Council shall be entered in the docket of City liens. When the entry is made, or not less than 30 days after the mailing of the notice provided in subsection 1, whichever is later, it shall constitute a lien on the property from which the nuisance was abated.

(4) The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street improvements are enforced, and shall bear interest at the rate specified in section 3.470(2), beginning 10 days after the entry of the lien in the lien docket.

(5) An error in the name of the owner or agent in charge of the property or a failure to receive the notice of the assessment shall not render the assessment void, but it shall remain a valid lien against the property.

[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 7852, April 6, 1995.]

5.540 Sale of Coal

(1) No person shall sell, offer for sale, trade, or deliver coal within the City. The term "coal" as used in this section means mineral coal and does not include charcoal. This section does not apply to sale of coal to anyone holding a valid air contaminant discharge permit issued by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality authorizing the burning of coal for industrial purposes.

(2) Violation of this section constitutes a violation.

[Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000.]

5.550 Outside Burning

 (1)  No person shall start or maintain any fire outside a building for the purpose of burning any combustible material, or cause or participate therein, nor shall any person in control of any premises cause or knowingly allow any such fire to be started or maintained on any part of said premises unless:
(a)  A permit has been issued as allowed in subsection (7) by the city Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee to maintain such fire at that location; and
(b)  The fire is started and maintained in accordance with the terms and specific conditions of the permit.
Exceptions that do not require a fire code permit under Section 1 include:
(a)  Outdoor cooking fires by permission of the property owner
(b)  Fires in outdoor fireplaces that meet the requirements of the Medford Building  Department by permission of the property owner
(c)    Natural gas fueled-only or propane fueled-only fireplace/fire pit/appliances
(d)   Agricultural heating devices
(e)    Fires at residential properties in wood-burning freestanding fireplace appliances or freestanding fire pit appliances that meet all of the following conditions:
Fires are not allowed when the Jackson County Wood Burning Advisory are declared red or yellow, and
Fires are not allowed when extreme fire danger levels declared by the Oregon Department of Forestry are in effect, and
The appliance shall be used per manufacturer’s safety requirements, and
The appliance must be placed on a non-combustible surface or non-combustible pad, and
Fires are not allowed without a screen to prevent embers from spreading, and
Fires are not allowed when temperatures exceed 90oF or wind speeds exceed 20mph, and
Fires are only permitted on property when the legal owner or the owner’s agent of
   the property gives permission, and
Fireplaces or fire pits shall not be operated within 15 feet of a combustible structure or combustible material (Not allowed on decks/patios of multi-family
   dwellings), and
Only dry wood or charcoal briquettes are allowed to be burned
(f)    Fires at residential properties in in-ground fire pits that meet all of the following     conditions:
Fires are not allowed when extreme fire danger levels declared by the Oregon Department of Forestry are in effect, and
Fires are not allowed when the Jackson County Wood Burning Advisory are declared red or yellow, and
Fires are not allowed without a screen to prevent embers from spreading, and
Fires are not allowed when temperatures exceed 90oF or wind speeds exceed 20 mph, and
Fire pits shall not be operated within 25 feet of a combustible structure or combustible material, and
Fires are only permitted on property when the legal owner or the owner’s agent of
   the property gives permission, and
The maximum fuel package size is restricted to three (3) feet or less in diameter and two (2) feet or less in height (Large bonfires are not allowed), and
Only dry wood or charcoal briquettes are allowed to be burned  
(2) No permit will be issued where burning would violate Oregon Administrative Rules (OAR 340-264-0078) governing open burning in the Rogue Basin Open Burning Control Area.
(3) No permit shall be valid at any time when the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee has ascertained that burning is not permitted. In addition, the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee may condition any permit issued hereunder to exclude the burning of any particular material when he finds that the burning of such material would be unduly obnoxious in the locality of the proposed burning site.
(4) The Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee shall not approve outside burning on any day if he determines that high temperatures, low humidity, high winds, drought, or other weather or other unusual conditions exist which make outside burning generally, or at the particular time and place proposed, unreasonably hazardous to the safety of persons or property.  
(5) The Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee may approve outside burning on any day when he determines that the ventilation index is or will be greater than 400 during that day. The ventilation index is the National Weather Service's indicator of the relative degree of air circulation for the Medford area.
(6) Fires which are subject to this section shall be maintained during daylight hours and by a competent adult person and shall be extinguished prior to darkness unless continued burning is specifically authorized in writing by the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee.
(7) A permit may be issued only for any of the following purposes:
(a) controlling agricultural diseases such as blight that must be quickly destroyed by fire to prevent the spread of the disease;
(b) burning contaminated pesticide containers as prescribed by D.E.Q. and manufacturer specifications;
(c) burning bee hives and beekeeping paraphernalia to eradicate the spread of disease;
(d) burning a structure or the other use of fire for training purposes by a fire department in coordination with D.E.Q.;
(e) commercial recreational fire (pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth, or similar purposes) as defined in the Oregon Fire Code as adopted and amended;
(8)  It shall be unlawful for a person to cause or allow any of the following materials to be burned: garbage; treated wood; plastic; wire insulation; automobile parts; asphalt; petroleum products; petroleum treated material; rubber products; animal remains; paint; animal or vegetable matter resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, or service of food; marijuana waste products; or any other material which normally emits dense smoke or noxious odors.
(9) Outside burning without a permit is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the Fire or Police Department.
 [Amd. Ord. No. 4732, Oct. 21, 1982; Amd. Ord. No. 6403, July 6, 1989; Amd. Ord. No. 6430, Aug. 17, 1989; Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000; Amd. Ord. No. 2005-57, Apr. 7, 2005; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2011-69, Apr. 21, 2011, Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2020-43, Apr. 2, 2020.]
 

5.555 Keeping of Poultry

(1) No person shall keep poultry on residential property, or on property legally developed as residential property, except in compliance with all of the following regulations and limitations and all other applicable provisions of the Medford Municipal Code:
 
a.   Any keeping of poultry shall be for personal use, and any related commercial activity is  prohibited.
 
b.  Roosters are prohibited.
 
c.  All allowed poultry must be confined to the property at all times, and no enclosure or structure associated with the poultry shall be located within 4 feet of the property lines of any abutting parcel.
 
d.  No enclosure, compound, pen, run, shed, or fenced area of confinement shall be located within the required front yard setback.
 
e.  The owner of the allowed poultry shall maintain the property in a safe condition (including but not limited to keeping heat lamps the minimum manufacturer-specified distance from flammable materials, and using electrical systems appropriate for an outdoor use).  The construction and/or use of any compound, pen, run, shed, or fenced area of confinement shall comply with any applicable building and/or fire codes.
 
f.  Any harvesting of allowed poultry that is carried out on the property must be done in a humane manner, and any remains shall be properly disposed of in a sanitary manner.
 
(2)  As used in this section, “allowed poultry” means chickens, ducks, geese, swans, and all other domesticated fowls or birds of comparable size.
(3)  No person shall keep ostriches, emus, peacocks, turkeys, or similar birds on a residential property, or on property legally developed as residential property.
(4)  Any violation of this section shall be declared a public nuisance, and may be abated in the manner provided for in Sections 5.520 through 5.535.
(5)  Violation of this section constitutes a violation.  Every day in which the violation exists constitutes a separate violation.

[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2017-109, Oct. 5, 2017, effective January 1, 2018; Amd. Ord. No. 2017-146, Jan. 4, 2018, effective July 1, 2018; Replaced Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-62, June 7, 2018.]

5.556 Definitions

A.   Religious Institution or Place of Worship.  A structure used primarily as a meeting area for religious activities. 
B.  Vehicle.  A car, truck, camper, travel trailer, recreational vehicle, or similar conveyance.  
[Added Sec. 1, Ord No. 2019-06, February 7, 2019.]

5.557 Overnight Sleeping in Vehicles

A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of the Medford Municipal Code, Religious Institutions or Places of Worship may provide up to and not exceed three (3) parking spaces for up to and not exceed three (3) vehicles for overnight sleeping in a vehicle on their parking lot if the Religious Institution or Place of Worship owns or leases real property on which a structure and an associated parking lot are located.
B.  A Religious Institution or Place of Worship that allows a person or persons to sleep overnight in a vehicle on the premises pursuant to subsection A of this section shall:
1.  Provide, or make available on the premises, sanitary facilities including, but not limited to, toilet, hand washing, and trash disposal facilities;
2.  Not allow tents or other personal property to be attached to the vehicle as a means to expand the capacity of the vehicle for additional camping or to establish long term campsites; and          
3. Ensure vehicles maintain a minimum distance of 20 feet from other overnight camping vehicles; and
4. Ensure that all vehicles are operable and leave the property on a daily basis; and
5. Obtain a cost-free permit from the City Of Medford to allow overnight vehicle camping on property owned or leased by the organization; and
6.  Not require payment of any fee, rent, or other monetary charge for  overnight sleeping in a vehicle as authorized by this section.
C.  A Religious Institution or Place of Worship that permits overnight sleeping in a vehicle pursuant to subsection A of this section may revoke that permission at any time and for any reason.  Any person who receives permission to sleep on a premises as provided in subsection A of this section shall leave the premises immediately after permission has been revoked.
D.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the City Manager or   the City Manager’s designee may prohibit overnight sleeping in a vehicle at a premises as provided in subsection A of this section if the City Manager or the City Manager’s designee finds that such activity does not meet the requirements of this section or constitutes a nuisance or other threat to public health, safety, or welfare.
E.  In addition to any other penalties that may be imposed, any premises used for overnight sleeping in a manner not authorized by this section or other   provisions of this Code shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated as such.
F.  Nothing in this chapter creates any duty on the part of the City, its employees, or its agents to ensure the protection of persons or property with regard to overnight sleeping in vehicles.
[Added Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2019-06, February 7, 2019.]
 

5.558 Enforcement

(1)  Violation of section 5.557(B) constitutes a violation.
(2)  The City has the administrative authority to implement and enforce this chapter, including the adoption of administrative rules, regulations, or policies.  This provision shall not be construed to abrogate or limit the jurisdiction or authority of the Medford Police Department or any other law enforcement agency.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2019-06, February 7, 2019.]
 

5.560 Purpose; Nuisance Declared

The presence of abandoned shopping carts within the City is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the purpose of Medford Municipal Code (MMC) 5.560 – 5.568 is to provide a means to allow for the voluntary abatement of the nuisance by the owners of shopping carts through a notification and retrieval process.  Notwithstanding any other nuisance abatement provision of this Chapter, the abatement of abandoned shopping carts shall be made pursuant to MMC 5.560 – 5.568.
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2017-145, Dec. 21, 2017.]
 

5.561 Definitions

Unless the context otherwise specifically requires, as used in MMC 5.562 – 5.568, the following definitions apply:
(a) “Abandoned cart” means any shopping cart that has been removed from the owner’s premises without written consent of the owner and which is located on either public or private property.
(b) “Code Enforcement Officer” means a City employee charged with the enforcement of MMC by the City Manager or the City Manager’s designee.
(c) “Owner” means a person that, in connection with the operation of a business, makes a shopping cart available to a customer.
(d) “Person” means a natural person, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, co-operative, trust, or other entity in law or fact.
(e) “Premises” means the entire area of the real property owned, occupied or utilized by an owner, including any parking lot or other property provided by or on behalf of an owner for customer parking or use.
(f) “Shopping cart” means a basket that is mounted on wheels and used for the transportation of goods, or any other similar device, that is provided by an owner for use by a customer.
[Added Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2017-145, Dec. 21, 2017.]
 

5.562 Cart Identification Required

Every shopping cart must have a permanently affixed sign that contains all of the following information:
(a) The identity of the owner of the shopping cart;
(b) A telephone number of the owner for shopping cart return; and
(c) A statement that the unauthorized removal of the shopping cart from the premises is a crime under ORS 164.015.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2017-145, Dec. 21, 2017.]
 

5.563 Posted Notice

An owner shall conspicuously post a sufficient number of signs on the owner’s business premises stating that unauthorized appropriation of a shopping cart is a crime under ORS 164.015 and providing a telephone number that members of the public may use to report abandoned shopping carts.
[Added Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2017-145, Dec. 21, 2017.]
 

5.564 Telephone Number Required

(a) A telephone number shall be established, maintained, and made available to the public, at the owner’s expense, for the purpose of reporting abandoned carts.
(b) More than one owner may use the same telephone number to share expenses. Any agreement by two or more owners to share a telephone number shall comply with the requirements of this section.
[Added Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2017-145, Dec. 21, 2017.]
 

5.565 Notification and Retrieval of Abandoned Carts

(a) A Code Enforcement Officer or any member of the public may report the location of an abandoned cart by calling the telephone number provided by the owner.
(b) If the City has notice of the location of an abandoned cart, a Code Enforcement Officer shall use the telephone number provided by the owner to report the location of the abandoned cart.
(c) If an abandoned cart does not have a sign with the information required by MMC 5.562, the City may take custody of the abandoned cart. If the owner can be identified, and after reasonable effort, the Code Enforcement Officer is unable to contact the owner of the abandoned cart and seven calendar days have passed, or if the owner cannot be identified, the Code Enforcement Officer may dispose of the abandoned cart as provided in MMC 5.567(b).
[Added Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2017-145, Dec. 21, 2017.]
 

5.566 Duty to Retrieve Cart

An owner, or an owner’s contractor, shall retrieve an abandoned cart within seven calendar days from the date the report is made to the owner under MMC 5.565.
[Added Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2017-145, Dec. 21, 2017.]
 

5.567 Custody and Disposition

(a) The Code Enforcement Officer may take custody of an abandoned cart and impose a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50) on the owner of the abandoned cart if the owner does not retrieve the abandoned cart within seven calendar days after the owner receives a report of an abandoned cart under MMC 5.565. The Code Enforcement Officer shall release the shopping cart to the owner after the civil penalty is paid.
(b) Disposition after Thirty Days. Title to any abandoned cart not reclaimed by the owner within thirty (30) days after notification from the Code Enforcement Officer, or to any abandoned cart where the City has been unable to identify the owner after reasonable efforts and which has been in the City’s custody for thirty (30) days, shall be forfeited to the City and the shopping cart may be sold or otherwise disposed of by the City.
[Added Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2017-145, Dec. 21, 2017.]
 

5.568 Violation

Failure by an owner to comply with MMC 5.562, 5.563, or 5.564, or to retrieve an abandoned cart under MMC 5.566 is an infraction, punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars.
[Added Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2017-145, Dec. 21, 2017.]
 

5.600 Control of Dogs - Intent and Purpose of Sections 5.601 to. 5.604

The City Council of the City of Medford finds and declares that the health and welfare of the citizens of the City of Medford are promoted by requiring dog owners to maintain control of their dogs in public places; through the means of imposing reasonable regulations on dog ownership and imposing criminal penalties on dog owners whose dogs threaten or injure other people or animals.


[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 1999-151, Oct. 28, 1999; Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45, March 16, 2000; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2014-140, Nov. 6, 2014.]

5.601 Definitions

(1)  “Criminal negligence” has the meaning set out in ORS 161.085(10).

(2)  “Dangerous dog” means a dog that engages in an unprovoked attack in a public place that causes either physical injury to another person or animal.

(3)  “Physical injury” has the meaning set out in ORS 161.015(7).

(4)  “Public place” has the meaning set out in ORS 161.015(10).

(5)  “Run at large” means a dog off leash in a public place.

(6)  “Unprovoked” means conduct by a dog that is not:
            (a)  In response to being tormented, abused or assaulted;
            (b)  In response to pain or injury;
            (c)   In protection of its nursing offspring; or
            (d)   In response to an assault or attempted assault on a person.

[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2014-140, Nov. 6, 2014.]

5.602 Control of Dogs

(1) No person who owns or keeps a dog shall permit the dog to:
 
(a)  Defecate in a public place, unless the person immediately removes the feces from the property;

(b)  Chase vehicles or persons;

(c)  Scatter garbage;

(d)  Run at large in a public place, except for any park area specifically designated as a "dog park;" or

(e)  Inflict injury on another person or animal.  It is a defense to a prosecution under this subsection if the dog was provoked immediately before inflicting injury upon another person or animal.  

(2)  Violation of this section constitutes a violation, punishable as prescribed in section 5.990(5).

(3)  In addition or in alternative to the penalty prescribed in section 5.602(2), the Court may impose reasonable restrictions on the keeping of the dog to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

[Added, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2014-140, Nov. 6, 2014.]
 

5.603 Failure to Control Dangerous Dog

(1)  A person commits the crime of failure to control dangerous dog if the person:
 
(a) Intentionally or recklessly permits a dangerous dog to inflict physical injury on another person or animal;

(b) With criminal negligence permits a dangerous dog to inflict physical injury on another person or animal; or
 
(c) Intentionally or recklessly permits a dangerous dog to engage in conduct that places a person in fear of imminent physical injury.

 (2)  Failure to control dangerous dog is a crime punishable as prescribed in section 5.990(1) if the Court finds that a person is guilty of the offenses set out in section 5.603(1)(a) or (b); and punishable as prescribed in Section 5.990(4) if the Court finds that a person is guilty of the offense set out at 5.603(1)(c).

(3)  In addition or in alternative to the penalties prescribed in section 5.603(2), the Court may impose one or more of the following conditions deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare:
 
(a)  Order a person to provide an enclosure to adequately confine a dangerous dog;
 
(b)  Order a person to post their property with a clearly visible warning sign that there is a dangerous dog on the property.
 
(c)  Require the person to have the dangerous dog spayed or neutered, and provide documentation demonstrating that the dangerous dog has been spayed or neutered;
 
(d)  Suspend the person’s right to own a dog in the City for a period of time as specified by the Court;
 
(e)  Require the person, at the person’s expense, to attend a responsible pet ownership class; or
 
(f)  Impose any additional conditions necessary to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the public.

[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2014-140, Nov. 6, 2014.]
 

5.604 Severability

The provisions of sections 5.600 through 5.603 are intended to be consistent with any applicable provisions of state law. The sections, subsections, paragraphs and clauses of this Ordinance are severable. The invalidity of one section, subsection, paragraph, or clause shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, subsections, paragraphs and clauses.

[Added, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2014-140, Nov. 6, 2014.]
 

5.605 Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 1999-151, Oct. 28, 1999.]


5.606 Intent and Purposes of Section 5.606 to 5.609

The City Council of the City of Medford recognizes that the feeding of wildlife creates an unnecessary risk of injury to persons and companion animals, as well as damage to landscaping, fences, and dwellings.  The City Council finds and declares that the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens are promoted by prohibiting the feeding of deer, raccoon, wild turkey, and potentially habituated wildlife within the City of Medford.
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2016-85, July 21, 2016.]

5.607 Definitions

(1)  “Feed” means the placing, depositing, distributing, storing or scattering of food, garbage or any other attractant so as to constitute a lure, attraction, or enticement for wildlife.
(2)  “Potentially habituated wildlife” means bear, cougar, coyote, and wolf.
(3)  “Wildlife” means deer, raccoon, wild turkey, and potentially habituated wildlife.
[Added Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2016-85, July 21, 2016.]

5.608 Prohibition Against Feeding Wildlife

(1)  No person may feed wildlife within the City of Medford.
(2)  Violation of this section constitutes a violation.  Every day in which the violation exists constitutes a separate violation.
[Adding Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2016-85, July 21, 2016.]

5.609 Public Nuisance- Remedy

Violation of section 5.608 is declared to be a public nuisance, and may be abated in the manner provided for in section 5.520.
[Added Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2016-85, July 21, 2016.]

5.610 Golf in City Parks Prohibited

(1) It is unlawful for any person while in a city park to use a golf club to hit a ball, other than a perforated plastic practice golf ball, so as to cause it to fly through the air or roll on the ground, except in an area specifically designated by the city for golf.

(2) Violation of this section constitutes a violation.

[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-148, Aug. 17, 2000.]

5.615 Failure of Bicycle Rider, Skateboarder, Scooter Rider or In-line Skater to Wear Protective Headgear on City-owned Property

 (1)   A person commits the offense of failure of a bicycle rider, skateboarder, scooter rider or in-line skater to wear protective headgear if the person rides on a bicycle, skateboard, scooter or in-line skates on any city-owned property not open to the general public for the use of motor vehicles and is not wearing protective headgear of a type approved under ORS 815.052. 

(2)   If a person in violation of this section is a child 11 years of age or younger, any citation issued shall be issued to the parent, legal guardian or other individual with legal responsibility for the safety and welfare of the child.

(3)   If a person in violation of this section is a child between the ages of 12 and 16 years of age, a citation may be issued to the child or to the parent, legal guardian or other individual with legal responsibility for the safety and welfare of the child, but not both.

(4)   The first time a person is convicted under this section, the person shall not be required to pay a fine if the person proves to the satisfaction of the Court that the person has protective headgear of a type approved under ORS 815.052.

(5)   Violation of this section constitutes a violation.

[Added, Ord. No. 2011-106, June 16, 2011.]

5.620 Park Traffic Limits

(1) No person shall operate a motor vehicle within any public park of the City, exceeding the speed limits set forth below:

(a) In parking lots and on roadways within a park, not greater than ten (10) miles per hour;

(b) On the Prescott Park Road, not greater than twenty (20) miles per hour; and

(c) At the IOOF/Eastwood Cemetery, not greater than ten (10) miles per hour.

(2) It is unlawful to park any vehicle except in designated areas. Any vehicle parked in violation of this section, or which obstructs traffic or is abandoned, shall be removed and impounded; with the associated expenses being borne by the owner.

(3) With the prior approval of the Parks and Recreation Director, traffic and parking in City Parks may be restricted due to special events or circumstances. Signs giving notice of any restrictions shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous manner to inform the public. It is unlawful for any person to violate any restrictions imposed under this subsection after notice thereof has been posted.

(4) Violation of this section constitutes a violation.

[Added, Ord. No. 2008-134, July 17, 2008.]


5.650 Control of Recreational and Medical Marijuana - Intent and Purpose of Sections 5.650 to 5.654

The City Council of the City of Medford recognizes that Oregon law permits authorized persons to engage in the use of marijuana for both medical and recreational purposes.  However, the Council also recognizes that the outdoor production of marijuana in residential areas has adversely affected the public health, safety and welfare. 
Specifically, the Council finds that the outdoor production of marijuana in residential areas has led to an increase in complaints of offensive odor and of criminal activity, such as robbery, burglary, theft, menacing, and the manufacturing, delivery and possession of a controlled substance. In addition, the marijuana produced at a dwelling is not required to be tested for pesticides, microbiological contaminants, or THC and CBD concentration at a state-licensed laboratory, while useable marijuana sold or transferred to a consumer by a state-licensed medical marijuana dispensary or marijuana retailer requires such testing. 
The Council declares that the health, safety and welfare of its citizens are promoted by prohibiting the outdoor production of recreational and medical marijuana at both dwellings and vacant land within residential areas, and ensuring that the otherwise permissible production of marijuana does not adversely affect neighboring properties by subjecting them to an offensive odor of marijuana.

[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2015-70, July 16, 2015; Replaced Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2016-60, Dec. 1, 2016.]


5.651 Definitions

Words and phrases used in Sections 5.650 to 5.654 shall have the following meanings ascribed to them:

(1)  “Dwelling” means any building or portion thereof containing living facilities, such as a house, apartment, accessory dwelling unit, or manufactured home. 

(2) “Indoors/Indoor production” means producing marijuana in a dwelling or garage, utilizing artificial lighting on marijuana plants.

(3)  “Marijuana” means the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae, any part of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae and the seeds of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae.

(4)  “Marijuana cultivator” means a person engaged in the production of marijuana and includes:

(a) any person engaged in the production of medical marijuana in accordance with state law; including, but not limited to, a registry identification cardholder, designated primary caregiver or person responsible for a marijuana grow site;

(b) any person engaged in the production of recreational homegrown marijuana in accordance with state law; or

(c) a landlord or property owner that permits or allows a marijuana cultivator to engage in the production of marijuana.


(5)  “Offensive Odor of Marijuana” means an odor of marijuana that is offensive to an ordinary, reasonable person under the totality of the circumstances.  Factors to be considered may include the intensity, duration and frequency of the marijuana odor, whether the marijuana odor is continuous or intermittent, and the circumstances in which the marijuana odor is smelled.

(6 ) “Outdoor production” means producing marijuana in an expanse of open or cleared ground open to the air; or in a greenhouse, hoop house, or similar non-rigid or glass structure that does not utilize man-made lighting, heating, or cooling systems.  

(7)  “Production of Marijuana” means the planting, cultivation, growing or harvesting of marijuana, and includes the trimming or drying of marijuana leaves or flowers.

(8)  “Property” means any home, business, publicly-owned property, or public right-of-way.

(9) “Garage” means a fully enclosed structure, attached to the dwelling, or detached and in existence as of June 21, 2018, built for the parking, shelter, or repair of automotive vehicles. 


[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2015-70, July 16, 2015; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2016-60, Dec. 1, 2016; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-74, June 21, 2018.]


5.652 Offensive Marijuana Odor

(1)  No marijuana cultivator shall cause or allow an offensive odor of marijuana to emanate from a dwelling to any other property.
 
(2)  Violation of this section constitutes a violation.  Every day in which the violation exists constitutes a separate violation.
 
[Added, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2015-70, July 16, 2015; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2016-60, Dec. 1, 2016.]

5.653 Ban on Outdoor Production of Marijuana

(1)  No marijuana cultivator shall engage in the outdoor production of marijuana on a property or on vacant land in residential areas.

(2) Marijuana cultivators shall be allowed to cultivate or produce homegrown marijuana and medical marijuana in a residential zone subject to the following conditions:
(A)  All cultivation or production of marijuana shall be conducted indoors;
(B) A marijuana cultivator is permitted to grow marijuana in their dwelling or in either an attached or detached garage.  
(C) Cultivating or producing marijuana shall meet the requirements of all adopted City building and life/safety codes; 
(D) A structure as noted under (2)(B) above that contains four or more mature marijuana plants shall be equipped with a carbon filtration system for odor control. An alternative odor control system is permitted if the applicant submits a report by a mechanical engineer licensed in the State of Oregon demonstrating that the alternative system will control odor as well as or better than the carbon filtration system otherwise required.

(3)  Violation of this section constitutes a violation.  Every day in which the violation exists constitutes a separate violation.
 
[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2015-70, July 16, 2015; Replaced Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2016-60, Dec. 1, 2016; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2018-74, June 21, 2018.]

5.654 Public Nuisance- Remedy

Violation of sections 5.652 and 5.653 are declared to be a public nuisance, and may be abated in the manner provided for in section 5.520.
 
[Added, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2015-70, July 16, 2015; Replaced Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2016-60, Dec. 1, 2016.]

5.660 Home Delivery of Marijuana

(1)  Except as described below, no marijuana-related business shall engage in delivery of marijuana or marijuana items to a person’s residence.
(2) Home delivery of marijuana by a licensed marijuana-related business to an authorized person is permissible only as follows:
(a) the delivery business shall be licensed by the state, and comply with all applicable state laws and regulations; and
(b) the driver must carry a printed invoice listing the items to be delivered, the name and address of the recipient, and the date and time the order was placed.
(3)  Violation of this section constitutes a violation.  Every day in which the violation exists constitutes a separate violation.
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-75, July 5, 2018.]
 

5.700 Definitions

Words and Phrases used in sections 5.705 to 5.715 shall have the following meanings ascribed to them:
(1) “Cannabinoid” means any of the chemical compounds that are the active constituents of marijuana.
(2) “Cannabinoid concentrate” means a substance obtained by separating cannabinoids from marijuana by:
(a) A mechanical extraction process;
(b) A chemical extraction process using a nonhydrocarbon-based or other solvent, such as water, vegetable glycerin, vegetable oils, animal fats, isopropyl alcohol or ethanol;
(c) A chemical extraction process using the hydrocarbon-based solvent carbon dioxide, provided that the process does not involve the use of high heat or pressure; or
(d) Any other process identified by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission, in consultation with the Oregon Health Authority, by rule.
(3) “Cannabinoid edible” means food or potable liquid into which a cannabinoid concentrate, cannabinoid extract or dried marijuana leaves or flowers have been incorporated.
(4) “Cannabinoid extract” means a substance obtained by separating cannabinoids from marijuana by:
(a) A chemical extraction process using a hydrocarbon-based solvent, such as butane, hexane or propane;
(b) A chemical extraction process using the hydrocarbon-based solvent carbon dioxide, if the process uses high heat or pressure; or
(c) Any other process identified by the commission, in consultation with the authority, by rule.
(5) “Cannabinoid product” means a cannabinoid edible and any other product intended for human consumption or use, including a product intended to be applied to the skin or hair, that contains cannabinoids or dried marijuana leaves or flowers; but does not include usable marijuana by itself, a cannabinoid concentrate by itself, a cannabinoid extract by itself or industrial hemp as defined in ORS 571.300.
(6) “Marijuana” means the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae, any part of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae and the seeds of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae, but does not include industrial hemp.
(7) “Marijuana items” mean marijuana, cannabinoid products, cannabinoid concentrates and cannabinoid extracts.
(8) “Marijuana leaves” means the leaves of the plant genus Cannabis within the plant family Cannabaceae.
(9) “Public place” means a place to which the general public has access and includes, but is not limited to, hallways, lobbies and other parts of apartment houses and hotels not constituting rooms or apartments designed for actual residence, and highways, streets, schools, places of amusement, parks, playgrounds and areas used in connection with public passenger transportation.
(10) “Useable marijuana” means the dried leaves and flowers of marijuana, but does not include the seeds, stalks and roots of marijuana or waste material that is a by-product of producing or processing marijuana.

[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2016-59, May 19, 2016.]

5.705 Use of Marijuana in Public Place

(1) It is unlawful for any person to engage in the use of marijuana items in a public place.

(2) A violation of this section constitutes a violation.

[Added, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2016-59, May 19, 2016.]
 

5.710 Prohibition Against Selling, Giving or Making Available Marijuana Item to a Person Who is Visibly Intoxicated

(1) A person may not sell, give or otherwise make available any marijuana item to a person who is visibly intoxicated.

(2) Violation of this section constitutes a crime punishable as provided in section 5.990(3).

[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2016-59, May 19, 2016.]
 

5.715 Prohibition Against Providing Marijuana Item to a Person Less than 21 Years of Age on Private Real Property

(1) A person who exercises control over private real property may not knowingly allow a person under the age of 21 years to consume marijuana items on the property, or allow any other person under the age of 21 years to remain on the property if the person under the age of 21 years consumes marijuana items on the property.  This section:
 
(a) Applies only to a person who is present and in control of the location at the time the consumption occurs; and
 
(b) Does not apply to the owner of rental property, or the agent of an owner of rental property, unless the consumption occurs in the individual housing unit in which the owner or agent resides.

(2) Violation of this section constitutes a crime punishable as provided in section 5.990(3).

[Added, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2016-59, May 19, 2016.]

5.720 Purchase of Possession of Marijuana Items by Minor

(1)  A person under 21 years of age may not possess, attempt to purchase, or purchase a marijuana item.
(2)  For purposes of this code provision, purchasing a marijuana item includes accepting a marijuana item, and possessing a marijuana item includes consuming a marijuana item, provided that the consumption of the marijuana item occurred no more than 24 hours before the determination that the person consumed the marijuana item.
(3)  Violation of this section constitutes a violation.
(4)  The court shall order that, when a person violates subsection 1 of this section, the person’s driving privileges and right to apply for driving privileges be suspended pursuant to ORS 809.260 and 809.280.  The court notification made to the Department of Transportation under this paragraph may include a recommendation that the person be granted a hardship permit under ORS 807.240 if the person is otherwise eligible for the permit.
(5)  In addition to and not in lieu of any penalty established by law, the court may order a person who violates this section to undergo assessment and treatment.  The court shall order a person to undergo assessment and treatment if the person has previously been found to have violated this section. 
[Added Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2018-18, Feb. 15. 2018]
 
 

5.725 Possession of Marijuana

(1) Except as explicitly permitted by state law, no person over the age of 21 shall intentionally or knowingly possess more than one ounce of useable marijuana in a public place.
(2) Violation of this section constitutes a violation punishable as provided in section 5.990 (5).
[Added Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2018-18, Feb. 15, 2018]

5.800 Failure to Appear

No person, having by court order been released from custody or a correctional facility upon a release agreement or security release upon the condition that he will subsequently appear personally in connection with a charge against him of having committed an offense against this Code, shall intentionally fail to appear as required.

5.805 Failure to Appear on a Citation

A person commits the crime of Failure to Appear on a Citation when the person:

(1) knowingly fails to appear before the court pursuant to a citation issued and served according to the provisions of chapter 2 of this code and a complaint is filed; or
 
(2) knowingly fails to post bail, appear for a hearing, or comply with a sentence as ordered by the court.

[Added Ord. No. 5023, Dec. 1, 1983.]

5.990 Penalties

(1) Except as provided in subsections (3) and (4) below, a violation of a provision of this Chapter 5 not classified as a violation is a crime and is punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 and imprisonment not exceeding one year.

(2) Except as provided in subsection (5) below, a violation of a provision of this Chapter 5 classified as a violation is punishable by a fine not exceeding $250. Conviction of a violation does not give rise to any disability or legal disadvantage based on conviction of a crime.

(3) A violation of sections 5.120, 5.130, 5.152, 5.298(2), 5.710, and 5.715 is a crime and is punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 and imprisonment not exceeding six months.

(4) A violation of sections 5.185, 5.247, 5.250, 5.292, 5.296(4)(a) and 5.603(1)(c) is a crime and is punishable by a fine not exceeding $500 and imprisonment not exceeding 30 days.

(5) A violation of sections 5.370(2), 5.602, and 5.725 is a violation and is punishable by a fine not exceeding $440.

(6) When a person is convicted of criminal activity that has resulted in ascertainable damages to any person, in addition to any other sentence it may impose, the court may order that the defendant make restitution to the victim. For purposes of this subsection, the definitions of ORS 137.103 apply.

(7) A person found guilty of an offense defined in this Code as a crime who, prior to sentencing, consents to donate labor for the welfare of the public may be sentenced to community service for a term not less than 24 hours or more than 160 hours as an alternative to incarceration, probation or fine or as a condition of probation.

[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5660, May 1, 1986; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 5993, Oct. 15, 1987; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 6028, Dec. 3, 1987; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6226, Nov. 3, 1988; Amd. Ord. No. 6574, March 15, 1990; Amd. Ord. No. 2000-45 and 2000-48, March 16, 2000; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2011-218, Nov. 3, 2011; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2014-140, Nov. 6, 2014; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2016-59, May 19, 2016; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2018-18, Feb. 15, 2018; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2018-115, Sept. 20, 2018.]

6 Streets, Highways, Public Parking and Public Right of Way

6.100 Powers and Duties of the Public Works Director

(1) The Public Works Director or his/her designee is delegated the powers of the "Road Authority" as described in ORS 810 and this Code. The Public Works Director or his/her designee is hereinafter, for purposes of this chapter, referred to as the Director.

(2) In making the best use of streets, sidewalks, and other publicly-owned property or places for vehicle traffic and parking and pedestrian traffic, the Director shall place and maintain the classes of signs, signals, markings, and devices found in Subsection (3) of this section upon the streets, sidewalks, and other publicly-owned property and places of the city as deemed necessary to the public welfare, safety, and convenience. Except that approval must first be secured from the State Transportation Commission where required by the Motor Vehicle Laws of Oregon, the Director shall base determinations only upon:

(a) Traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations;

(b) Standards, limitations, and rules as may be established by the State Transportation Commission or the Department of Transportation (hereinafter ODOT);

(c) Recognized traffic control standards.

(3) Pursuant to Subsection (2) of this section, the Director may:

(a) Designate street areas, city-owned or leased land upon which parking is restricted or prohibited, the times at which the restrictions or prohibitions shall be in effect, and the angle of the parking, and parking time limits.

(b) Designate the location and time of operation of traffic control signals.

(c) Establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands, and stands for other passenger common-carrier vehicles.

(d) Designate the location of passenger loading zones for use in front of any hotel, auditorium, theater, church, school, or public building.

(e) Designate on each side of a block, where required, loading zones.

(f) Designate weight limits.

(g) Designate and cause to be placed or maintained appropriate signs, signals, marks, lines, or devices for:

(1) Intersections where drivers of vehicles shall not make right, left, or U turns and the times when the prohibitions apply.

(2) Crosswalks or closure of crosswalks at intersections where necessary for pedestrian safety.

(3) Safety zones of a kind and character and at places deemed necessary for pedestrian safety.

 (h) Cause to be placed or marked and maintained:

(1) Traffic control signs.

(2) Parking spaces.

(3) Traffic lanes and other symbols.

(4) All other signs and markings necessary to implement traffic and parking controls.

(i) Make and enforce temporary experimental or emergency regulations consistent with this chapter. No regulation shall be effective and in force until and unless adequate signs, signals, or other notices are erected clearly indicating the regulation. The regulation shall not remain in effect for more than 30 days.

(j) Designate streets upon which motor truck and motor bus traffic is prohibited.

(4) When the public safety and welfare no longer require that an existing sign, signal, or marking, or other device be maintained, or public safety and welfare require the alteration thereof, the Director may remove or alter it accordingly. However, no removal or alteration shall be made where contrary to state law or ordinance, or if installed by resolution the council shall first approve any change or alteration.

(5) The Director may issue parking permits as established in Section 6.340 herein. 

(6) The city Director may order the placing of temporary signs or other traffic control devices, conforming to State Transportation Commission and or ODOT specifications, if any, and designating a construction speed less than that otherwise designed by law, upon any portion of the highway or street upon which temporary conditions constituting a danger to the public exist, or above, below, or upon which construction or maintenance work is being carried on so close to the roadway as to be a danger to passing traffic or to be endangered by passing traffic. The operation of a vehicle in excess of any speed designated and posted under this section shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of ORS 811.105. The city council reserves to itself the authority to designate construction speeds less than otherwise designated by law in any street or portion of street where it finds such lesser speed necessary to carry out the purposes of this subsection, or to proceed by resolution to exercise the authority conferred by ORS 810.180(4).

(7) The Director shall prepare and keep complete records and maps of the location of all signs, signals, markings, and other devices which are or shall be placed within the city, governing vehicle traffic and parking and pedestrian traffic.

(8) If a sign, signal, marking, or other device is placed , the Director shall enter in a record kept by him or her the nature of the device and the date and location of the installation or placement. This record shall be a public record of which the Director shall be custodian.

(9) The entry described in Subsection (7) of this section shall be conclusive evidence of a determination made by the Director that those conditions exist which justify the exercise of the authority conferred upon the Director.

(10) The Director shall make the surveys, studies, and investigations of traffic and parking conditions upon the city streets as the Director deems necessary in the public interest or as directed.

(11) Except that this subsection shall not be construed to include the signs, signals, markings, or other devices located on state highways or otherwise within the exclusive jurisdiction of the State Transportation Commission, the Director shall install and maintain all signs, signals, markings, or other devices on the city streets or properties which regulate vehicle traffic and parking or pedestrian traffic and are: (a) Required by resolution of the council; or (b) Necessary to give proper notice of any regulation imposed by ordinance or state law; or (c) Established pursuant to the authority given in Section 6.100 herein.

[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 1999-147, Sept. 17, 1999; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2009-120, June 4, 2009.]


6.120 Traffic Control Devices

(1) All traffic control devices placed in position by the Director or at his/or her direction shall be deemed official traffic control devices for purposes of Chapter 811, Oregon Revised Statutes.

(2) All traffic control devices placed in position by the Director shall be presumed to have been placed by his/her official act or at the direction of his/her lawful authority unless the contrary is established by competent evidence.

(3) A traffic control device placed in position by the Director under provision of Oregon law and this code and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to that device shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices as adopted by the Oregon Transportation Commission, unless the contrary is established by competent evidence.

[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 1999-147, Sept. 17, 1999.]

6.200 Downtown Parking District

A Downtown Parking District is created for the establishment and maintenance of off-street motor vehicle parking facilities for public use The boundaries of     the Downtown Parking District shall be identical to, and coterminous with, the boundaries of the Central Business District overlay as shown on the official zoning map of the City of Medford, including all future amendments to those boundaries.
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. 2020-91, Jul. 2, 2020]
 

6.220 [Repealed Ord No. 7627, May 5, 1994; Effective July 1, 1994.]


6.230 [Repealed Ord No. 7627, May 5, 1994; Effective July 1, 1994.]


6.240 [Repealed Ord. No. 7627, May 5, 1994; Effective July 1, 1994.]


6.250 [Repealed Ord. No. 7627, May 5, 1994; Effective July 1, 1994.]


6.260 [Repealed Ord. No. 7627, May 5, 1994; Effective July 1, 1994.]


6.270 [Repealed Ord. No. 7627, May 5, 1994; Effective July 1, 1994.]


6.280 [Repealed Ord. No. 7627, May 5, 1994; Effective July 1, 1994.]


6.320 Obstructing Enforcement

(1) No person shall erase, remove or otherwise conceal any mark made on a motor vehicle tire by a person officially charged with enforcement of this ordinance acting in the course of his employment.

(2) No person shall discard, mutilate, or destroy any summons or complaint or citation formally issued for violation of this ordinance, if the matter complained of has not been finally resolved by the court having jurisdiction over the summons or complaint.

6.330 Prohibited Parking Generally

No person shall park a vehicle:

(1) On any public right-of-way with expired vehicle registration.

(2)  Where official signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking.

(3) On a bridge other than the Main Street bridge.

(4) In an alley except while in the course of loading or unloading merchandise or under the terms of a current, valid Delivery Permit or Emergency Alley Repair Permit.  The City Manager's Office may issue Delivery Permits.  The Public Works Director may issue Emergency Alley Repair Permits for repairs being made to businesses whose entrance or exit abuts an alley located within the Downtown Parking District as provided for in Section 6.340.

(5) On a street or in a city parking lot in a manner or at a time prohibited by official signs (except as permitted under Section 10.829B).

(6) On a street or in a city parking facility longer than the time limited by official signs for parking:

(a) The period to be considered shall begin when the vehicle is parked in a particular limited time zone on a particular block face; and

(b) The period shall be terminated if the vehicle is moved and parked on a different block face, at which time a new period shall begin as stated in (a);

(c) “Block face” shall be defined a “side of the street where the vehicle was parked between two (2) intersecting streets.  A parking facility shall be considered as a block face.  An alley shall not be considered a street or block face for purposes of this section".

(7) In an unimproved portion of the front setback of any structure in any residential zoned district.

(8) A vehicle shall be parked so that it is entirely within the painted lines of a single parking space.

(9) Within an area marked off by traffic markers or by painted curb or pavement.

(10) Within 10 (10') feet of a fire hydrant or other fire protection devices or equipments, within 30 (30') feet of a fire station, or in a fire department access road or fire lane.

(11) In a street intersection, including the area used for crosswalks.

(12) Across the entrance to an alley or driveway.

(13) Where parallel parking on the right side of a street is permitted, unless the right wheels of the vehicle are parallel to and within 12 inches of the right curb or, if no curb, as close as possible to the right edge of the right shoulder.

(14) Where parallel parking on the left side of a street is permitted, unless the left wheels of the vehicle are parallel to and within 12 inches of the left curb or, if no curb, as close as possible to the left edge of the left shoulder.

(15) Where parallel parking on the left or right side of a street is permitted, unless the vehicle faces the direction in which vehicles in the adjacent lane of the street are required to travel. Provided however that, notwithstanding subsection (5) above, the City Council may, by resolution or motion, designate certain days and certain areas as exempt from posted parking time limits whenever the Council determines that it is in the public interest to do so.

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5539, Oct. 17, 1985; Amd. Ord. No. 5779, Dec. 18, 1986; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2003-27, Feb. 6, 2003 - effective March 1, 2003; Amd. Ord. No. 2006-196, Sept. 7, 2006; Amd. Ord. No. 2007-41, March 15, 2007; Amd. Ord. No. 2009-170, Aug. 6, 2009; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2011-175, Sept. 1, 2011; Amd. Ord. No. 2012-147, Sept. 20, 2012, Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2019-104, Sep. 19, 2019.]


6.331 [Repealed, Ord. No. 2012-48, Apr. 19, 2012]

Repealed

6.335 Parking Taxicabs

No person shall park a taxicab on a street while awaiting patronage except as may be permitted by permit of the city.

6.340 Parking Permits

(1) Temporary "No Parking" Permits- Public Right-of-Way. Upon written application, the Public Works Director may grant a permit to any church, assembly hall, theater, or other place of assembly to place "No Parking" signs at the curb on any street in front of the entrance to the premises during and immediately before and after the premises are in actual use for public assembly purposes. The Public Works Director shall specify the terms of the permit. The applicant shall be required to pay the temporary right-of-way permit fee at the Public Works Engineering Division. The sign shall be used only during and immediately before and after the premises are actually in use for public assembly purposes and no applicant shall use or permit the use of the sign during any other times. If a provision of this subsection or a term of the permit is violated, the permit shall be terminated and canceled by the Public Works Director.

(2) Public Right-of-Way Permit. Upon written application, the Public Works Director may grant a public right-of-way permit whenever a proposed use of the public space makes necessary the temporary obstruction or occupancy of a portion of a public street, sidewalk or alley as a necessary condition to the performance of construction or demolition work on an adjoining structure. The fee for such permit shall be as established by the Public Works Department Schedule of Right-of-Way Permit Fees.

(a) Findings Required. Before issuing such a permit, the applicant must demonstrate that such occupancy is necessary to the proposed construction or demolition and that it will not unreasonably interfere with the safe public use of the street, sidewalk or alley. The permit shall be issued for a limited time, not exceeding thirty (30) days, and for the purpose therein limited; shall define the area to be occupied, and shall contain such other conditions as the Public Works Director finds necessary to the public safety and convenience. The permit may be renewed for additional periods not to exceed thirty (30) days each if the Public Works Director finds such renewal to be necessary. No permit for occupancy of any part of the roadway more than eight (8) feet beyond the curb shall be granted without the approval of the Traffic Engineer and in no event shall the occupancy take up more than half of the roadway of any street or alley.

(b) Revocation. The Public Works Director may, by written notice to the applicant or his agent, revoke a permit for violation of a condition, but the applicant may appeal such revocation as prescribed by Section 1.025 of the Medford Code. The Public Works Director or his designee may also revoke a permit if he finds that the permit provides for the occupancy of space in excess of need, or that the continued occupancy under the permit constitutes an undue obstruction of traffic.

(3) Emergency Alley Repair Permit. The Public Works Director, upon application accompanied by the prescribed fee, may issue either a daily or weekly Emergency Repair Alley Permit entitling the driver of a commercial repair vehicle to park in an alley while in the course of doing repairs for a business whose entrance or exit is located in the alley. The contractor shall describe on the application the specific work to be completed in order for a permit to be considered. Emergency Repair Alley Permits shall not be duplicated.

(a) Permit Fees and Use. The fee for the Emergency Repair Alley Permit shall be as established by the Public Works Department Schedule of Right-of-Way Permit Fees. The Emergency Repair Alley Permit shall be prominently displayed on the driver’s side dash of the vehicle, and shall indicate the business or property where the service or repair is being performed. Business or property owners are not permitted to purchase an Emergency Repair Alley Permit, unless they personally perform the work.

(b) Definitions. The term "repairs" includes, but is not limited to, servicing equipment such as heating/ventilation/air conditioning, computer, elevator, fire alarm, plumbing, telephone, cable and electrical. The term "commercial repair vehicle" shall mean any truck, pickup, panel delivery, or other motorized vehicle of like nature used in the course of business and designed for, or adapted to, the purpose of carrying materials, tools, equipment, and machinery for use in servicing the equipment described above or performing other service and repair work on adjacent premises.

(4) Temporary Parking Permits-Public Parking Lots. The City Manager may issue temporary parking permits for public parking lots as provided for in Section 2.185.

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-166, Sept. 7, 2000; Replaced Sec. 2, Ord.  No. 2009-120, June 4, 2009.]


6.345 Storing Vehicles or Objects on Streets

(1) No person owning or controlling any vehicle or any other object shall cause or permit it to be stored within the roadway of any street. For purposes of this section a vehicle or other object shall be deemed "stored" after five consecutive days if the vehicle has not been moved a minimum of 25 feet, and each day thereafter during which it remains in place shall be deemed a separate offense. This shall not be construed to permit the placing of any object within the traffic lanes or in any place which obstructs or interferes with the public use of the entire street for any period of time, or the parking of any vehicle in excess of the time provided by law, or in any place where such parking is prohibited; and any object "stored" in violation of this section may be dealt with in the manner prescribed for. This section shall not apply to machinery or vehicles used by the city or its contractors in working on the streets.

(2) No person owning or controlling any motor home, motor truck, truck trailer, manufactured dwelling, or manufactured structure, shall cause or permit it to be parked or maintained within one location on the right-of-way of any public street for longer than twenty-four consecutive hours. For purposes of this subsection motor home, motor truck, truck trailer, manufactured dwelling, and manufactured structure shall include any of the vehicles defined in ORS Chs. 446 and 801, and "within one location" shall include any and all parking area in front of any premises.

(3)  No person owning or controlling any vehicle with expired vehicle registration shall permit the vehicle to be placed on the public right-of-way.

 [Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 1998-123, July 16, 1998; Amd. Ord. No. 2006-195, Sept. 7, 2006.]


6.350 Sales on Public Property

(1) Unless authorized by other provisions of this code, no person shall park or leave standing a vehicle, movable device, container, equipment or merchandise on a street, sidewalk, public right-of-way, or public off-street parking lot, for longer than five consecutive minutes in one location for the purposes of offering food or merchandise for sale without prior written approval of the council.

(2) Information required. Applications for a sidewalk vending permit shall be on forms provided by the City. The application shall include the following information:

(a) The name and mailing address of the applicant;

(b) A description of all products to be sold;

(c) A valid copy of all applicable health permits required by federal, state, or local authorities;

(d) A description of the cart to be used in conducting business, including scaled drawings or a photograph and proposed colors, including signage to be used;

(e) The number of carts proposed to be operated;

(f) List of all persons or employees operating the vending unit or preparing food to be sold from the vending unit and proof of a current food handlers permit if required by Jackson County; and

(g) Any other information deemed necessary to enforce this section.

(3) Departments’ review.

(a) All applications for sidewalk vending shall be referred to the Planning Department, Fire Department, Police Department, Building Department, and Public Works Department for review and compliance with applicable codes and ordinances. After review and recommendation, the application shall be referred to the City Manager or Manager’s designee for approval.

(b) Applicants must pay the City business license tax and pay an additional $300.00 permit fee per location. The $300.00 permit fee is good for ninety (90) days and may be renewed. If more than one applicant applies for a permit at a single location, the City will approve one permit only for each location by random selection.

(4) Approved cart. All sidewalk vendors are required to conduct their business from an approved cart.

(5) Location specified:

(a) Each fixed location permit shall specify the location where the cart is approved to be operated. No operation shall occur at locations other than the approved site.

(b) Sidewalk vending shall be limited to locations specified by the City Manager.  Approved locations are shown on the map included in the Sidewalk Vendor Permit Application Form.

(c) Hours of operation will be from seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o’clock (10:00) P.M., except that operations are permitted until two-thirty (2:30) A.M. on Saturdays and Sundays.  No carts shall remain on the sidewalk except during the above hours of operation.

(6) Separation distances. All carts shall maintain the following separation distances and shall be so located as to not constitute an obstruction to pedestrians or vehicles:

(a) Ten feet (10’) from a building entrance or exit;

(b) Ten feet (10’) from a fire hydrant or other fire protection devices or equipment;

(c) Twenty feet (20’) along a curb from an intersection or driveway;

(d) Five feet (5’) of unobstructed sidewalk width.

(7) Size. A cart shall not be larger than four feet wide, nine feet long, and four feet high (4’ x 9’ x 4’) measured from the sidewalk. Canopies, umbrellas or awnings attached to the cart shall be permitted; provided that there is a minimum of seven feet (7’) vertical clearance to the sidewalk, the shading device does not extend more than two feet (2’) from the edge of the cart in any direction or exceed twice the surface area of the cart, and does not exceed a height of eight and one-half feet (8 ½’) measured from the sidewalk. The space between the four foot (4’) maximum cart height and the seven foot (7’) canopy or awning minimum clearance shall remain open except for transparent material used for siding.

(8) Signage. Only business signs painted directly on the cart or canopy shall be permitted. Signage shall not extend above the opaque sides of the cart or hang below the awnings of the cart.

(9) Product display. All displays, products and accessory items shall be contained within the cart. No product or accessory items shall be attached to the side or awning of the cart. No product or display shall be higher than four feet (4’) above the ground except for transparent devices used to prepare food, e.g., popcorn machines and hot dog warmers, which may not exceed seven feet (7’) in height measured from the sidewalk.

(10) Construction. Carts shall be constructed of wood, washable plastic, fiberglass or noncorrosive metal. All carts shall be painted. All carts shall be designed to be moveable by one person and shall have a minimum of two (2) rubber or rubber-like wheels as part of the cart for ease of movement.

(11) No sidewalk vendor shall:

(a) Leave any cart unattended;

(b) Store, park or leave any cart beyond hours of operation on any street or sidewalk;

(c) Sell from other than the approved location;

(d) Conduct sales at times other than herein permitted;

(e) Leave any location without first picking up, removing and disposing of all trash and refuse remaining within a fifteen foot (15’) radius. Each vendor shall be responsible for maintaining a fifteen foot (15’) radius around the cart clean of any trash or refuse.

(f) Solicit from or conduct business with any persons in motor vehicles located within any traffic lane on a public street;

(g) Use any noise-making or sound-producing device that calls attention to its operation;

(h) Unreasonably interfere with or obstruct the free flow of pedestrian traffic or access to businesses;

(i) Violate any federal, state or local ordinance, statute or regulation;

(j) Sell any items other than flowers, or prepared food in a ready-to-eat condition.

(12) Placement or operation of any street vending cart in violation of the provisions of this section is declared to be a public nuisance and may be summarily abated. The Police Department may cause the removal of any cart found on a public sidewalk in violation of this section and is authorized to store such cart until the owner shall redeem it by paying the reasonable removal and storage charges.

[Amd. Ord. No. 2002-159, Sept. 5, 2002; Amd. Ord. No. 2004-117, June 3, 2004; Amd. Ord. No. 2006-112, May 18, 2006; Amd. Ord. No. 2007-178, Aug. 16, 2007; Amd. Ord. No. 2008-228, Nov. 20, 2008; Amd. Ord. No. 2009-249, Nov. 19, 2009, Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2019-104, Sep. 19, 2019.]


6.360 Obstructions in Right of Way

(1) No person shall place, cause to be placed, or permit to remain on a street or sidewalk anything that obstructs or interferes with public use of a street or sidewalk or interferes with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. The provisions of this section do not apply:

(a) To merchandise in the course of receipt or delivery, unless the merchandise remains upon a street or sidewalk for a period longer than one hour.

(b) To merchandise displayed for retail sale by prior express permission of the Council on such terms and conditions as the Council may provide.

(2) No person shall post, place, plant or attach in any way a sign on a parking strip, sidewalk or curb, utility pole, wall, hydrant, bridge, or tree in the public right of way or on public property, or place, attach or post a sign on a vehicle in order to use the public right of way or public property for commercial advertising by parking that vehicle in or on a public street, right of way, or public property.

(3) The provisions of subsection 2 do not apply to:

(a) Delivery trucks displaying advertising relating to the truck owner's business or to public service, but only while such trucks are being loaded or unloaded;

(b) Vehicles for commercial use on which only the name, address, and the business engaged in by the vehicle owner is painted or attached permanently or by magnetic placard.

(4) No person shall attach any object to the ground, sidewalk, curb, pavement, or to any pole, wall, hydrant, tree or structure in the public right-of-way or on public property except by prior express permission of the Council on such terms and conditions as the Council may provide.

(a) Notwithstanding the above, the Public Works Director or his designee is authorized to issue a permit to allow owners or tenants of buildings in the Central Business District Overlay area to affix signs to the walls of their buildings that encroach into the right-of-way. 

(b) Permits must be complete and accompanied by the right-of-way permit fee in effect at the time of submission.  Approval will include conditions to ensure that the public safety and convenience are maintained.  Such conditions shall include the following: 

(i) Obligation to perform any and all damage repairs of the area occupied, post bonds, deposit cash, and/or reimburse the City for any costs incurred for damage repairs, as determined by the City Manager per applicable administrative rules governing use of city property;

(ii) Provision of written assurance that the City will be held harmless for any liability that is solely attributable to the permittee's conduct; and

(iii) The sign shall not obstruct the pedestrian and other modes of traffic on the sidewalk or right of way in question. 

(c) The signs allowed under this section shall be permitted to be displayed only during hours that the owner or tenant is open for business. 

(d) Signs shall be of soft fabric no greater than 36 inches tall and 18 inches wide.  Signs and framing and brackets shall extend no further than 30 inches from side of building.  The bottom edge of the sign and any framing, if lower than 7 (seven) feet from sidewalk or other right-of-way, shall result in a minimum width of five (5) feet from any other obstruction or curb for safe pedestrian passage.  

(5) No person shall apply paint or similar substance to any sidewalk, curb, gutter, pavement or other portion of the public right-of-way without written permission of the Director.

(6) Unlawful transfer on vehicular portion of the right-of-way.

A.   A person commits the offense of unlawful transfer on a highway if the person:

(1)   While a driver or passenger in a vehicle on a highway, road or street within the boundaries of the city of Medford, gives or relinquishes possession or control of, or allows another person in the vehicle to give or relinquish possession or control of any item of property to a pedestrian; or

(2)   While a pedestrian, accepts, receives or retains possession or control of any item of property from a driver or passenger in a vehicle on a highway, road or street within the boundaries of the city of Medford.

B.   This subsection does not apply if the vehicle is legally parked. This subsection also does not apply to persons participating in a "Pedestrian Activity," as defined in OAR 734 Division 58, for which a permit has been issued by the Oregon Department of Transportation, so long as all terms of such permit are being met.

C.  Any person found violating this subsection shall be guilty of committing a traffic violation punishable by a fine not to exceed $75.00.

(7) Violation of this section constitutes a violation. Each day in which the obstruction or sign is caused or allowed to exist constitutes a separate violation.

(8) The placing of obstructions or signs in the right of way or on public property without consent is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the Director or Chief of Police may summarily abate the nuisance, or, the nuisance may be abated as provided in section 5.520.

[Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 1999-147, Sept. 17, 1999; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-54, April 6, 2000; Amd. Ord. No. 2010-155, July 1, 2010; Amd. Ord. No. 2011-109, June 16, 2011.]


6.361 Trackout Prohibited

(1)  No person shall drive or move any vehicle that tracks or deposits mud, dirt or debris upon the surface of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way.

(2)  Violation of subsection (1) is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and subject to summary abatement by the City Manager or his designee.  Summary abatement includes but is not limited to suspension of any and all city permits relating to construction on the site which is the source of the mud, dirt or debris.

(3)  Each day during which such a condition exists shall be deemed a separate offense.

[Added Ord. No. 7573, Feb. 17, 1994; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2008-187, Sept. 18, 2008.]


6.365 Trucks and Buses - Operation on Certain Streets Prohibited

(1) As used in this chapter, "motor truck" and "commercial bus" shall include any of the vehicles defined in ORS Ch. 801.

(2) No person shall operate a motor truck or commercial bus on any street where such operation is prohibited by sign or other official traffic control device.

(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply to vehicles defined in section 6.340(3)(b).

[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 1998-123, July 16, 1998.]


6.370 Truck and Bus Parking Restrictions

(1) No person shall park a motor truck, truck trailer, or commercial bus on a street in front of or within 100 feet of a hotel, apartment, residence building City park or school between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. During the remaining hours of the day, motor trucks, truck trailers and commercial buses may only park on residential streets of the City while in the process of loading or unloading persons or property to adjacent properties. This limitation does not apply to commercial and/or industrial zones.

(2) For purposes of this section the following definitions are applicable:
 
(a) A “Motor Truck” is a motor vehicle that is primarily designed or used for carrying loads other than passengers. Motor trucks do NOT include service vehicles while in the course of maintenance or repair of appliances, fixtures or utilities. A service vehicle is any truck, pickup, panel delivery, or other motorized vehicle of like nature used in the course of business and designed for, or adapted to, the purpose of carrying materials, tools, equipment, and machinery for use in plumbing or electrical service, picking up or delivering freight or merchandise, maintaining facilities of public utilities, or performing other service and repair work.
 
(b) A “Truck Trailer” is any trailer designed and used primarily for carrying loads other than passengers, whether designed as a balance trailer, pole trailer, semi trailer, or self-supporting trailer.

(c) A “Commercial Bus” means every motor vehicle designed or used for carrying passengers and their personal baggage and express for compensation, except:
 
(1) Taxicabs or limousines that:
 
(A) Are passenger vehicles with a passenger seating capacity that does not exceed five;

(B) Carry passengers for hire where destination and route traveled may be controlled by a passenger and the fare is calculated on the basis of any combination of an initial fee, distance traveled or waiting time;
 
(C) Are operated under a current license or permit issued by a city, county or other unit of local government where a permit or license is required for the operation of a taxicab; and
 
(D) Transport persons or property, or both, between points in Oregon. (2) Vehicles commonly known and used as private passenger vehicles and not operated for compensation except in the transportation of students to or from school.

(3) Penalty Provisions
 
(a) A first citation is punishable by a fine not less than $ 75.00.
 
(b) A second citation within a twelve (12) month period is punishable by a fine not less than $150.00.

(c) A third citation within a twelve (12) month period is punishable by a fine not less than $250.00.

[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 1998-123, July 16, 1998; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-64, April 20, 2000.]

6.375 Bus Stops

(1) Any person operating or in charge of a commercial bus shall stop the commercial bus at street intersections only at places designated by official bus stop signs or, in areas not designated by official signs, at the far side of the street intersections. Such vehicles shall be pulled in as close to the curb as possible and shall not have any part of the vehicle projecting into or over a pedestrian lane, whether the pedestrian lane is marked or unmarked. No part of the vehicle shall project toward or into the main vehicular traffic lane farther than is absolutely necessary; provided, however that nothing herein is intended to prohibit bus stops in moving lanes of traffic where no curb parking is provided and such stop is not otherwise prohibited by applicable laws or regulations.

(2) The stopping of one commercial bus behind another commercial bus which is within a bus zone, or the standing of the same at an angle toward the street curb line, shall constitute a violation of this section. There shall be but one commercial bus stopping at any corner of any intersection at any one time, unless, all such vehicles are wholly within the area of a bus zone as indicated.

[Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 1998-123, July 16, 1998.]

6.380 Parks and Other Public Property

No person shall operate a motor vehicle in or on a city park or city property except on a roadway or other surface clearly marked or designated for motor vehicle traffic or parking. The provisions of this section do not apply to emergency or city maintenance vehicles.

6.390 Emergency Vehicles

No prohibition in this code restricting the time, place and manner of parking shall apply to an emergency vehicle operated by an agent or employee of the city, county, the State of Oregon or its political subdivisions while in the course and scope of his agency or employment.

6.395 City Vehicles

The provisions of this chapter relating to the parking or standing of vehicles upon the public streets and alleys shall not be deemed to apply to a vehicle of the city when and during the time the same shall be in use in connection with maintenance, repair, or construction of streets or alleys or other public purposes.

6.400 Parades

No person shall occupy or proceed along a street in a procession or parade, except a funeral procession, without a current valid parade permit, as provided in Section 2.185.

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2008-146, Aug. 7, 2008.]


6.410 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-146, Aug. 7, 2008.]

 


6.420 Horses and Livestock

No person shall drive, ride or lead a horse or other livestock in any street, public right-of-way, or city park except under the terms of a current valid parade permit as provided in Section 2.185, or except as provided in Sections 8.496 through 8.499.

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 1998-52, March 19, 1998; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2008-146, Aug. 7, 2008.]


6.430 Operation of Bicycles, Skateboards and Scooters

No person shall operate a skateboard, scooter or bicycle on a sidewalk within the area bound by Bear Creek, the north right-of-way of Sixth Street, the west right-of-way of Oakdale Avenue, and the south right-of-way of Tenth Street, except where official signs mark a designated bicycle path. 
[Amd. Ord. No. 2011-188, Oct. 6, 2011.]

6.440 [Repealed, Ord. No. 2010-40, March 4, 2010.]

 


6.450 Bicycle License Issuance

The Police Chief upon receipt of an application and payment of the prescribed tax shall issue a bicycle license to a person if he finds that:

(1) the bicycle has not been reported lost or stolen and not yet recovered; and
 
(2) the applicant provides documentary evidence of ownership of the bicycle.

6.460 Bicycle License Term and Fees

Bicycle licenses shall be valid for a ten year period or as long as an owner keeps a bicycle, whichever comes first.
[Amd. Ord. No. 7244, Nov. 5, 1992; Amd. Ord. No. 7512, Nov. 4, 1993.]

6.500 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8026, Feb. 1, 1996.]


6.510 Overhanging Trees or Shrubs

No person who owns or occupies property adjacent to the public right-of-way shall cause or allow trees or shrubs to overhang the sidewalk by a height of less than 10 feet or the roadway by a height of less than 15 feet or to remain in a condition that presents an unreasonable risk of bodily injury or property damage to persons or property within the right-of-way.

6.520 Sight Obstruction at Intersections

No person who owns or occupies property at the intersection of two or more streets, highways or alleys shall cause or allow the tree, shrub or other vegetation to grow or occupy a space higher than 24 inches above the crown of the adjacent streets, highways or alleys on any property, whether publicly or privately owned, within 50 feet of the intersection of the streets, highways or alleys without prior permission of the Director.
[Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 1999-147, Sept. 17, 1999.]

6.525 Leaf Collection

(1) The City Council consents to and permits the placement of bagged leaves adjacent to the traveled portion of paved city streets from November 1 to December 15 of each calendar year.

(2) The city will at public expense remove bagged leaves during the same time period.

(3) The maximum weight of any single bag filled with leaves is 40 pounds.

(4) Bags of leaves will not be removed from private property.

(5) Leaf bags shall be no more than 30 gallons in capacity, or 33 inches x 39 inches in size, and must be a minimum of 1.2 mil in thickness.

(6) Bags of leaves placed in the public right-of-way for collection must contain leaves only.

(7) No person shall place bags of leaves in the public right-of-way outside of the time period specified in subsection
(1). No person shall place leaves, other vegetation, or other types of debris in the public right-of-way at any time except as permitted by this Code.

[Added Ord. No. 5731, Sept. 18, 1986; Amd. Ord. No. 1998-95; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 1999-147, Sept. 17, 1999.]

6.530 Nuisance Abatement

A violation of section 6.330 to 6.520 is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated summarily by the Director or Chief of Police or in the manner provided in section 5.520.
[Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 1999-147, Sept. 17, 1999.]

6.600 Intent and Purpose of Sections 6.600 to 6.655

The City Council of the City of Medford finds and declares that:
 
(1) The uncontrolled placement of newsracks in public right-of-way presents an inconvenience and danger to the safety and welfare of persons using such rights-of-way, including pedestrians, persons entering and leaving vehicles and buildings, and persons performing essential utility, traffic control and emergency services.
 
(2) Newsracks so located as to cause an inconvenience or danger to persons using public rights-of-way, and unsightly newsracks located therein, constitute public nuisances.
 
(3) It is a matter of public necessity that the City of Medford protect children and unconsenting adults in and on its public streets, sidewalks, transportation facilities and other public rights-of-way from viewing public displays of offensive sexual material. Such displays, thrust indiscriminately upon unwilling audiences of adults and children, constitute assaults upon individual privacy.
 
(4) The provisions and prohibitions contained in Sections 6.600 to 6.655 are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, morals and general welfare of persons in the City of Medford in their use of public rights-of-way.

[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5372, Feb. 21, 1985.]

6.605 Newsracks

Definitions.

(1) Distributor shall mean the person responsible for placing and maintaining a newsrack in a public right-of-way.

(2) Newsrack means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used, or maintained for the display and sale of newspapers or other publications.

(3) Nudity means the showing, with less than a fully opaque covering, of the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anus or anal region of any person, other than a child under the age of puberty, or any portion of the breast at or below the areola thereof of any female person, other than a child under the age of puberty, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.

(4) Offensive means that the work in which the representations appear, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest and patently depicts or portrays the prohibited sexually explicit material in a manner which, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.

(5) Pictorial Material means any material suggesting or conveying a visual image, and includes, but is not limited to, a photograph, painting or drawing.

(6) Parkway means that area between the sidewalks and curb of any street, and where there is no sidewalk that area between the edge of the roadway and property line adjacent thereto. Parkway shall also include any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel.

(7) Roadway means that portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.

(8) Sexually Explicit Material means any pictorial material depicting human sexual intercourse, human or animal masturbation, bestiality, oral intercourse, anal intercourse, human-animal intercourse, excretory functions, homosexual acts, direct physical stimulation or touching of unclothed genitals or pubic areas of the human male or female, flagellation or torture by or upon a person in the context of a sexual relationship or sexual stimulation. The material shall be judged without regard to any covering which may be affixed or printed over the material in order to obscure genital areas in a depiction otherwise falling within the definition of this subsection. Works of art or of anthropological significance are not included within the definition of this subsection.

(9) Sidewalk means any surface provided for the use of pedestrians. (10) Street means all that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks.

[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5372, Feb. 21, 1985; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 1999-147, Sept. 17, 1999.]

6.610 Permit Required

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, place, maintain or operate, on any public street or sidewalk, or in any other public way or place, in the City of Medford any newsrack without first having obtained a permit from the City specifying the exact location of such rack(s). One permit may be issued to include any number of newsracks, and shall be signed by the applicant.
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5372, Feb. 21, 1985.]

6.615 Application for Permit

Application for such permit shall be made in writing, to the City Manager upon such form as shall be provided by him, and shall contain the name and address of the applicant, the proposed specific location of said newsrack, and shall be signed by the applicant.
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5372, Feb. 21, 1985.]

6.620 Conditions for Permit

(1) As an express condition of the acceptance of such permit, the permittee thereby agrees to indemnify and save harmless the City, its officers, directors, and employees against any loss or liability or damage, including expenses and costs for bodily or personal injury, and for property damage sustained by any person as the result of the installation, use, or maintenance of a newsrack within the City of Medford.

(2) Permits shall be issued for the installation of a newsrack or newsracks without prior inspection of the location but such newsrack or newsracks and the installation, use or maintenance thereof shall be conditioned upon observance of the provisions of this Ordinance. Permits shall be issued within seven (7) days after the application has been filed.

(3) Such permits shall be valid for three years and shall be renewable pursuant to the procedure for original applications referred to in Section 6.615. (4) Stickers showing the permit number shall be issued with the permit and must be displayed on the front of each newsrack at all times.

[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5372, Feb. 21, 1985; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 1999-147, Sept. 17, 1999.]

6.625 Standards for Maintenance and Installation

Any newsrack which rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway, shall comply with the following standards:

(1) No newsrack shall exceed five (5) feet in height, thirty (30) inches in width, or two (2) feet in thickness.

(2) No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale, or purchase of the newspaper or other publication sold therein.

(3) Each newsrack shall be equipped with a coin-return mechanism to permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund in the event he is unable to receive the publication paid for. The coin-return mechanisms shall be maintained in good working order.

(4) Each newsrack shall have affixed to it in a readily visible place so as to be seen by anyone using the newsrack a notice setting forth the name and address of the distributor and the telephone number of a working telephone service to call to report a malfunction, or to secure a refund in the event of a malfunction of the coin-return mechanism, or to give the notices provided for in this section.

(5) Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, each newsrack shall be serviced and maintained so that:
 
(a) It is reasonably free of dirt and grease.
 
(b) It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint.
 
(c) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion.
 
(d) The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the publications therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free of cracks, dents, blemishes and discoloration.

(e) The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof are reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading.
 
(f) The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen.

(6) Newsracks shall be designed to be stable under a wind load of at least twenty (20) pounds per square foot without attachment to the pavement or any other object.

[Added - Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5372, Feb. 21, 1985.]

6.627 Display of Offensive Material

It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain any publication or material in newsracks which exposes to public view any pictorial material which depicts or appears to depict nudity or offensive sexually explicit material. Violation of this section is a violation. Each day during which the violation continues shall be a separate offense.
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5372, Feb. 21, 1985; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-54, April 6, 2000.]

6.630 Location and Placement of Newsrack

Any newsrack which rests in whole or in part upon, or on any portion of a public right-of-way or which projects onto, into, or over any part of a public right-of-way shall be located in accordance with the provisions of this Section:

(1) No newsrack shall be used or maintained which projects onto, into, or over any part of the roadway of any public street, or which rests, wholly or in part upon, along, or over any portion of a roadway of any public street.

(2) No newsrack shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway, when such installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property, or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other governmental use, or when such newsrack unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, the ingress into or egress from any legally parked or stopped vehicle, residence or place of business, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, or other objects permitted at or near said location.

(3) No newsrack shall be chained, bolted, or otherwise attached to any fixture or tree located in the public right-of-way, except to other newsracks.

(4) No newsrack may be placed within one hundred (100) feet of any other newsrack on the same side of the street unless they are side-by-side or within a common enclosure which shall not exceed five (5) feet in height, thirty (30) inches in width, or two (2) feet in thickness. A maximum of five unenclosed side-by-side newsracks may be allowed in one location if they meet the other standards of this Section. In case of conflict over location, the first to apply for a permit shall have priority.

(5) No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:

(a) Within three (3) feet of any marked crosswalk.
 
(b) Within twelve (12) feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk.
 
(c) Within five (5) feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility.

(d) Within five (5) feet of any driveway.
 
(e) Within three (3) feet ahead or fifteen (15) feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop.
 
(f) Within three (3) feet of the outer end of any bus bench.
 
(g) At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than six (6) feet.
 
(h) Within three (3) feet of or on any public area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs, trees or other landscaping.
 
(6) The provisions contained in Subsection (e) of this Section shall not apply if compliance with the provisions would prohibit the placement of newsracks for a distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet on the same side of the street in the same block.

(7) Newsracks shall not be located in the public right-of-way in any residential zoning district.

(8) If the City Manager determines that any newsrack interferes with any present or proposed public use of the right-of-way or use by any utility, he may order such newsrack to be removed upon ten days written notice by mail to the permit holder. Failure to comply with such order shall be a violation of this ordinance.

[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5372, Feb. 21, 1985.]

6.635 Violations of Ordinance

Upon determination of the City Manager that a newsrack has been installed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance, except Section 6.627, an order to correct the offending condition will be issued to the distributor of the newsrack. Such order shall be telephoned to the distributor whenever it is practical to do so and confirmed by mailing a copy of the order by certified mail, return receipt requested. The order shall specifically describe the offending condition and suggest actions necessary to correct the condition. Failure to properly correct the offending condition within ten days after mailing of the order shall result in the offending newsrack being summarily removed and processed as unclaimed property. If the offending newsrack is not properly identified as to owner under provisions of Section 6.625(4), it shall be removed immediately and processed as unclaimed property. The City Manager shall cause inspection to be made of the corrected condition or of a newsrack reinstalled after removal under this Section. The distributor of said newsrack shall be charged a $25.00 inspection fee for each newsrack so inspected which charge shall be in addition to all other fees and charges required.
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5372, Feb. 21, 1985; Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 1999-147, Sept. 17, 1999.]

6.640 Appeals

Any person or entity aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice or action taken under the provisions of this Ordinance may appeal to the City Council as provided in Section 1.025 of this Code.
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5372, Feb. 21, 1985.]

6.645 Revocation


In addition to the enforcement procedures provided in Section 6.635 of this Ordinance, it shall be within the power and discretion of the City Manager to suspend or revoke the permit for continued or repeated violation of any provision of this Ordinance or any directive issued pursuant to this Ordinance. Suspension or revocation shall be mandatory for any conviction of a violation of Section 6.627 of this Ordinance. Notice of revocation shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the offending newsrack is not removed within five days after the notice is mailed, it shall be considered abandoned and may be removed immediately by the City and treated as unclaimed property.
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5372, Feb. 21, 1985.]

6.650 Designated Representative

"City Manager" as used in this Ordinance shall include his designated representative(s).
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5372, Feb. 21, 1985.]

6.655 Abandonment

In the event a newsrack remains empty for a period of thirty (30) continuous days, the same shall be deemed abandoned, and may be treated in the manner as provided in Section 6.635 for newsracks in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance.
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5372, Feb. 21, 1985.]

6.700 Intent and Purpose of Sections 6.700 to 6.750

The City Council of the City of Medford finds and declares that:

(1) Trees, as defined, regulated and protected herein, are declared to be a natural public resource; and
 
(2) The provisions and prohibitions contained in Sections 6.700 to 6.750 are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, safety and general welfare of persons in the City of Medford in their use of public property and public rights of way and in the reasonable economic use of private property.

[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8026, Feb. 1, 1996.]

6.705 Definitions

The following terms as used in Sections 6.700 to 6.750 shall mean: Tree - A woody perennial, usually with one main trunk attaining a height of at least six feet at maturity or a trunk diameter of at least two inches, or shrubs when planted in the right of way or so near a right of way as to obstruct or interfere with public use of the right of way. Public Property - Any property belonging to the City of Medford or dedicated to the public use in any manner including public rights of way. Manager - The City Manager of the City of Medford or his authorized designee. [Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8026, Feb. 1, 1996.]

6.710 Adopted Standards

(1) Standards governing the planting, maintenance and removal of trees on public and private property shall be adopted by the Manager and amended as the need arises. These standards shall be filed with the City Arborist.

(2) The standards shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

(a) Acceptable tree species, varieties and cultivars with information on the appropriate placement of each.

(b) Height clearances over streets, sidewalks or other parts of public rights of way.

(c) Clearances for sewers, storm drains, curbs, sidewalks, streets, driveway aprons, signs, fire hydrants, water meters, overhead utility lines and similar equipment.

(3) Violation of any adopted standard is a violation.

[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8026, Feb. 1, 1996; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-54, April 6, 2000; Amd. Ord. No. 2009-162, July 16, 2009.]


6.715 Certain Trees Prohibited

No person shall plant on any public property the following trees: poplar, willow, conifer, cottonwood, fruit tree, nut tree or ailanthus, except that tree species commonly found in riparian areas and wetlands, including but not limited to poplar and willow, may be planted in riparian areas and wetlands if part of approved restoration or enhancement plans. No person shall plant willow, cottonwood or poplar trees anywhere in the City unless the City Manager approves the site as one upon which the tree roots will not interfere with a public sewer or private lateral.
[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8026, Feb. 1, 1996; Amd. Ord. No. 1999-216, June 1, 2000.]

6.720 Damaging or Destroying Trees on Public Property; Violation

With regard to any tree on public property, except as provided in the adopted standards and these sections, no person shall:

(1) Break, injure, mutilate, burn, kill, remove or destroy any tree;
(2) Permit any leak to exist in any gas pipe or main within the root zone of any tree;
(3) Permit any toxic chemical, solid or liquid, to pass, drain or be emptied on or about any tree;
(4) Permit any wire designed to carry electrical current to be attached to any tree;
(5) Excavate any tunnel, ditch or trench, or lay any driveway, sidewalk or pavement through or across the root zone of any tree;
(6) Attach any wire, rope, cable, poster, sign or nail or other fastener to any tree;
(7) Place, deposit or store any stone, brick, sand, earth or other material as to damage any tree that is maintained in accordance with the adopted standards;
(8) Move any building or other large object along any street in such a manner as to damage any tree that is maintained in accordance with the adopted standards;
(9) Prevent, delay or interfere with the Manager or his agents in the planting, maintenance or removal of any tree.

[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8026, Feb. 1, 1996.]

6.725 Permit Required

(1) No person other than a city department employee shall plant, prune, root prune, remove, cut above ground, or otherwise disturb any tree on public property without prior written permission of the Parks and Recreation Director. The person obtaining the permit shall abide by the adopted standards.

(2) The permit application shall include the following information: A site or plat drawing showing the number of trees to be planted, pruned or removed; location, grade, species, cultivar or variety of trees to be planted or pruned; reason for pruning or removal; method of planting or maintenance; and other information to enable the Manager to assure compliance with the adopted standards.

(3) The permit is free and is valid for 90 days from the date of issuance.

(4) Any person removing a tree must also remove the stump to a depth of six inches below ground level.

(5) Any tree removed must be replaced. All replacement trees shall be a minimum of 1-3/4" caliper in size. All replacement trees must be chosen from a list of designated street trees provided by the city.

(6) Whenever any tree is planted or maintained contrary to the provisions of Sections 6.700 to 6.750, the Manager may remove or maintain the tree in accordance with the adopted standards. Any cost to the City of such removal or maintenance shall be assessed to the owner of abutting property or other person who failed to comply with the requirements of these sections. The Manager may revoke any permit for any violation of the provisions of Section 6.700 to 6.750.

[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8026, Feb. 1, 1996.]

6.730 Owners to Maintain Landscaping in Right-of-Way

(1) The owners of property abutting streets other than arterial and collector streets in residential zoning districts within the City shall be responsible for the care and maintenance, including trimming, pruning and spraying of trees and shrubs or other landscaping located on the public right of way and for repairing damage done to a street, sidewalk or curb by the roots of any tree or shrub located on the public right of way adjacent to the private real property owned by the property owner.  No material shall be used in the public right-of-way which may be washed off any landscaped area and interfere with drainage in gutters or storm drain pipes.  Bark mulch applied within public right-of-way medians or planter strips shall be of shredded texture.  Bark nuggets or chips shall not be applied.

(2) All owners of property within the City shall be responsible for the following:

(a) Trimming, pruning and spraying trees on private property that overhang a public right of way.

(b) Repairing damage done to a street, sidewalk or curb by the roots of any tree or shrub on private property.

(c) Removing trees and shrubs on private property that have been declared a public nuisance.

(d)  Maintenance of all vegetation within the right-of-way abutting the property.

(3) If any property owner by the owner's neglect to perform any duty required by this section causes injury or damage to any person or property, that owner shall be liable to the person suffering such injury or damage and shall indemnify the City for all damages the City has been compelled to pay in such case. Such damages may be collected in a civil action against the property owner.

(4) Maintenance required by this section shall be done in accordance with the adopted standards and permit requirements.

(5) The person working on trees or landscaping on public property shall be responsible for removing all debris from the site by sunset of the same day.

[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8026, Feb. 1, 1996; Amd. Ord. No. 2003-293, Nov. 20, 2003; Amd. Ord. No. 2004-20, Feb. 5, 2004; Amd. Ord. No. 2013-83, June 6, 2013.]


6.735 Removal of Trees

(1) Whenever it is necessary, the City may remove a tree from public property in connection with the improvement or widening of a street.

(2) For reasons other than street improvement, abutting property owners shall remove a tree from a public right of way upon order of the City in the following cases:

(a) Trees which pose a safety hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic or threaten or cause a disruption to public utilities service;
 
(b) Trees which pose a safety hazard to structures;
 
(c) Trees which prevent entering or exiting a lot or parcel of property;
 
(d) Trees which prevent the development of a lot or parcel, or the physical use thereof;
 
(e) Disease or pest infested trees which are a hazard to people, structures, improvements
or other trees;
 
(f) Trees which are so weakened or damaged by age, storm, fire, ice or other injury as to cause a danger to people or property;
 
(g) Dead trees and tree stumps;
 
(h) Trees or the roots of which interfere with or cause the surface of a street, sidewalk or curb in the public right of way to be up heaved or otherwise disturbed.

(3) The Manager may require the abutting property owner to replace any trees removed under this section.

(4) All trees located on private property that have an infestation of pests, insects or their eggs or larvae which may be spread; or that are infected by disease which may be spread; or that overhang a public right of way so as to constitute a sight hazard or danger to pedestrians or vehicles; or interfere with the public use of the right of way are declared a public nuisance and shall be removed by the owner of the private property when so ordered by the City. [Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8026, Feb. 1, 1996.]

6.745 Pruning of Trees by Public Utilities

A public utility may prune a tree in a public right of way if a tree endangers or otherwise interferes with the provision of a public utility service. Such pruning shall be done in accordance with the adopted standards. No less than five working days prior to pruning, except in emergency cases caused by accident, storm or other unforeseen event, the public utility shall notify the Manager and abutting property owners of the intent to prune.
[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8026, Feb. 1, 1996.]

6.750 Appeal

(1) If the Manager refuses to issue a permit or revokes a permit, the applicant may appeal to the council as provided in Section 1.025 of the Medford Code.

(2) The Manager's decision shall not be reversed or modified unless it was contrary to the provisions of these sections or the adopted standards.
[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8026, Feb. 1, 1996.]

6.800 [Repealed Ord. No. 2000-56, April 6, 2000.]


6.805 [Repealed Ord. No. 2000-56, April 6, 2000.]


6.810 [Repealed Ord. No. 2000-56, April 6, 2000.]


6.815 [Repealed Ord. No. 2000-56, April 6, 2000.]


6.820 [Repealed Ord. No. 2000-56, April 6, 2000.]


6.825 [Repealed Ord. No. 2000-56, April 6, 2000.]


6.830 [Repealed Ord. No. 2000-56, April 6, 2000.]


6.835 Inventory

Any police officer who causes a vehicle to be impounded pursuant to Oregon Revised Statutes or the Medford Code shall conduct an inventory of the vehicle prior to releasing the vehicle to the tow truck company.
[Added, Ord. No. 8216, Oct. 17, 1996.]

6.900 Identity of Violator in Parking Offense

A registered owner of a vehicle parked or left in violation of section 6.330 to 6.390 shall be presumed to be the person who parked or left the vehicle unless the citing officer observes and apprehends the vehicle operator at the time of the violation or unless the contrary is established by competent evidence.

6.910 Service of Parking Citations

Service of a citation for violation of Section 6.330 to 6.390 shall be effective by placing the citation in plain view on the vehicle.

6.915 Additional Overtime Parking Citations

Additional citations for overtime parking may be issued if a period equal to the time limit has elapsed since the previous citation was issued and the vehicle remains in the same space or in another time limited space within the same square block.
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5661, May 1, 1986; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2003-27, Feb. 6, 2003 - effective March 1, 2003.]

6.920 Form of Parking Citation

A parking citation may be in the form prescribed in ORS 221.340.

6.925 [Repealed Sec. 1, Ord. No. 1999-109, July 15, 1999].


6.930 Penalties - Generally

(1) Except as otherwise provided herein, violation of any provision of chapter 6 of this code shall be a violation. Every day in which the violation is caused or permitted to exist constitutes a separate violation. The violation penalty is in addition to any other penalty, interest, or charge imposed by this code.

(2) When all or part of a section or provision of Chapter 6, Code of Medford, is repealed by Ordinance No. 5109, the code provision repealed remains in force for the purpose of collecting delinquent taxes or imposing penalties for non-payment of taxes due and owing for fiscal 1983-84 and prior years and for the purpose of authorizing the accusation, prosecution, conviction and punishment of a person who violated the code provision before the effective date of the repealing ordinance.

(3) A violation of Sections 6.710 through 6.745 is a violation and is punishable by a fine not exceeding $750.

[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5661, May 1, 1986; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8115, June 20, 1996; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-54, April 6, 2000.]

6.940 Penalties for Certain Parking Violations

(1) Violations of Sections 6.330, 6.331 and Parking Regulations shall be punishable as follows:

(a) By a fine of $25.00.

(b) By a fine of $50.00 if violator has received a citation within the previous thirty (30) days.

(c)  All fines are payable within thirty (30) days from the date of citation issuance.  Fines remaining unpaid after thirty (30) days shall increase to twice the original amount.

 

(2) If the prescribed fine is not paid within the first thirty days, the city shall mail a notice by regular first class mail notifying the registered owner of the cited motor vehicle of the amount owed the city. If the prescribed fine is not paid within thirty days of notice, the account shall be sent to collections.

(3) The fine shall be paid to the city or its designee as indicated on the citation.  A Customer Parking citation voucher may constitute payment of fine. 

(4) The time for payment as provided herein shall be calculated by excluding the day the citation is issued and including the last day unless the last day falls upon any legal holiday (including city holidays), Saturday or Sunday, in which case payment may be made on the next succeeding business day without additional penalty.

[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 5390, Apr. 4, 1985 - effective midnight, June 30, 1985; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 5661, May 1, 1986; Amd. Ord. No. 6222, Nov. 3, 1988 - (1)(a) is effective Jan. 1, 1989; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 1999-109, July 15, 1999; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-54, April 6, 2000; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2001-145, Aug. 2, 2001, effective Jan. 1, 2002; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2003-160, June 5, 2003 - effective July 1, 2003; Amd. Ord. No. 2007-198, Sept. 20, 2007 - effective Oct. 1, 2007; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2011-175, Sept. 1, 2011, Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2019-89, Aug. 1, 2019.]


6.945 Parking Citation Appeal

The violator has the right to appeal the citation.  The appeal procedure shall be outlined on the citation.  Appeals must be submitted in writing within thirty (30) days of issuance of the citation.  Appeals shall be heard by the Medford Municipal Court.

[Added, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2011-175, Sept. 1, 2011.]

6.950 Immobilizer (Boot) Installation

(1) When a driver, registered owner, or person in charge of a motor vehicle has accumulated $150 in outstanding parking fines on any number of motor vehicles, any police or parking enforcement officer of the city is directed to immobilize that person's motor vehicle or vehicles found upon a public street or city off-street parking lot by installing on or attaching to the motor vehicle a device designed to restrict the normal movement of the vehicle.

(2) For purposes of this section, fine shall be outstanding on a citation when the citation is issued and shall remain outstanding until the fine is paid.

(3) Ten days before immobilizing a vehicle according to the provisions of this section, the city shall place a notice on the vehicle and mail a notice by regular first class mail to the registered owner of such vehicle as shown by the records of the Oregon Motor Vehicles Division notifying the owner that the motor vehicle or vehicles may be immobilized ten days after the placement of notice on vehicle and date of mailing the notice herein for failure to pay outstanding parking fines.  Where vehicle ownership information is not available through Oregon Motor Vehicles Divsion, the city is not required to mail the notice described herein, and posting shall be sufficient.

(4) If the vehicle is so immobilized, the person who installs or attaches the device shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a written notice on a form approved by the city, advising the owner, driver, or person in charge of the vehicle that it has been immobilized by the city pursuant to this section and that release of the vehicle may be obtained upon receipt by the Medford Municipal Court of full payment of the outstanding balance owed. Payment must be submitted via cash, credit/debit card, money order, or cashier's check. Personal checks will not be accepted by the city.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5390, Apr. 4, 1985 - effective midnight, June 30, 1985; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 1999-109, July 15, 1999; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2001-145, Aug. 2, 2001, effective Jan. 1, 2002; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2011-175, Sept. 1, 2011; Amd. Ord. No. 2012-181, Dec. 6, 2012.]

6.960 Immobilizer Removal

(1) No person other than an officer or agent of the city may remove or attempt to remove the device, or move or attempt to move the vehicle, before it is released by the city in accordance with this section.

(2) Violation of subsection (1) of this section constitutes a crime.

(3) The registered owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for payment for damages to the device, in addition to any fine imposed pursuant to this section.

(4) A vehicle shall be released and the temporary immobilization device removed when the registered owner, operator or person in charge of the vehicle:
 
(a) Posts bail and pays all fines and bail in cash for parking citations issued against the vehicle, its operator or owner; or
 
(b) Presents clear and convincing information to the city that the present owner of the vehicle did not own the immobilized vehicle at the time the parking citations were issued.
 
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5390, Apr. 4, 1985 - effective midnight, June 30, 1985; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 1999-109, July 15, 1999.]

6.970 Immobilizer - Fees.

(1) When a motor vehicle is immobilized in accordance with section 6.950, a fee shall be charged by the city, in addition to all other amounts for which lack of payment has led to the immobilization of the vehicle. The boot removal fee during normal business hours shall be $150.00.  Normal business hours are defined as 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, except for city observed holidays.  The boot removal fee after normal business hours shall be $250.00.  After normal business hours are defined as between the hours of 5:01 p.m. and 7:59 a.m. Monday through Friday and 24 hours a day on weekends and city observed holidays.  The fee and all other amounts shall be paid before the vehicle is released.

(2) The parking restrictions of the city shall not apply to a vehicle so immobilized.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5390, Apr. 4, 1985 - effective midnight, June 30, 1985; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 1999-109, July 15, 1999; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2001-145, Aug. 2, 2001, effective Jan. 1, 2002; Amd. Ord. No. 2005-205, Sept. 15, 2005; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2011-175, Sept. 1, 2011.]


6.972 Impoundment of Vehicles

(1) A motor vehicle still immobilized at 5:00 p.m. on the following day may be taken into custody and impounded. Under the direction of a police officer or agent of the city, the vehicle may be taken to a city facility for storing vehicles or to some reputable motor vehicle storage facility and kept there until it is released or sold.

(2) The city employee or agent directing the impoundment shall determine if the vehicle exceeds $750 in value at the time the vehicle is impounded.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5390, Apr. 4, 1985 - effective midnight June 30, 1985; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 1999-109, July 15, 1999.]

6.974 Towing and Storage Charges, Release of Vehicles

(1) Any private company which tows and stores any vehicle pursuant to section 6.972 shall have a lien on the vehicle in accordance with ORS 87.152 for the just and reasonable charges for the tow and storage services performed, and may retain possession of that vehicle until such charges have been paid.

(2) A vehicle towed pursuant to section 6.972 may only be released to the registered owner or other person having a financial interest in the vehicle as shown by the records of the Oregon Motor Vehicle Division, or to a person who purchased the vehicle from the registered owner and who produces written proof of ownership to the municipal court.

(3) A person entitled to such lawful possession of the vehicle may secure the release of the vehicle upon posting bail and paying outstanding fines and immobilization fees for parking offenses in cash to the municipal court and upon paying tow and storage fees to the person having custody of the vehicle.

(4) If subsection (3) above has not been complied with, then the vehicle shall not be released, except upon order of the municipal court judge.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5390, Apr. 4, 1985 - effective midnight, June 30, 1985.]

6.976 Notice to Interested Persons of Vehicle Towing

(1) After a vehicle has been towed pursuant to section 6.972, notice shall be sent by regular first class mail to the registered owner or other persons having an interest in the vehicle as shown by the records of the Oregon Motor Vehicle Division, of the towing and procedures available for obtaining a hearing, by mailing such notice within 48 hours after the towing, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. If the vehicle is registered in another state or foreign country, reasonable efforts shall be made to notify the registered owner and persons having an interest in the vehicle.

(2) Notice required by this section shall state:
 
(a) The name and telephone number of the city department issuing the notice and how the department may be contacted;
 
(b) The description of the vehicle and the reason it was impounded including a reference to the sections of this code violated and authorizing the impoundment.
 
(c) The place where the vehicle is stored and that the towing and storing of the vehicle is at the owner's expense;
 
(d) Where any person may assert his or her claim of financial interest in the vehicle so long as it is done within 15 days of the date of the notice if the vehicle is valued at $750 or less, or within 30 days of the date of the notice if the vehicle is valued at over $750, and that a failure to do so will constitute a waiver of any financial interest that person may claim in the vehicle;

(e) How any interested person may secure the release of the vehicle upon posting bail and paying outstanding fines and immobilization fees for parking offenses in cash to municipal court and upon paying tow and storage fees to the person having custody of the vehicle;

(f) The vehicle may be sold or junked if it is not redeemed;

(g) Any person securing release of the vehicle may challenge the creation and amount of the tow and storage charges at the time and place set for the hearing pursuant to this section; and

(h) That a hearing on the validity of the tow and storage charges must be submitted in writing to the municipal court within fourteen days of the date of the notice herein.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5390, Apr. 4, 1985 - effective midnight, June 30, 1985.]

6.978 Publication of Notice

(1) Notice required by section 6.976 shall also be posted in a public place at or near the front doors of the Jackson County Justice Building and Medford City Hall.

(2) If the vehicle exceeds $1,000 in value, notice shall be sent by certified mail as provided in section 6.976 and published once a week for two consecutive weeks in a daily newspaper of general circulation a summary description of the vehicle, its location at the time of impoundment and who to contact for further information.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5390, Apr. 4, 1985 - effective midnight, June 30, 1985.]

6.980 Hearing

(1) The owner or other person entitled to lawful possession of an immobilized or towed vehicle shall have the right to a hearing to determine the validity of such immobilization or towing.

(2) The hearing request must be submitted in writing to the municipal court within fourteen days after the vehicle is immobilized.

(3) The hearing shall be conducted by the municipal court judge within fourteen days of receipt of a proper request filed pursuant to this section; provided however, that in all cases where a vehicle has been towed and not yet released at the time the request is filed, the municipal court shall set and conduct the hearing within 72 hours of receipt of the hearing request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.

(4) The hearing shall afford a reasonable opportunity for the person requesting it to demonstrate by the statements of witnesses and other evidence that the immobilization, tow and storage of the vehicle was invalid or unjustified. The hearing shall not be determinative of or adjudicate any parking citation issued relative to any immobilized vehicle.

(5) If the municipal court finds, by substantial evidence, that the immobilization, tow and/or storage was for any reason unjustified, he shall order that the vehicle, if still held, be immediately released, that the owner or any other person who has a financial interest in the vehicle are not liable for the immobilization fee, tow and storage charges, and order the return of any money paid for immobilization fee, tow and storage charges to the person who paid such charges. In any case, where the municipal court orders the vehicle to be released, the vehicle must be picked up by the person entitled to possession within twenty-four hours to avoid further storage charges. If the vehicle is not claimed within this time period, then it will not be released until the additionally accruing charges, if any, are paid by the person entitled to possession of the vehicle.

(6) If the municipal court finds by substantial evidence that the immobilization fee, tow and/or storage charges are justified, he shall order that the vehicle, if still held, continue to be held until all bail, fines, immobilization fees, tow and storage charges are paid. The vehicle must be picked up by the person entitled to possession within twenty-four hours after the decision of the municipal court to avoid further storage charges. If the vehicle is not claimed within this time period, then it will not be released until the additionally accruing charges are paid by the person entitled to possession of the vehicle.

(7) Any person who has a hearing scheduled pursuant to this section and without good cause shown, as determined by the municipal court, fails to appear at such hearing, shall not be entitled to have such hearing rescheduled.

(8) The owner and any other person who has an interest in the vehicle shall only be entitled to one hearing for each immobilization and tow of that vehicle. (9) The determination of the municipal court is final and is not subject to appeal.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5390, Apr. 4, 1985 - effective midnight, June 30, 1985.]

6.982 Right to Sell Towed Vehicles

(1) Whenever any vehicle shall be taken into custody pursuant to section 6.972, it shall be held at the expense and risk of the owner or person lawfully entitled to possession.

(2) At any time within thirty days after any such notice as required by section 6.976 has been sent, the owner or person lawfully entitled to possession of the vehicle may claim the vehicle by presenting satisfactory proof of ownership or right to possession to the municipal court and by paying costs of publication of notice and the amounts due under section 6.974(3).

(3) The vehicle shall not be released from any storage facility, except upon a written order from the municipal court.

(4) Any vehicle which has been in storage for more than 30 days after the notice required by section 6.976 may be sold at public auction as the city manager or his designate may from time to time direct.

(5) At the time of the sale, a certificate of sale in substantially the following form shall be issued to the purchaser: "CERTIFICATE OF SALE This is to certify that under the provisions of the Medford Code and pursuant to due notice of time and place of sale I did on the ____ day of _________________, 19__ for the sum of $_________________ cash, (s)he being the highest bidder, and that being the highest sum bid therefor, sell the following described personal property: (Brief description of property) and in consideration of the payment of said sum of $_______, receipt of which is hereby acknowledged, I have this day delivered to said purchaser the foregoing property. Dated this _____ day of ______________, 19___. _________________________ Office NOTE: The City of Medford assumes no responsibility as to condition or Title of the above-described property. In case this sale shall for any reason be invalid, the liability of the City is limited to return of the purchase price." (6) The original certificate of sale shall be delivered to the purchaser and one copy shall be filed with the City Recorder. (7) Notice of the time and place of such public auction sale shall be given by publication in a daily paper of general circulation ten days prior to the date of such sale, and that such vehicles shall be sold to the highest bidder for cash. The proceeds of such sale shall be first applied to payment of the costs of such sale and expense incurred in the preservation and custody of such vehicles, next to the parking fines and immobilization fee incurred by such vehicle and the balance, if any, shall be credited to the general fund of the City.

[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5390, Apr. 4, 1985 - effective midnight, June 30, 1985.]

6.984 Sale of Abandoned Vehicles

(1) If a vehicle appraised at a value of $750 or less and taken into custody under the provisions of ORS 819.110, 819.120 or 819.130 is not reclaimed within 30 days after it is taken into custody, the City may sell the vehicle to the towing company which is storing the vehicle. The sale shall be without public auction and the sale price shall be the total amount of towing and storage fees incurred to the date of the sale.

(2) The contents of any vehicle sold under this section are subject to the same conditions of sale as the vehicle in which they are found.

(3) Funds received from the sale of a vehicle or its contents under this section shall be credited first to any costs incurred in the sale, then to any costs and expenses incurred in the removal, preservation and custody of the vehicle, and then to the general fund of the City.

(4) Upon sale of a vehicle under this section, a certificate of sale in substantially the following form shall be issued to the purchaser. The original certificate of sale shall be delivered to the purchaser and one copy shall be filed with the city Recorder: "CERTIFICATE OF SALE This is to certify that under the provisions of Section 6.984 of the Code of Medford, I did on the _____ day of ______________, 19___ sell to _________________________ of _________________________ for the consideration of _______________ Dollars ($__________) the following described personal property: (Brief description of vehicle) and in consideration of said sum, receipt of which is hereby acknowledged, I have this day delivered to said purchaser the property described above. Dated this _____ day of ______________, 19___. ______________________________ Chief of Police NOTE: The City of Medford assumes no responsibility as to the condition or Title of the above described property. In case this sale shall for any reason be invalid, the liability of the City is limited to return of the purchase price."

[Added Ord. No. 6687, August 2, 1990.]

7 Public Protection


7 Fire Code (7.001 to 7.030)

7.001 Uncontrolled Weeds and Grass - Purpose and Scope [Renumbered to Section 7.410]

[Renumbered to Section 7.410, Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2009-91, May 7, 2009.]


7.002 Definitions [Renumbered to Section 7.420]

[Renumbered to Section 7.420, Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2009-91, May 7, 2009.]


7.003 Nuisance Described; Offense Punishable [Renumbered to Section 7.430]

[Renumbered to Section 7.430, Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2009-91, May 7, 2009.]


7.004 Notice and Abatement Proceedings [Renumbered to Section 7.440]

[Renumbered to Section 7.440, Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2009-91, May 7, 2009.]


7.010 2019 Oregon Fire Code as Modified Adopted by Reference

 There is hereby adopted, and made an ordinance of this City, that certain Code and Standards known as the "Oregon Fire Code" published by the International Code Council, specifically the 2019 edition thereof, as amended by the State of Oregon, and including those Appendices set forth in Section 101.2.1 of the "Oregon Fire Code", subject to the modifications and deletions set forth in Sections 7.015 through 7.023 of the Medford Municipal Code. A link to a viewable copy of the Oregon Fire Code shall be maintained on the City’s website for reference.
 [Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5435, May 2, 1985; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7395, June 3, 1993; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 8271. Feb. 6, 1997; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2005-58, Apr. 7, 2005; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2009-91, May 7, 2009; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2011-69, Apr. 21, 2011; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2014-148, Dec. 4, 2014; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2020-43, Apr 2, 2020.]
 

7.015 Establishment and Duties of the Fire & Life Safety Division (FLSD)

A Fire & Life Safety Division is established within the fire department under the direction of the fire chief.  The Fire & Life Safety Division shall be under the supervision of the fire marshal.

[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2014-148, Dec. 4, 2014.]

7.017 Definitions

(1)  Wherever the word "jurisdiction" is used in the Oregon Fire Code, it shall mean the City of Medford.

(2)  Wildfire Risk Area:  The wildfire risk area defined in the Oregon Fire Code shall be equivalent to Jackson County's defined wildfire hazard area/zone.

[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2009-91, May 7, 2009; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2011-69, Apr. 21, 2011; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2020-43, Apr. 2, 2020.]


7.018 [Repealed, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2020-43, Apr. 2, 2020]

.

7.019 [Repealed, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2020-043, Apr. 2, 2020]

. 

7.020 [Repealed, Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2020-43, Apr. 2, 2020]

.

7.021 Section 7.021 is repealed

[Sec. 4, Ord. No. 7395, June 3, 1993.]

7.022 The Use of All Types of Fireworks in this Jurisdiction are Prohibited within the Wildfire Hazard Zone, the Bear Creek Greenway, any City Park, and any Public School. The Retail Sales of Fireworks are Prohibited within this Jurisdiction.

All Types of Fireworks Prohibited. The Use of All Types of Fireworks in this Jurisdiction are Prohibited within the Wildfire Hazard Zone, the Bear Creek Greenway, any City Park, and any Public School.  The Retail Sales of Fireworks are Prohibited within this Jurisdiction.
(1)  To offer for sale, expose for sale, or sell at retail any fireworks within this jurisdiction is specifically prohibited.
(2) To use or explode any fireworks within the wildfire hazard zone, the Bear Creek Greenway, any city park, or any public school within this jurisdiction is specifically prohibited.
 
EXCEPTION:
The use of fireworks for display is allowed as set forth in Sections 7.023 (17-18) and 7.023 (23) of the Medford Code in conformance with NFPA 1123 “Code for Fireworks Display”, 2018 edition. 
[Added, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5435, May 2, 1985; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 7395, June 3, 1993; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 8271, Feb. 6, 1997; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2005-58, Apr. 7, 2005; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2009-91, May 7, 2009; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2014-148, Dec. 4, 2014, Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2019-31, May 2, 2019; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2020-43, Apr. 2, 2020.]


7.023 Modifications to the Oregon Fire Code 2019 Edition, as adopted by the State of Oregon

 The Oregon Fire Code is modified as follows:
(1) Section 102.7 is amended by adding the following language:
Section 319 Mobile Food Preparation Vehicles of the 2018 ICC International Fire Code is adopted.
(2) Section 104.6.3 is amended by adding the following language:  
Fire Investigation Reports for fires that are under investigation will not be released until the investigation is complete. Exception: The Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee may release incomplete Fire Investigation Reports.
 (3) Section 105.1.1 is amended by adding the following language:
A Fire Department Permit and Services Fee Schedule listing fees not more than the actual or average cost of providing the service shall be established by ordinance and periodically amended by ordinance of the City Council and kept on file in the Fire Department and the City Recorder's office. Required permits include, but may not be limited to, those listed on the Fire Department Permit and Services Fee Schedule.       
 
(4) Section 106.2 is amended by adding the following language:
            (a)  Inspections outside of normal business hours:  The Fire & Life Safety Division will make every attempt to conduct inspections during the Fire & Life Safety Division's normal business hours.  If the applicant or business owner's agent requests an inspection time other than the City's normal business hours, or if the fire code official determines a permit inspection is required and there is no other alternative but to conduct the inspection at a time other than the City's normal business hours, the fire  code official shall inform the applicant or business owner's agent that there will be an additional inspection fee as set forth in the Fire Department Permit and Services Fee Schedule.  The inspection will not be performed until the fees have been paid.  
(b)  Re-inspections. A re-inspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or re-inspection after the second site visit when such portion of work for which inspections is requested is not complete or when corrections called for are not made. To obtain a re-inspection, the applicant shall file an application therefore in writing on a form furnished for that purpose and pay the re-inspection fee as set forth in the Fire Department Permit and Services Fee Schedule. In instances where re-inspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been paid.
(5) Section 109.1 is amended by adding the following language:  
Refer to Medford Code Section 7.910.
(6) Section 110.3 is amended by adding the following language: 
Violations.
(A) Any person who violates any of the provisions of the Oregon Fire Code as adopted and amended herein or fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to comply with any order made there under, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved there under, or any certificate or permit issued there under, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such order as affirmed and modified by the regional appeals advisory board or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the required time, shall severally for each and every violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a penalty as provided by the City Code (Refer to Section 7.900). The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violations or defects within a reasonable time; and not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
(B) The application of the above penalty is in addition to other remedies available to the City including but not limited to the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(C) Due consideration to the appropriateness of the penalty with respect to the gravity of the violation, the good faith of the person being charged, the history of previous violations shall be given whenever an infraction penalty is assessed under this section.
(D) The Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee shall have the authority to issue infraction penalties.
(7) Section 307 is amended by adding the following language: 
Refer to Medford Code Section 5.550.
 (8) Section 503.4 is amended by adding the following language:
Fire department emergency access obstructions on existing streets and fire lanes. The Fire Chief of or the Fire Chief’s designee shall have the authority to impose parking restrictions on existing streets or fire lanes that provide less than 20 feet width of unobstructed access. The Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee may require that the street or a portion of the street or fire lane be posted with public street No Parking signs or private street/property No Parking-Fire Lane signs/marking if any of the following conditions apply:
(a) Site –specific conditions, parking of vehicles, or inadequate turning radius have rendered the travel lanes inadequate for emergency operations and fire department access.
(b) Actual emergency response experience indicates that emergency vehicles cannot effectively provide emergency service.
Approval of the Public Works Director (or designee) shall be obtained for the layout, design and installation of parking restrictions on public streets. Fire Department approval shall be obtained for the layout, design, and installation of No Parking – Fire Lane signs along private streets, private easements, and fire lanes.  
The Medford Police Department shall have the authority to issue fire code citations for the following offenses on public and private properties:
            (a)  Obstruction of marked fire apparatus access roads and fire lanes (Ref. OFC 503.4; OFC            
            503.2.1).
            (b)  Failure to maintain existing No Parking or NO PARKING – FIRE LANE signs/marking        (Ref.  
            OFC 503.3; OFC D103.6).
            (c)  Obstruction of fire hydrants and fire protection equipment (Ref. OFC 507.5.4; ORS   811.550(16).
(9) Section 507.5 and Appendix C is amended by adding the following language:
The fire code official may be guided by fire hydrant spacing listed in Table C102.1 but generally will utilize a standard of 250 feet (narrow streets – see Medford Code section 10.430) to 500 (Standard residential streets) feet between fire hydrants in low density residential zones and 300 feet between fire hydrants in high density residential and commercial/industrial zones. For streets classified as Major Arterial, Minor Arterial, Major Collector and some Minor Collector streets where the Minor Collector may be re-classified as a Major or Minor Collector or a Major Arterial street, hydrants may be required to be located on each side of the street to meet a hydrant density of 300 or 500 feet on each side of the street. Increased hydrant density may be required by the fire code official.
(10) Section 903.2.11.1.3 is amended by adding the following language:
Sprinklers Required in Basements.
(a) DEFINITIONS.  For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply:
"Basement" shall mean any story, any portion of which is below the building grade of the building, or a cellar or subcellar. 
"Building grade" shall mean the average of the finished ground level or a sidewalk level at and adjoining the exterior walls of the building.
"Story" shall mean all that portion of the building within the exterior walls thereof, included between the upper surface of any floor and lower surface or bottom of the floor structure next above. 
(b) SCOPE.  This sec)ion shall apply only to buildings devoted wholly or in part to the following uses:  business and professional offices; hotels, apartments, motels and like purposes; industrial manufacturing; commercial, or professional enterprises; or any use or operation where the public is expressly or indirectly invited to come upon the premises or any part thereof to transact business, to meet or congregate, or for care or treatment.  The requirements of subsection (b) of this section shall apply to a building that is existing at the time of the enactment of this ordinance, only if such building is hereinafter substantially remodeled or structurally altered, or if there is hereafter a change of use of the basement in the building whereby the public is thereafter expressly or indirectly invited to enter the basement for the purpose of transacting business therein.  This section shall not be construed as excusing or suspending for any period any requirement otherwise imposed by any other section or provision of the Oregon Fire Code.
(11)  Section 901.6.3 is amended by adding the following language: Records of all fire protection system inspections, tests, and maintenance required by the referenced standards shall be maintained on the premises for the life of the installation and service contractors shall submit the service reports, in a manner specified by the Fire Marshal, to Medford Fire-Rescue's Fire & Life Safety Division within 30 days of performing the inspection and test. 
(12) Section 904.1.1 is amended by adding the following language: Fire protection systems service providers providing inspections, tests, and maintenance required by OFC 901.6 and the referenced standards shall be qualified and shall provide the inspections, tests, and maintenance in accordance with the referenced standards. Where a manufacturer requires only manufacturer certified technicians to conduct inspection, testing and maintenance service on their engineered fire protection system, uncertified technicians shall not service the system. Prior to servicing the system, the service company performing the work shall submit a copy of the current manufacturer's certification in the manner specified by the Fire Marshal, to Medford Fire-Rescue's Fire & Life Safety Division to keep on file.
(13) Section 1101.4 is amended by adding the following language:
When a building is found to be in noncompliance with this chapter, the fire code official shall apply all of the actions found in the Section 110 which may include notification to the owner, the owner’s authorized agent, operator, or other person responsible for the noncompliance of the building. Upon receipt of such notice, the owner, the owner’s authorized agent, operator, or other person responsible for the noncompliance shall, subject to the following time limits, take necessary actions to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(14) Section 5001 is amended by adding the following language:
The manufacture and storage of the following materials is prohibited within this jurisdiction, unless approved by the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee.
(1) Unclassified detonable or Class I Organic Peroxides
(2) Class 4 oxidizers
(3) Class 3 and Class 4 Unstable reactives
 (15)  Section 5601 is amended by adding the following language:
The manufacture of fireworks within this jurisdiction is prohibited.
(16) Section 5601.1.3 is amended by adding the following language:
The provisions of the Oregon Fireworks Law, as set forth in Chapter 480 of the Oregon Revised Statutes, are adopted and incorporated herein by reference.

Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to store, use, offer                   for sale, expose for sale, or sell at retail any fireworks within this jurisdiction. The storage, use, offer for sale, exposition for sale, and sale of retail fireworks within the City of Medford is permitted from July 1 to July 6.  Refer to Medford Code 7.023 Sections 17-18 and 23 for permitted public displays. Refer to Medford Code Section 7.022 for specific location use and sales restrictions.
 The careless or reckless use of fireworks is prohibited in this jurisdiction.
 Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful to store, use, offer for sale, expose                  for sale, or sell any non-retail fireworks within this jurisdiction. 
 (17) Section 5601.2 is amended by adding the following language:
Permits are required for public displays. A State of Oregon permit is required for public fireworks displays and on-stage special effects as outlined by OAR 837-012-0700 through OAR 837-012-0970. In addition, a local permit is required from the Medford Fire Department.  Applications for the Medford Fire Department permit shall be made in writing at least ten (10) days in advance of the date of display. After the permit is granted, possession and use of fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that purpose only.  No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable.  
(18) Section 5601.2.4 is amended by adding the following language:
Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall file with the jurisdiction a corporate surety bond in the principal sum of $1,000,000.00 or a public liability insurance policy for the same amount for the purpose of the payment of all damages to persons or property which arise from, or are caused by, the conduct of any act authorized by the permit upon which any legal judgment results.  The Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee may specify a greater or lesser amount when, in his opinion, conditions at the location of use indicate a greater or lesser amount is required. Public agencies shall be exempt from this bond requirement.
(19) Section 5601.8 is amended by adding the following language:
The limits referred to in Section 5601.8 of the Oregon Fire Code, in which storage of explosive and blasting agents is prohibited are hereby established as follows:
(1) Storage requiring a Type 1 magazine is prohibited within this jurisdiction.
(2) Storage requiring a Type 2 magazine is prohibited within this jurisdiction.
(20) Section 5604 is amended by adding the following language:
The storage of explosives, explosive materials or fireworks is prohibited at any location within this jurisdiction, unless approved by the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee.
EXCEPTION:
Temporary storage, for use, in connection with approved blasting operations, explosive bolts, explosive rivets or cartridges for explosive-activated power tools in quantities approved by the fire code official.  See OAR 837-012-1200-1420, ORS 480.010  through 480.290 and NFPA 495, “Explosive Materials Code”, 2013 edition.
(21) Section 5605 is amended by adding the following language:
The manufacture of explosives, explosive materials or fireworks at any location within this jurisdiction is prohibited.
(22) Section 5607 is amended by adding the following language:
A blasting permit from the Medford Fire-Rescue Fire & Life Safety Division is required prior to the use of explosives or blasting agents.
(23) Section 5608 is amended by adding the following language:
The fire code official shall have power to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of permits for supervised public displays of fireworks by a jurisdiction, fair associations, amusement parks, other organizations or for the use of fireworks by artisans in the pursuit of their trade. Every such display shall be handled by a competent operator approved by the fire code official and shall be of such good character and so located, discharged or fired so as, in the opinion of the fire code official after proper investigation, not to be hazardous to property or endanger any person.
(24) Section 5704.2.9.6.1 is amended by adding the following language:
(1) The limits referred to in Section 5704.2.9.6.1 of the Oregon Fire Code in which the storage of flammable or combustible liquids is restricted are hereby established as set forth in the Medford Land Development Code.
(2) New above-ground bulk storage plants for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited within this jurisdiction.
(25) Section 5801.1 is amended by adding the following language:
The storage, utilization or manufacture of flammable gases shall not exceed 250,000 standard cubic feet, exclusive of finished products in sealed portable containers.
(26) Section 6104.2 is amended by adding the following language:
The limits referred to in Section 6104.2 of the Oregon Fire Code in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted includes all properties within this jurisdiction.
[Added, Sec. 6, Ord. No. 7395, June 3, 1993; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 8271, Feb. 6, 1997; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2005-58, Apr. 7, 2005; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2009-91, May 7, 2009; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2011-69, Apr. 21, 2011; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2014-148, Dec. 4, 2014; Amd. Ord. No. 2015-102, Oct 1, 2015, Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2019-31, May 2, 2019; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2020-43, Apr. 2, 2020.]

 


7.025 Appeals [Renumbered to Section 7.910

[Renumbered to Section 7.910, Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2009-91, May 7, 2009.]


7.030 Severability [Renumbered to Section 7.920]

[Renumbered to Section 7.920, Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2009-91, May 7, 2009.]


7 General (7.100 to 7.210)

7.100 Sitting or Standing in Aisle of Theater or Hall

(1) No owner, lessee, manager, or other person in charge of a theater or public hall shall permit a person during a public assembly therein to sit or remain standing in an aisle, passageway, stairway, or before any exit of the theater or public hall.

(2) No person, during a public assembly in a theater or public hall, shall sit or remain standing in any aisle, passageway, or stairway or before any exit of the theater or public hall.

7.150 Mutual Assistance Agreements

(1) The City may enter into mutual assistance agreements with municipal corporations and political subdivisions of and within Jackson County, Oregon, in substantially the following form: "Whereas, it is necessary and proper that a mutual assistance agreement be entered into by the undersigned for the mutual protection of life and property; Now, therefore, in consideration of the covenants herein contained, each of the undersigned agrees to furnish men and equipment to any of the other undersigned when assistance is necessary and men and equipment are available, and the City of Medford, Oregon, in consideration of the covenants herein, does hereby agree to receive and transmit such calls as may be received from the police and fire departments of any and all of the undersigned when authorized by and transmitted in accordance with the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission."

(2) The mayor and city recorder are hereby authorized to execute these agreements for and on behalf of the City.

7.200 Annexation Not Required

The City shall not be required to annex territory contiguous to its boundaries under the provisions of ORS 222.850 to 222.915, as now existing or hereafter amended.

7.210 Fire Suppression Charges

 (1) When a fire or public safety incident occurs outside the limits of the city, or a rural fire protection district served by the city under contract, and the city fire department responds, the city may seek compensation and shall be paid for such service by charging the owner of the property as provided in ORS 478.310 or the Medford Code.   
(2) Whenever any person starts or maintains a fire in the city in violation of Medford Code Section 5.550 and the city fire department is required to respond to or to be used actively or on a standby basis in connection with the extinguishment of the fire, control of the fire, or investigation of the fire, the person or persons responsible for the fire is liable and the city may choose to recover costs incurred by the city for such responses or use.   
(3) When a fire is extinguished in an unprotected area pursuant to ORS 476.280 by the city fire department, the city may seek compensation and shall be paid for such service by charging the owner of the property as provided in ORS 476.290 or the Medford Code.
(4) When a hazardous material response occurs by the city fire department, the city may seek compensation and shall be paid for such service by charging the person responsible as provided in ORS 453.382 or the Medford Code. 
[Added Ord. No. 6404, July 6, 1989; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2005-58, Apr. 7, 2005; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2009-91, May 7, 2009; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2020-43, Apr. 2, 2020.]
 
7 Woodburning Restrictions (7.220 to 7.242)

7.220 Wood Burning Definitions

For purposes of Sections 7.220 through 7.242, the following definitions shall apply:

(1) "Alternative heat source" means a heat source other than a solid fuel burning device.

(2) "High pollution period" means a period of time commencing three hours after initial designation as a red or yellow day by the DEQ or Jackson County Department of Health and Human Services. In the event that the DEQ or Jackson County Department of Health and Human Services designates consecutive days as red or yellow, they shall all be considered a part of the same period.

(3) "Medford-Ashland Air Quality Maintenance Area" means that part of the County specifically identified by DEQ as an air quality maintenance area, that is one of several areas in the State wherein air quality has deteriorated due to unhealthful levels of pollutants in the air. A map and written description of the Medford-Ashland Air Quality Maintenance Area (hereinafter referred to as AQMA) are included as Exhibits "A" and "B" respectively, following the text of this ordinance.

(4) "Opacity" means the degree to which emissions from a solid fuel burning device reduce the transmission of light and obscure the view of an object in the background. It is expressed as a percentage representing the extent to which an object viewed through the smoke is obscured.

(5) "Oregon certified stove" means a solid fuel burning device certified by DEQ or EPA as meeting the emission performance standards specified in Oregon Administrative Rules 340-262-0500 through 340-262-0600.

(6)"PM2.5" means airborne particles 2.5 microns in diameter and smaller, which can be inhaled deep into the lungs and can lodge there for weeks and months, aggravating asthma, heart disease, and other respiratory and heart conditions.  

(7) "Red day" means a 24 hour period beginning at 7:00 a.m. when PM2.5 levels are forecast by the DEQ or the Jackson County Department of Health and Human Services to reach unhealthy levels.  

(8) "Residence" means a building containing one or more dwelling units used for habitation by one or more persons.

(9) "Residential woodburning" means utilization of wood in a solid fuel heating device inside a new residence.

(10) "Sole source of heat" means one or more solid fuel burning devices which constitute the only source of heating in a residence. No solid fuel burning device or devices shall be considered to be the sole source of heat if the residence is equipped with a permanently installed furnace or heating system utilizing oil, natural gas, electricity or propane.

(11) "Solid fuel burning device" means a device designed for solid fuel combustion so that usable heat is derived for the interior of a building, and includes, without limitation, solid fuel burning stoves, fireplaces, fireplace inserts, or woodstoves of any nature, combination fuel furnaces or boilers used for space heating which can burn solid fuel, or solid fuel burning cooking stoves. Solid fuel burning devices do not include barbecue devices, natural gas-fired artificial fireplace logs, DEQ approved pellet stoves, or Kachelofens.

(12) "Space heating" means raising the interior temperature of a room.

(13) "Yellow day" means a 24 hour period beginning at 7:00 a.m. when the PM2.5 levels are forecast by the DEQ or Jackson County Department of Health and Human Services to be approaching unhealthy levels.  

NOTE: Ordinance No. 4740 adopted by the Council Nov. 4, 1982 and signed by the Mayor Nov. 11, 1982 provides as follows:

Section 1. General Definitions

1.1 Air stagnation advisory: Forecast made by the National Weather Service for poor ventilation conditions.

1.2 Council: The City Council of the City of Medford.

1.3 Cost-effective level of weatherization: Minimum, cost-efficient standards of weatherization, including standards for materials and installation, which shall be set by the Director of Building Safety. These standards shall reflect, but not exceed the levels defined in ORS 469.710(3).

1.4 Medford-Ashland AQMA: That part of Jackson County, Oregon, specifically identified by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality as an air quality maintenance area -- one of several areas in the state wherein air quality has deteriorated due to unhealthful levels of pollutants in the air.

1.5 Particulate: Airborne particles ranging from .01 to 1,000 microns in size. These particles are inhaled during breathing and can be harmful.

1.6 Person: Includes individuals, corporations, associations, firms, partnerships, and joint stock companies.

1.7 Primary particulate standard: An average particulate concentration of 260 micrograms per cubic meter of air during a twenty-four hour period.

1.8 Proof of weatherization: Certification, receipts, contracts, or other such documents specifically listing weatherization steps taken by the homeowners, which may be reviewed by building inspectors at the time of solid fuel heating system installation.

1.9 Regulations: Regulations promulgated by the Council pursuant to this ordinance.

1.10 Residential building: An existing building used for permanent or seasonal habitation by one or more persons, containing four or fewer dwelling units, and constructed prior to January 1, 1979.

1.11 Residential woodburning: Utilization of a wood heating device inside a dwelling unit.

1.12 Spaceheating: Raising the interior temperature of a room or rooms.

1.13 Total suspended particulate level: Amount of particulate in ambient air.

1.14 Trackout: The deposition of mud, dirt and other debris on paved public roadways by motor vehicles; the material being so tracked onto public roadways. Trackout can become pulverized and blown into the air by vehicular traffic, where it becomes a part of the total suspended particulate level.

1.15 Ventilation index: The National Weather Service's indicator of the relative degree of air circulation for a specified area.

1.16 Wood heating devices: A stove, heater, fireplace, or other receptacle wherein wood is heated to the point of combustion.

Section 2. Severability.

2.1 If any portion of this ordinance is declared to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall be confined to the section to which such declaration of invalidity relates, and the remainder of this ordinance shall continue to be operative.

Section 3. Weatherization Requirements for Solid Fuel Heating Device Installation. The purpose of this section is to reduce the amount of particulate pollution resulting from residential woodburning for building heating. Most buildings constructed before 1979 were built to lower weatherization standards than buildings constructed since that date. A highly weatherized and insulated building will require less fuel to attain and hold a given temperature. It will produce less smoke pollution and will also result in a savings of the wood or other fuel resource. Additionally, weatherization prior to or at the time of installation of a solid fuel heating device will generally result in the selection of a device more appropriately sized for the building and will lessen the potential amount of smoke produced. Therefore:

3.1 The installation of a wood stove, fireplace, or any other form of solid fuel, space heating device is allowed if:

A) The space heating device is installed pursuant to the uniform building code and regulations of the Medford Department of Building Safety.

B) The structure contains an alternate form of space heating, including natural gas, propane, electric, oil, solar, or kerosene, sufficient to meet necessary space heating requirements, so that during episodes of high pollution levels, the occupant will be able to heat the home with other than a solid fuel burning, smoke producing method.

C) The residence meets or is proposed to meet within 90 days the cost-effective levels of weatherization as defined in Section 1.3 of this ordinance.

Section 4. [Repealed Ord. No. 5072, Feb. 16, 1984.] The purpose of this section is to minimize particulate emissions from home heating devices by improving home weatherization and reducing energy loss. This section is also intended to encourage homeowners to make use of free energy audits and low-interest financing available from local utility companies. It is the City's intent to advertise and make known programs which are already available for weatherizing homes and to assist citizens in taking advantage of those programs.

4.1 It is the goal of the City of Medford to assist citizens to weatherize all residences to the cost-effective level by January 1, 1987.

4.2 All residential buildings shall have received an energy audit prior to the time of sale or rental, and such information shall be made available to potential purchasers or renters as a condition of such sale or rental. This section shall become effective six months after adoption of this ordinance.

4.3 In January of 1984, if the primary particulate health standards are not being maintained, all homes with a wood heating system shall be weatherized to cost-effective levels at the time of sale or rental.

Section 5. Pollution Episode Curtailment

The purpose of this section is to reduce the amount of particulate pollution during periods of air stagnation or when pollution levels are critical. Periods of air stagnation occur at various times in a year and can create a severe accumulation of pollutants. Residential woodburning can contribute as much as 50 percent of the particulate pollution during these conditions.

5.1 The use of residential woodburning devices is prohibited on each day that an air stagnation advisory announcement for the Medford-Ashland AQMA has been issued by the National Weather Service. This subsection takes effect on July 1, 1984, if the particulate health standard is not attained in the Medford-Ashland Air Quality Maintenance Area by that date.

5.2 Residences having no other form of space heating are exempt from this section.

[Section 6 Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-187, Sept. 18, 2008; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2020-43, Apr. 2, 2020.]

 



IMAGES FOR THIS CODE

Exhibit A
Exhibit B
(Click on an image to see a larger version)

7.222 Operation of Solid Fuel Burning Device Prohibition

(1) The operation of a solid fuel burning device within the City of Medford during a high pollution period shall be prohibited unless an exemption has been granted pursuant to Section 7.224. A rebuttable presumption of a violation for which a citation shall be issued shall arise if smoke is being discharged through a flue or chimney after a time period of three hours has elapsed from the time of declaration of the high pollution period. Any resident of the premises who is over the age of eighteen years shall be presumed to be the violator unless rebutted by contrary evidence.

(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, the operation of an Oregon Certified solid fuel burning device shall be permitted during a high pollution period so long as no visible emissions of smoke are discharged through a flue or chimney after a time period of three hours has elapsed from the time of the declaration of the high pollution period. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to emissions of smoke during the starting or refueling of a fire for a period not to exceed 30 minutes in any four-hour period.

(3) No property owner within the City of Medford shall rent or lease a residential unit that is not equipped with a secondary source of heat other than a solid fuel burning device, unless the landlord has a valid exemption under Section 7.224. Should a violation of this section occur it shall be attributable to the property owner and not to the tenant or lessee.

(4) No person owning or operating a solid fuel burning device shall at any time cause, allow, or discharge emissions from such device which are of an opacity greater than fifty percent (50%). The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to emissions during the starting or refueling of a new fire for a period not to exceed 30 minutes in any four-hour period. For the purposes of this section opacity percentages shall be determined by a certified observer using the standard visual method listed in 40 CFR 60A, Method 9, or operation of equipment approved by the Jackson County Department of Health and Human Services that is known to produce equivalent or better accuracy.

(5) It shall be unlawful for any new or used solid fuel heating device to be installed in the City of Medford after the effective date of this section of the Code unless the device is installed pursuant to the City of Medford regulations; the solid fuel heating device complies with the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality Particulate Emission standards for certified woodstoves; and for all new construction, the structure contains an alternate form of space heating, including natural gas, propane, electric, oil, solar, or kerosene, sufficient to meet necessary space heating requirements, so that during episodes of high pollution levels, the occupant will be able to heat the home with other than a solid fuel heating device. If the conditions set forth in this subsection are not fulfilled, no person in possession of the premises shall cause or permit, and no public agency shall issue any permit for the installation of the device.

[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6992, October 3, 1991; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 1998-203; Sept. 17, 1998.]


7.224 Solid Fuel Burning Device Exemptions

It is permissible for a household to operate a solid fuel burning device within the City of Medford during a high pollution period when the head of that household has previously obtained one of the following exemptions. Exemptions granted under this section shall expire on September 1 of each year:

(1) Economic Need: An exemption for an economic need to burn solid fuel for residential space heating purposes may be issued to heads of households who can show their eligibility for energy assistance under the Low-Income Energy Assistance Program (hereinafter referred to as L.I.E.A.P.), as administered by ACCESS, Inc. or its successor.

(2) Sole Source: An exemption may be issued to the heads of households who sign a sworn statement declaring their reliance on a solid fuel burning device as the sole source of heat for their residence. Sole source exemptions shall not be issued unless the residence is approved for installation of an alternative heating source through the Jackson County Housing Authority woodstove replacement program guidelines or in the absence of such a program, when the head of a household can show that the family income is less than 80% of the median income level for the Medford metropolitan area as established by the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Households that qualify for an exemption based on economic need, as defined in this chapter, may continue to rely on a solid fuel burning device as the sole source of heat for the residence beyond two years from the effective date of this section.

(3) Special Need: Upon a showing of special need which shall include, but not be limited to, occasions when a furnace or central heating system is inoperable other than through the owner or operator's own actions or neglect.

[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 6992, October 3, 1991; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 1998-203, Sept. 17, 1998; Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2020-43, Apr. 2, 2020.]


7.225 Removal of Non-Certified Wood Stoves and Fireplace Inserts

(1) The City Council finds that it is necessary for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the City's residents to require that non-certified wood stoves and fireplace inserts be removed when structures situated on real property containing them are sold or transferred.

(2) Definitions.  When used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings as herein ascribed:

Non-certified wood stove or fireplace insert. A residential space heating device that has not been certified by either the State of Oregon Department of Environmental Quality or Federal Environmental Protection Agency as complying with smoke emission standards. "Non-certified wood stove or fireplace insert" does not include

(1) devices exempt from certification requirements such as pellet stoves (a wood burning heating appliance which uses wood pellets as its primary source of fuel),

(2) cook stoves (an indoor wood burning appliance the design and primary purpose of which is to cook food),

(3) antique wood stoves (a wood stove built before 1940 that has an ornate construction and a current market value substantially higher than a common wood stove manufactured in the same time period) and

(4) fireplaces.

Sale of structure or sale of structures. Any transaction whereby the ownership of a structure, or the real property upon which a structure is located, is conveyed by a purchase agreement, inheritance or a transfer of title, for real property.

Structure. Has the same meaning provided in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Medford, Oregon.

(3) Unless otherwise agreed, the responsibility for removal of non-certified wood stoves or fireplace inserts shall be the responsibility of the seller of the structure(s) which contain the non-certified wood stove(s) or fireplace insert(s).

(4) The presence of all wood stoves or fireplace inserts in a structure shall be included as a part of the Sellers property disclosure presented to the new owner, as part of the sale or transfer of any real property. The disclosure shall evidence by certificate, whether any wood stoves or fireplace inserts are of a conforming use, and present in the subject property.

(5) Unless otherwise agreed, all non-certified wood stoves and fireplace inserts must be removed from the structure upon sale or transfer of a structure containing any non-certified wood stove(s) and fireplace insert(s). If the seller assumes the responsibility of removal, then such removal shall be completed on or before the closing or title transfer of any real estate. Should the buyer or the undersigned owner assume the responsibility of removal, the responsible party shall complete the removal within 30 calendar days after the recordation of title and evidence the removal, as stated herein.

The certificate shall be in substantially the following form:

"WOOD STOVE/FIREPLACE INSERT DISCLOSURE CERTIFICATE

The undersigned seller discloses to the undersigned owner the presence of wood stoves or fireplace inserts located at property which has the following address:

__________________________________________

The wood stoves or fireplace inserts are generally described as:

1.  ________________________________________

2.  ________________________________________

3.  ________________________________________

4.  ________________________________________

5.  ________________________________________

The wood stoves or fireplace inserts are:

certified                         non-certified

1. _______                    ______

 

2.  ______                     ______

 

3.  ______                     ______

 

4.  ______                     ______

 

5.  ______                     ______

Seller and the undersigned owner understand that the City of Medford's wood stove/fireplace insert ordinance requires non-certified wood stoves or fireplace inserts to be removed from the subject structures upon sale; and that the seller shall have the responsibility for the removal of the wood stoves or fireplace inserts, unless the seller and the undersigned owner agree in writing, that the undersigned owner shall assume the responsibility to remove the wood stove(s) or fireplace insert(s) pursuant to the local ordinance.

The responsibility for removing any non-certified wood stoves or fireplace inserts shall be:

______ Responsibility of the seller.

______ Responsibility of the undersigned owner.

The seller and the undersigned owner also understand, this certificate must be completed and signed by both parties, delivered to the City of Medford on or before the closing of any related real estate transaction. Further, all obligations stated herein, survive the Close of escrow or transfer of title.

The penalty for not removing non-certified wood stoves or fireplace inserts is a fine not exceeding $250.00.

Dated:________________

____________________________ (Seller)____________________________ (Undersigned Owner)"

(6) The disclosure(s) and certificate must be executed by both seller and the undersigned owner, on or before, the closing of any real estate transfer involving real property, upon which the structure(s) containing the wood stoves or fireplace inserts are involved. Upon the complete execution of the disclosure certificate, a copy must be submitted to the City of Medford by the responsible designee. Delivery of the disclosure certificate is required for any transfer of title, whether the real estate transaction is closed in escrow or closed by the seller and the undersigned owner without a closing escrow.

(7) Failure of the seller, or the undersigned owner, to provide a disclosure certificate required by this ordinance, demonstrating the subsequent removal of a non-certified wood stove(s) or fireplace insert(s) from a structure, required by this ordinance, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $250.00.

[Added, Ord. No. 2006-192, Sept. 7, 2006.]


7.226 Abatement; Legal Proceedings

Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to appropriate legal proceedings to enjoin or abate such violation or noncompliance, in addition to the penalty provided in Section 7.900 below.

[Added Ord. No. 6484, Nov. 2, 1989, effective November 20, 1989.]


7.228 Administrative Regulations

The City Manager shall prescribe administrative regulations governing the procedure for granting exemptions.
[Added Ord. No. 6484, Nov. 2, 1989, effective November 20, 1989.]

7.240 Installation of Solid-Fuel Heating Devices

No person shall install any new or used solid-fuel heating device in any building unless such device has been certified by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) to comply with DEQ emission standards for such devices and such device bears an authorized permanent DEQ or EPA label attached by the manufacturer stating that the device has been certified. In addition to the penalties provided by this code, violation of this section shall be a public nuisance subject to abatement.
[Added Ord. No. 6686, August 2, 1990.]

7.242 Prohibited Materials

It shall be unlawful for a person to cause or allow any of the following materials to be burned in a solid fuel burning device: garbage, treated wood, plastic, wire insulation, automobile parts, asphalt, petroleum products, petroleum treated material, rubber products, animal remains, paint, animal or vegetable matter resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, or service of food or any other material which normally emits dense smoke or noxious odors.
[Added Sec. 4, Ord. No. 1998-203, Sept. 17, 1998.]

7.300 Penalty [Renumbered to Section 7.900]

[Renumbered to Section 7.900, Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2009-91, May 7, 2009.]


7 Nuisance and Abatement (7.410 to 7.440)

7.410 Uncontrolled Weeds and Grass: Purpose and Scope

The uncontrolled growth of high grass, weeds, brush, and other like vegetation on property in city areas causes:

(1) A fire hazard endangering people and property;

(2) An interference with the use and enjoyment of other properties by propagating noxious weeds and causing them to spread; and

(3) A health hazard by furnishing an area for the breeding of vermin and by generating irritants. Therefore, permitting such uncontrolled growth is unreasonable and unnecessary in an urban area and constitutes a public nuisance. Any person who owns and has the right to control real property assumes no obligation to the rest of the community and is therefore chargeable with knowledge of the growth of vegetation on that property and has a duty to remove any nuisance which reasonable inspection would reveal.

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8271, Feb. 6, 1997; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2009-91, May 7, 2009.]


7.420 Definitions

For purposes of Sections 7.410 to 7.440, the following definitions shall apply:

(1) Owner. Any person with an ownership interest or with any leasehold or other possessory interest, of record or otherwise, which gives him, either alone or jointly with others, a right to occupy, possess, or control real property. In any event, any person who appears as owner on the records of the county assessor shall be presumed to be one of the owners of the property, but such presumption may be rebutted.

(2) Person. Any natural person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity.

(3) Occupant. Any person in lawful possession, or with a lawful right to store or keep personal property on, any real property or, in case of corporate ownership, that officer, employee, or agent of a corporate owner having the authority or duty to control or operate the property on behalf of the corporation.

[Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2009-91, May 7, 2009.]


7.430 Nuisance Described; Offense Punishable

(1) Except as provided in subsection (3) hereof, it shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any owner or occupant of real property in Medford to allow grass, weeds, brush, or bushes, or any like vegetation, over a height of ten inches to remain upon such real property during the period May 1 to September 30 in any calendar year, or at any other time prior to May 1 if the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee determines that such growth constitutes a fire hazard.  For the purposes of this section, dead or dried grass/weeds/brush/bushes/vegetation over a height of 10 inches is a fire hazard.

Fire season fire danger level restrictions including vegetation removal and operation of equipment in effect by Oregon Department of Forestry shall be enforced by the City of Medford. Exceptions may be granted by the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee.
 
The following guidelines shall be used for mitigation requirements, unless as otherwise approved by the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee:

           (a)   Properties less than one acre in size: All grass, weeds, brush, bushes, or any like vegetation posing a fire hazard shall be disked, cut, or removed.
           (b)   Properties more than one acre in size: Grass, weeds, brush, bushes, or any like vegetation posing a fire hazard shall be disked, cut, or removed. Firebreaks may be considered acceptable as an alternative to clearing the entire parcel. Minimum 30'      wide firebreaks shall be provided around the perimeter of the property and the area shall be divided into maximum 2.5 acre parcels with minimum 30' wide cross-breaks. In addition, minimum 100' firebreaks are required adjacent to improved           subdivisions/properties (Road width may be considered part of the 100' firebreak).
          (c)   Subdivisions, including those with paved streets and not fully built out: All grass, weeds, brush, bushes, or any like vegetation posing a fire hazard shall be disked, cut, or removed from each individual lot.
          (d)   Unmaintained agricultural properties: Grass, weeds, brush, bushes, or any like vegetation posing a fire hazard shall be disked, cut, or removed. Minimum 30'          wide firebreaks shall be maintained along the perimeter from the edge of road.  In     addition, minimum 100' wide firebreaks adjacent to improved subdivisions/properties (Road width may be considered part of the 100'       firebreak). 
           (e)   Structures in wildfire hazard zones: Minimum 100’ firebreaks (defensible space)          shall be provided around the perimeter of the structure (Road or driveway width may be considered part of the 100' firebreak). 
(2) Violation of subsection (1) of this section constitutes a violation per Section 7.430 of the Medford Municipal Code.

(3) The provisions of subsection (1) shall not apply to the following:

             (a) To ornamental shrubs, bushes, or other like vegetation maintained and kept in a landscaped yard or place; or,

            (b) Any crop grown and maintained for agricultural purposes, or grass or other like vegetation grown and maintained for pasturage upon property fenced, zoned, and otherwise lawfully used for said purpose; or,

            (c) To any "natural area" within a public park in the City of Medford. As used herein the term "natural area" shall mean any park or portion thereof preserved in its native state, and approved in writing by the Medford Park Development Commission. Prior to approving any natural area the Medford Park Development Commission shall solicit and comply with any order of the Fire Marshal concerning the elimination or reduction of a fire hazard.

(4) Each day during which such a condition is unlawfully permitted to exist after notice has been given in the manner prescribed by section 7.440(2) shall be deemed a separate offense punishable in the manner prescribed by Section 1.100 of this Code; provided that the condition shall be deemed a nuisance and, in addition to the foregoing remedy, may be abated by the City in the manner hereinafter prescribed, and the cost of abatement assessed as a lien against the property and subject to foreclosure in the same manner and to the same effect as in the case of special benefit assessment liens.

[Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 5358, Feb. 7, 1985; Amd. Ord. No. 7345, March 18, 1993; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8271, Feb. 6, 1997; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2000-55, April 6, 2000; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2009-91, May 7, 2009, Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2019-23, April 4, 2019; Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2020-43, Apr. 2, 2020.]


7.440 Notice and Abatement Proceedings

(1) Each year, the city manager may cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Medford, Oregon, a public notice that conditions prescribed in section 7.430(1) constitute a public nuisance, and directing that all growth which would constitute such a nuisance be cut or removed within 21 days from the date of publication of the notice.

(2) Whenever a condition prohibited by section 7.430(1) is found to exist, the officer designated by the city manager may give notice to the owners and occupants of the property by causing same to be sent by mail to such persons as are sought to be charged hereunder at their last known address, or, if the mailing address of any owner or occupant is not known to the City, it shall be sufficient for the charging of such person that the notice be addressed to him and sent in care of the person appearing as owner on the records of the county assessor of Jackson County, Oregon. The notice:

(a) shall be directed to all persons shown on the assessor's records or otherwise known to the City to be owners and occupants, whether corporate or otherwise;

(b) shall refer to the premises involved with convenient certainty, the street address, if any, being sufficient;

(c) shall notify the addressees to remove the unlawful growth within 15 days from the date of mailing; and

(d) shall instruct them to comply therewith within 15 days from the date of mailing. The notice shall further inform the owners and occupants that, if the condition is not corrected within the said period of time, the owners and occupants may be prosecuted for violation. If public notice has been published pursuant to subsection (1), the mailed notice shall further state that unless the unlawful growth is removed within 30 days after the publication of said notice or 15 days after date of the mailed notice, whichever is later, the City may cause the unlawful growth to be cut or removed from the premises and will charge the costs thereof to the property owner(s) and may make the same a lien against the property.

(3) Any owner or occupant may, at any time before he becomes in violation, or, if notice has been mailed to him under subsection (2) hereof, within 10 days after such notice is mailed, appeal for relief by filing a petition with the city recorder seeking a hearing as provided in Section 5.525 of this Code. The petition shall include the facts upon which the petitioner relies to relieve himself from the obligations of this section with relation to the property. If the City Recorder finds that it would work a real and unnecessary hardship upon the petitioner to comply with the terms of this section, then the City Recorder may relieve the petitioner of the obligations of this section in relation to the particular property, but nothing therein shall be construed as obligating the City to remove or abate the nuisance without charging the cost against the said property. The owner or owner's agent may appeal the City Recorder's findings to the City Council. A written notice of appeal shall be filed with the City Recorder within ten days after the City Recorder's decision is mailed. The City Recorder shall set the matter for public hearing at the next regular meeting of the City Council. If the City Council determines that a nuisance exists, the owner or owner's agent shall abate the nuisance within ten days of the Council's decision; or the nuisance shall be abated by the City in the manner provided in subsection (4).

(4) If the condition is not corrected within the time limited and no relief has been granted, such agent of the City as may be designated by the city manager may abate the nuisance by removing the grass, weeds, brush, bushes, or like vegetation from the property, or so much thereof as the city manager may determine to be necessary to remove the hazard to abutting property. The city manager shall maintain an accurate record of the expenses incurred by the City in removing the unlawful growth and shall include therein a charge of 30% of said expenses or $50, whichever is greater, for costs of administration. The total cost, including said overhead, shall thereafter be assessed against the property owner(s) and may be entered in the docket of City liens not less than 30 days after the mailing of the notice provided in subsection (2).

(5) If a lien is filed, the lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street improvements, and shall bear interest at the rate specified in section 3.470(2), beginning 10 days after the entry of the lien in the lien docket.

(6) The said remedy shall not be exclusive and, in addition to proceedings by abatement hereunder, the city manager may proceed against the responsible owner in city court in the manner prescribed by law or, if the condition is permanent, substantial, or continuing, may proceed by suit in equity for mandatory injunction or such other relief as may be afforded by a court of equity.

[Amd. Ord. No. 6297, Feb. 16, 1989; Amd. Ord. No. 7345, March 18, 1993; Amd. Ord. No. 7851, Apr. 6, 1995; Amd. Ord. No. 2008-61, April 3, 2008; Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2009-91, May 7, 2009, Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2019-23, April 4, 2019]

7 Penalties and Appeals (7.900 to 7.920)

7.900 Penalty

(1)  Except as set forth in (2) of this section, violation of a provision of this Chapter 7 constitutes a violation punishable by a fine as set forth in Section 1.100 of the Medford Code. Each day in which a violation is caused or permitted to exist constitutes a separate violation.

(2)  Violation of 7.023(16(c) constitutes a violation punishable by a fine of $2,500.  Each day in which a violation is caused or permitted to exist constitutes a separate violation.

[Added Sec. 4, Ord. No. 5435, May 2, 1985; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2000-55, April 6, 2000; Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2009-91, May 7, 2009; Amd. Sec. 1 & 2, Ord. No. 2019-31, May 2, 2019; Amd. Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2020-43, Apr. 2, 2020.]

 


7.910 Appeals

 
Appeals of any decision of the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee may be appealed by filing a written appeal with the City Recorder in accordance with Section 1.025 within 10 days of the decision. An application for appeal of a fire code related decision shall be based on a claim that the intent of the code or the rules legally adopted hereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, that the provisions of the code do not fully apply, or an equivalent method of protection or safety is imposed.

[Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 7395, June 3, 1993; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 7730, Oct. 6, 1994; Amd. Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2009-91, May 7, 2009; Amd. Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2020-43, Apr. 2, 2020.]


7.920 Severability

The city council hereby declares that if any section, paragraph, sentence, or word of this ordinance or of the code hereby adopted be declared for any reason to be invalid, it is the intent of the city council that it would have passed all other portions of sections 7.010 to 7.920, inclusive, independent of the elimination herefrom of any such portion as may be declared invalid.

[Amd. Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2009-91, May 7, 2009.]

7 Vacant Residential Property Registration (7.950 to 7.958)

7.950 Title and Purpose

This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Vacant Residential Property Registration Ordinance of the City of Medford.”  The purpose of this ordinance is to protect neighborhoods from blight by requiring that vacant residential properties be adequately secured and maintained. 

[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2009-204, Sept. 17, 2009; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2017-41, April 20, 2017.]


7.951 Definitions

(1) "Borrow" means any person who becomes obligated on a real estate loan agreement, either directly or indirectly, and includes, but is not limited to, mortgagors, vendees under conditional land sales contracts and grantors under trust deeds.

 

(2) "Evidence of vacancy" means any condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions present, would lead the Chief of Police or his designee to believe that the property is vacant.  Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation; accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail; past due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash, junk and/or debris; the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds and/or shutters; the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with residential habitation; evidence of trespass or criminal mischief; or statements by neighbors, passerby, delivery persons, and/or government employees that the property is vacant.

 

(3) "Lender" means any person who makes, extends, or holds a real estate loan agreement and includes, but is not limited to, mortgagees; beneficiaries under trust deeds; vendors under conditional land sales contracts; trustees and a successor in interest to any mortgagee, beneficiary, vendor or trustee.  The term also includes any mortgagee, beneficiary or trustee that accepts a deed in lieu of foreclosure.

 

(4) "Notice of default" means a written notice to a borrower stating that a default on a real estate loan agreement has occurred and that legal action may be taken.

 

(5) "Out of area" means outside of Jackson County.

 

(6) "Real Estate Loan Agreement" means any agreement providing for a loan on residential property, secured in whole or in part by real property located within the City of Medford, or any interest therein, and includes, but is not limited to mortgages, trust deeds and conditional land sales contracts.

 

(7) "Vacant" means a subject property that is not legally occupied.

 

[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2009-204, Sept. 17, 2009; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2017-41, April 20, 2017.]


7.952 Inspection

(1)  Immediately upon default of the borrower, but no later than prior to recording a notice of default with the Jackson County Clerk’s Office, a lender shall perform an inspection of the property that is the security for the real estate loan agreement.

 

(2)  If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, the lender shall, within ten (10) days of the inspection, register the property with the Chief of Police or his designee.

 

(3)  If the property is occupied but remains in default, the property shall be inspected by the lender on a monthly basis until the borrower remedies the default.  If an inspection reveals that the property is vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, the lender shall, within ten (10) days of the inspection, register the property with the Chief of Police or his designee.

 

(4)  This ordinance also applies to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where title has transferred from one lender to another lender; and a property transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure.

 

[Added, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2009-204, Sept. 17, 2009.]


7.953 Registration

(1)  The registration shall contain the following information:

(a)  The name of the lender;
 

(b)  The direct mailing address of the lender.  Post office boxes are not acceptable;
 

(c)  The direct contact name and phone number for the lender;
 

(d)  The physical address for the lender’s agent authorized to receive service of process, if applicable; and
 

(e)  The direct contact information for the local property management company responsible for security, maintenance and marketing of the property, if applicable.

 

(2)   No registration fee shall be imposed.  A lender that has registered a property under this ordinance shall report any change of information contained in the registration within ten (10) days of the change.  Properties subject to this ordinance shall remain under the registration requirement as long as the property remains vacant.

 

(3)  Registration forms shall be available at the Medford Police Department and online at the City’s website.

 

[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2009-204, Sept. 17, 2009.]


7.954 Maintenance and Security Requirements

(1)  A lender shall maintain properties subject to this ordinance.  Maintenance includes all of the following:
 

(a)  Ensuring that the condition of the subject property does not constitute a public nuisance or a chronic public nuisance as described by the Code;

(b) Keeping the premises free of weeds, dead vegetation, graffiti, trash, accumulated newspapers, circulars, flyers, discarded personal items, and any other item or condition that would cause a person to form a reasonable belief that the property is vacant;


(c)  Regular watering, irrigation, cutting, pruning and mowing of the subject property and the removal of all trimmings, as applicable to the property;
 

(d)  If there is an outdoor pool or spa on the premises, such facility shall be kept in working order, so that water remains clear and free of pollutants and debris; or drained and kept covered.  In either case, subject properties with pools or spas shall comply with the City’s minimum security fencing requirements.

 

(2)  The property shall remain secure and locked. Windows and doors may be boarded up if damaged or if otherwise permitted by the Code.  Damaged windows and doors shall either be repaired or replaced within ten (10) business days.

 

(3)  Compliance with this section does not relieve a person subject to this ordinance of any obligations set forth by state law, or any covenants, conditions and restrictions which may apply to the subject property.

 

[Added, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2009-204, Sept. 17, 2009; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2017-41, April 20, 2017.]


7.955 Local Presence of Lender or Lender's Agent Required

An out of area lender shall retain the services of a local property management company to ensure compliance with this ordinance. The property management company shall post a direct contact name and 24-hour contact phone number for persons to report problems or concerns, and the posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street.  If no such area exists, then the posting shall be placed on the exterior of the property in a location visible from the street to the front of the property.  An exterior posting shall be constructed of and printed with weather resistant materials.

 

[Added, Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2009-204, Sept. 17, 2009; Replaced Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2017-41, April 20, 2017.]


7.956 Additional Authority

The Chief of Police or designee shall have the authority to require the lender to implement any additional maintenance and/or security measures including, but not limited to:

(a)  Installation of additional security lighting;

(b)  Increasing on-site inspection frequency;

(c)  Employment of an on-site security guard; and

(d)  Any other measures as may be reasonable required to prevent the decline of the property.

 

[Added, Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2009-204, Sept. 17, 2009; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2017-41, April 20, 2017.]


7.957 Violation; Penalty

(1)  A lender that violates any section of this ordinance shall be subject to prosecution as provided for in section 7.900.

 

(2)  Citations for violation of any section of this ordinance may be mailed by first class mail to the lender or lender’s registered agent.

(3) Violation of section 7.954 is declared to be a public nuisance, and may be abated in the manner provided by sections 5.520 through 5.535 of the Code.

 

[Added, Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2009-204, Sept. 17, 2009; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2017-41, April 20, 2017.]


7.958 Appeals

A lender that is required to implement additional maintenance or security measures as provided for in section 7.956 of this ordinance shall have the right to appeal to the City Council under the procedures set out in section 1.025 of the Code.

 

[Added, Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2009-204, Sept. 17, 2009; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2017-41, April 20, 2017.]

 
7 Chronic Nuisance Property (7.960 to 7.978)

7.960 Intent and Purpose of Sections 7.960 to 7.978

The City Council finds that:
(1) By virtue of its authority to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the community, the City has the power to abate a violation of the Code declared to be a public nuisance by imposing a fine on the owner of the property, requiring the owner to abate the nuisance, or abating the nuisance if the owner fails to do so.  However, the abatement of a single nuisance is ineffective in protecting the health, safety, and welfare of the community at large when conditions or activities related to the use of property give rise to a series of public nuisances over time.
(2) A process to hold property owners and other persons in charge of property accountable for adverse conditions and activities that repeatedly occur in connection with the property is needed to help maintain and improve the quality of life in the City.
(3) Pursuant to the City’s authority to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the community, this ordinance is enacted to establish the rights, duties, and procedures necessary to hold property owners and other persons in charge of property accountable for adverse conditions and activities that repeatedly occur in connection with the property.
[Added Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2017-42, May 4, 2017.]

7.962 Definitions

Words and phrases used in sections 7.960 through 7.978 shall have the following meanings ascribed to them:
(1) “Chronic Nuisance Abatement Plan (CNAP)” means a plan required to be submitted by a person in charge in response to a notice authorized under section 7.964 that includes actions to abate, correct, or eliminate the occurrence of chronic nuisance activities on or around the property. A CNAP may include, but is not limited to the following: actions to remedy building code, fire code, property maintenance code, and nuisance code violations; eviction of problem tenants responsible for causing chronic nuisance activities; or hiring security guards to monitor the property.  A CNAP shall include an implementation timeline.
(2) “Chronic Nuisance Property” means property on which:
(a) three or more nuisance activities have occurred during any 30-day period;
(b) four or more nuisance activities have occurred during any 120-day period;
(c) six or more nuisance activities have occurred during any 365-day period; or
(d) a court has issued a search warrant based upon probable cause that possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses as defined in ORS 167.203, ORS 475.005 through ORS 475.285 and/or ORS 475.752 through 475.980 has occurred within the previous thirty (30) days, and the execution of the search warrant has resulted in the discovery of such controlled substances.
(3) “Nuisance Activities” means any of the following activities, behaviors, or criminal conduct that occurs on or within 200 feet of a property: 
(a) harassment as provided in ORS 166.065 or Medford Municipal Code section 5.130;
(b) intimidation as provided in ORS 166.155 through 166.165;
(c) disorderly conduct as provided in ORS 166.025 or Medford Municipal Code section 5.120;
(d) assault as provided in ORS 163.160, ORS 163.165, ORS 163.175, ORS 163.185 or Medford Municipal Code section 5.105;
(e) strangulation as provided in  ORS 163.187;
(f) menacing as provided in ORS 163.190 or Medford Municipal Code section 5.110;
(g) recklessly endangering another person as provided in ORS 163.195 or Medford Municipal Code section 5.115;
(h) public and private indecency as provided in ORS 163.465 and ORS 163.467;
(i) prostitution or related offenses as provided in ORS 167.007 through ORS 167.017;
(j) alcoholic liquor violations as provided in the Oregon Liquor Control Act, or Medford Municipal Code sections 5.310, 5.350, 5.360 or 5.361;
(k) theft as provided in ORS 164.015 through 164.140 or Medford Municipal Code sections 5.291 through 5.298;
(l) arson or related offenses as provided in ORS 164.315 through 164.335;
(m) possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses as provided in ORS 167.203, ORS 475.005 through 475.285, and ORS 475.752 through 475.980;
(n) illegal gambling as provided in ORS 167.118, ORS 167.122, and ORS 167.127;
(o) criminal mischief as provided in ORS 164.345 through 164.365 or Medford Municipal Code section 5.270;
(p) any attempt to commit (as defined by ORS 161.405), or conspiracy to commit (as defined by ORS 161.455), any of the above offenses;
(q) marijuana-related offenses as provided in the Control and Regulation of Marijuana Act (ORS 475B.010 through ORS 475B.395), the Oregon Medical Marijuana Act (ORS 475B.400 through ORS 465B.525), or Medford Municipal Code sections 5.652, 5.653, 5.705, 5.710, or 5.715;
(r) hindering prosecution as provided in ORS 162.325;
(s) discharge of weapons as provided in Medford Municipal Code section 5.160;
(t) public urination as provided in Medford Municipal Code section 5.125;
(u) unnecessary noise as provided in Medford Municipal Code section 5.225(1)(a-b);
(v) unlawful accumulation of junk as provided in Medford Municipal Code section 5.500;       
(w) failure to control dangerous dog as provided in Medford Municipal Code section 5.603.
(4) “Control” means the ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract, or govern conduct that occurs on a property.
(5) “Person in Charge” means any person, in actual or constructive possession of a property, including but not limited to, an owner, occupant, tenant, or person authorized to manage a property.
(6) “Permit” means to suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent, or expressly assent or agree to the doing of an act.
(7) “Person” means any natural person, agent, association, firm, partnership, or corporation capable of owning, occupying, using, or managing property in the City of Medford.
(8) “Property” means any property, including land and that which is affixed, incidental or appurtenant to land, including but not limited to, any business or residential premises, room, house, parking area, loading area, landscaping, building, or structure or any separate part, unit, or portion thereof, or any business equipment, whether or not permanent.  For property consisting of more than one unit, property is limited to the unit or the portion of the property on which any nuisance abatement has occurred or is occurring, but includes areas of the property used in common by all units of property including without limitation other structures erected on the property and areas used for parking, loading, and landscaping.
(9) “Person Associated With” means any person who, on the occasion of a nuisance activity, has entered, patronized, visited, or attempted to enter, patronize or visit, or waited to enter, patronize or visit a property or person present on a property, including without limitation any officer, director, customer, agent, employee, or any independent contractor of a property, person in charge, or owner thereof.
[Added Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2017-42, May 4, 2017.]

7.964 Notice and Manner of Service

(1) When the Medford Police Department receives a report documenting that a property has become a chronic nuisance property, the Chief or designee shall notify the person in charge in writing. 
(2) The notice shall contain the following information:
(a) The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the property.
(b) A statement that the Chief or designee has determined the property to be a chronic nuisance property, with a concise description of the nuisance activities upon which the statement is based.
(c)  A statement that the person in charge shall submit a CNAP to the Chief or designee within ten (10) days from the date the notice was personally served or mailed.
(3)  Service shall be made either personally or by certified mail-restricted delivery, addressed to the person in charge at the address of the property, or such other place which is reasonably calculated, under all the circumstances, to notify the person in charge of the City’s determination. A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner of the property at such address shown on the tax rolls of the county, if that person is different than the person in charge, and shall be made either personally or by certified mail-restricted delivery.
(4)  At or near the same time of the delivery of the notice set forth in subsection (d), the City shall post a copy of the notice at the property.
(5)  Concurrent with any notification procedures set forth above, the City shall send copies of the notice, as well as any other documentation which supports legal proceedings against the property, to the City Attorney.
[Added Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2017-42, May 4, 2017.]
 

7.966 Chronic Nuisance Abatement Plan

(1) A person in charge shall respond to the Chief or designee within ten (10) days of the date the notice described in section 7.964 was served by submitting a CNAP describing the actions that the person in charge will take to abate, correct, or eliminate the occurrence of chronic nuisance activities.
(2) The Chief or designee shall review the CNAP submitted by the person in charge and shall approve or deny it in writing within ten (10) days of it being submitted.
(3) The Chief or designee shall approve the plan if it is determined that the actions proposed are likely to substantially decrease the incidence of chronic nuisance activities on or around the property.
(4) In the event the CNAP is denied, the reasons for the denial shall be included and the person in charge shall have ten (10) days to resubmit a plan for approval.
(5) After the Chief or designee approves a CNAP, the person in charge shall implement it in accordance with the timeline and terms set forth within the CNAP.
[Added Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2017-42, May 4, 2017.]
 

7.968 Violation

(1)  Any property within the City which is a chronic nuisance property is subject to the remedies prescribed in this ordinance.
(2)  Any person in charge in violation of this ordinance shall be subject to the remedies prescribed in this ordinance.
(3)  The following actions constitute a violation of this ordinance:
(a) failing to submit a CNAP as required by section 7.966(1);
(b) failing to submit an approved CNAP as required by section 7.966(4);
(c) failing to implement the CNAP in accordance with the timeline and terms set forth within the plan as required by section 7.966(5); or
(d) a report of an additional nuisance activity at the property after service of the notice described in section 7.964.
(4) A violation of subsection (3) of this section constitutes a violation.  Every day in which the violation exists constitutes a separate violation. 
[Added Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2017-42, May 4, 2017.]
 

7.970 Commencement of Civil Action; Remedies

(1) If the person in charge fails to submit and implement a CNAP as required, or the approved CNAP does not result in the abatement of the chronic nuisance activity, the City Manager may refer the matter to the City Attorney to commence legal proceedings to seek closure of the property, the imposition of civil penalties, and any such other relief deemed appropriate.  The action shall be brought in any court of competent jurisdiction, including the City of Medford Municipal Court. The court may award attorney fees to the prevailing party.
(2) The action shall be commenced by the filing of a complaint alleging facts constituting the nuisance activities, and containing a legal description of the property involved and an allegation that the owners of record of the property have been notified of the facts giving rise to the alleged nuisance activities at least ten (10) days prior to the filing of the action with the court.
(3) The complaint shall be served as provided in Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure (ORCP) 7. No service need be made prior to an application for a temporary restraining order, provided the procedures of ORCP 79 B are followed with regard to all persons entitled to service under this section.
(4) If after the commencement but prior to the trial of any action or suit brought by the City, a person in charge stipulates with the City that he or she will pursue a course of action the parties agree will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation, the City may agree to stay proceedings for a period of not less than ten (10) days nor more than sixty (60) days.  The person in charge or the City may thereafter petition the court for such additional periods of time as may be necessary to complete the action(s) to abate the nuisance activities.  However, in the event that the City reasonably believes the person in charge of a property is not diligently pursuing the action(s) necessary to abate the nuisance activities, the City may apply to the court for release from the stay and may seek such relief as is deemed appropriate.
(5) When a person in charge responds to the Medford Police Department as required by this ordinance, statements made in connection with that response shall not constitute an admission of any chronic nuisance activities. This subsection does not require the exclusion of any evidence that is otherwise admissible or offered for any other purpose.
(6)  If the existence of the nuisance is established in the action, an order of abatement shall be entered as part of the judgment in the case.  The order may contain any or all of the following remedies:
(a) Order that the property be closed and secured against all access, use, and occupancy for a period of not less than six (6) months, nor more than one (1) year.  The court shall retain jurisdiction during any period of closure.  The person in charge may petition the court for an order reducing the period of closure if the person in charge and the City stipulate that the nuisance has been and will continue to be abated.  The court shall not include provisions for the closing of the premises under the provisions of this subsection unless that relief is specifically requested in the complaint.
(b) Impose a civil penalty of up to $250 per day for each day nuisance activities occurred on the property following notice;
(c) any other relief prayed for and deemed appropriate.
(7) A property shall no longer be determined to be a chronic nuisance property either after the passage of one year from the date of the last reported chronic nuisance activity or the date the chronic nuisance abatement plan was approved, whichever is later.
(8)  The provisions of section 7.960 through 7.978 are separate and distinct remedies from those specified in Medford Code sections 5.520 through 5.535.  Nothing in these provisions shall require any conviction for criminal activities prior to the commencement of any action provided herein.
[Added Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2017-42, May 4, 2017.]

7.972 Burden of Proof, Defenses, Mitigation of Civil Penalty

(1) The City shall have the initial burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the property is a chronic nuisance property. 
(2) It is an affirmative defense to an action against a chronic nuisance property that the person in charge at all material times could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had become chronic nuisance property, or could not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct leading to the determination that the property is a chronic nuisance property.
(3)  In establishing the amount of any civil penalty requested, the Court may consider any of the following factors and shall cite those found applicable:
(a)  The actions taken by the person in charge to mitigate or correct the nuisance activities at the property;
(b)  The financial condition of the person in charge;
(c)  Whether the problem at the property was repeated or continuous;
(d)  The magnitude or gravity of the problem;
(e)  The cooperativeness of the person in charge with the city;
(f)  The cost incurred by the city for investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the nuisance activities;
(g)  Any other factor deemed by the court to be relevant.
[Added Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2017-42, May 4, 2017.]

7.974 Closure During Pendency of Action; Emergency Closures

Any emergency closure proceeding initiated under this ordinance shall be based on evidence showing that nuisance activities have occurred on the property and that emergency action is necessary to avoid an immediate threat to public welfare and safety.  Proceedings to obtain an order of emergency closure shall be governed by the provisions of ORCP 79 for obtaining temporary restraining orders.
[Added. Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2017-42, May 4, 2017.

7.976 Enforcement; Award of Costs and Disbursements or Attorney Fees

(1)  The court may authorize the City to physically secure the property against all access, use, or occupancy in the event that the person in charge fails to do so within the time specified by the court.  In the event that the City is authorized to secure the property, all costs reasonably incurred by the City to physically secure the property shall be paid to the City by the person in charge and shall be included in a judgment pursuant to ORCP 68.  The judgment shall also include an award of the City’s other costs and disbursements and attorney fees, if applicable.
(2) The person in charge shall pay reasonable relocation costs of a tenant as determined by the court if, without actual notice, the tenant moved into the property after either:
(a)  A person in charge received a notice from the Chief or designee that the property has become a chronic nuisance property; or
(b)  A person in charge was served with a complaint to close a chronic nuisance property.
(3) Any person who is assessed costs and disbursements and/or attorney fees under this section shall be personally liable for the payment thereof to the city.
[Added Sec. 17, Ord. No. 2017-42, May 4, 2017.]
 

7.978 Severability

The provisions of sections 7.960 through 7.978 are intended to be consistent with any applicable provisions of state law.  If any provision or its application to any person or circumstances, is held to be invalid for any reason, the remainder of these provisions, or the application of them to other persons or circumstances, shall not in any way be affected.
[Added Sec. 18, Ord. No. 2017-42, May 4, 2017.]

8 Business

8 Business (8.001 to 8.004)

8.001 Review of Business License Application

(1) Any application for a license required by this chapter other than a home occupation license shall be referred to the planning department, building department, public works department-engineering division, police department, and fire marshal for endorsement. Within ten (10) days, the planning department, building department, public works department-engineering division, police department, and fire marshal shall endorse favorably the application if they find that the specified location, site, and existing structure (if one is to be used) can lawfully be used for the conduct of the proposed activity under the provisions of this Code, county, state or federal law.  If the department cannot make such a finding, it shall return the application to the City Manager, or designee, with a negative endorsement, stating the reasons. The applicant shall be promptly notified by mail of any negative endorsements by the Finance Department and shall also be notified of the right to appeal the action and the procedure for appeal.

(2) Home occupation license applications shall be reviewed for compliance with the criteria listed in Section 8.001(2)(a) through (g) and endorsed by the Finance Department following the procedure provided in Section 8.001(1).  Home occupation businesses must conform to the following criteria:

(a) Home occupation activities conducted at the authorized residential property shall be restricted to the interior of the dwelling unit or enclosed accessory structure.

(b) Outdoor storage, including but not limited to trailers, inventory, supplies, or equipment, visible from the public right of way or adjacent properties or common areas is prohibited.

(c) Inventory stored on the residential premises shall not include flammable liquids, fireworks, explosives or any "hazardous materials" as defined in the Uniform Fire Code adopted by the City.

(d) Home occupation activities conducted at the authorized residential property must be conducted only by persons lawfully residing in the dwelling at the authorized residential property.

(e) The home occupation site shall not be used as a location for employees to assemble.

(f) Total residential and business motor vehicle traffic to and from the premises (deliveries or customers) shall not exceed an average of ten (10) trips per day during any five-day period. In no case shall the total residential and business motor vehicle traffic to and from the premises exceed sixteen (16) trips per day. Each departure from and each arrival at the premises shall be counted as a separate trip.

(g) Repair, reconditioning, dismantling or storage of motorized vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles, or large equipment on the premises is prohibited.

[Amd. Ord. No. 7688, June 16, 1994; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 1998-233, Oct. 15, 1998; Amd. Ord. No. 2001-09, Jan. 18, 2001; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2007-98, June 7, 2007; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2008-174, Aug. 21, 2008; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2013-128, Sept. 5, 2013.]


8.003 Denial or Revocation of License

(1) If the applicant makes any material misrepresentation on the sworn application, the City Manager (or designee) shall deny or revoke the business license upon discovery of the misrepresentation and bar the applicant from doing business in the city for one year from the date of discovery by the city of the misrepresentation.

(2) If the application or the investigation by the city discloses information which indicates that the business would be engaged in unlawful activity or that the specified location, site, and existing structure (if one is to be used) cannot lawfully be used for the conduct of the proposed activity or that the applicant lacks any license or permit required by the city or any other government agency, the application shall be denied by the city manager (or designee).

(3) If an existing licensed business is found to be engaged in unlawful activity or if it is determined that the specified location, site, and existing structure (if one is to be used) cannot lawfully be used for the conduct of the business activity, the business license shall be revoked by the city manager (or designee) and the applicant shall be barred from doing business on the formerly licensed premises for one year from the date of discovery by the city of the unlawful activity.

(4) If an existing licensed business is found to lack any license or permit required by the city or any other government agency, and the business fails to obtain the license or permit and present satisfactory proof of same within fifteen (15) business days after notice of such deficiency is mailed to the business, the license shall be revoked by the city manager (or designee).

(5)  As used herein, "unlawful activity" includes but is not limited to violations of local, state or federal law.

(6)       (a) Upon the determination that the conduct of a business licensee creates an imminent threat to life or property, the business license may be summarily suspended.  If the activities of the business  licensee cause any property to be or remain in the public way, the property of the business licensee may be removed from the public way by the City and the costs of such removal be assessed to the business licensee.

(b) The suspension takes effect immediately upon notice of suspension being received by the holder of the business license, or being delivered to the business address as stated on the business license being suspended. Such notice shall state the reason for the suspension.

(c)  The City may continue the suspension as long as the reason for the suspension exists or until a determination on appeal regarding the suspension is made under Section 8.004.

(d)  A summary suspension under this Section may be appealed by the business licensee in the manner set forth in Section 8.004.

[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 1998-233, Oct. 15, 1998; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-174, Aug. 21, 2008; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2013-128, Sept. 5, 2013; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2014-103, Aug. 21, 2014.]


8.004 Appeal of Denial, Revocation, Classification or Exemption of License

(1)   An applicant denied a business license, or a holder of a business license that has received a notice of revocation or summary suspension shall have the right to appeal that action to the City Manager (or designee). A written appeal must be filed within seven (7) calendar days after the date of the notice of the action. The written appeal filed must state the basis for the appeal and be accompanied by the filing fee in an amount set by Council resolution. The fee shall be refunded if the denial or revocation decision is not affirmed or upheld.

(2)   The revocation of a business license does not take effect until final determination of the appeal. Notwithstanding this paragraph, a summary suspension shall take effect upon issuance of, or such other time stated in, the notice of suspension.

(3)   Unless the appellant and City agree to a longer period of time, an appeal shall be heard within fourteen (14) calendar days of receipt of the written appeal. The City Manager (or designee) shall give the appellant and any other persons requesting the same, at least seven (7) days’ notice of the time and place of such hearing.

(4)   At the time and place set for the hearing upon the appeal of the denial or revocation, the City Manager (or designee) shall give the appellant and any other interested party a reasonable opportunity to be heard. The City Manager (or designee) shall hear and determine the appeal on the basis of the applicant's written appeal statement and any additional evidence the City Manager (or designee) deems appropriate. At the hearing, the appellant may present testimony and oral argument personally or by counsel. The rules of evidence as used by courts of law do not apply. In all such cases, the burden of proof shall be upon the appellant.

(5)   The City Manager (or designee) shall uphold, or modify and uphold, the denial or revocation, or reverse the denial or revocation and render a new decision in the matter consistent with the requirements of the application or license in question. The decision of the City Manager (or designee) shall be issued within ten (10) calendar days of the hearing and shall be in writing and contain findings of fact and a determination of the issues presented.   An applicant wishing to appeal the decision of the City Manager (or designee) shall have the right to appeal to the City Council under the procedures set out in section 1.025 of this code.

[Added, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 1998-233, Oct. 15, 1998; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2007-98, June 7, 2007; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2008-62, April 3, 2008; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2008-174, Aug. 21, 2008.; Amd. Ord. No. 2011-74, May 5, 2011; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2014-103, Aug. 21, 2014; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

8 Licenses For Revenue (8.005 to 8.080)

8.005 Purpose and Scope

(1)  A business license provides the city with an opportunity to determine whether the location, site, and existing structure (if one is to be used) can lawfully be used for the conduct of the proposed activity under the provisions of the Medford Code. The license grants the applicant the conditional privilege of doing business in the city, but it does not constitute a representation or a warranty by the city as to the legality of the business or its activities. The business license tax imposed by the terms of Sections 8.005 to 8.080 is a privilege tax imposed on a business at the time of issuance or renewal of a business license; the tax is for revenue purposes only and no part of the tax shall be considered to be a regulatory fee.

(2) A Residential Rental Registration provides the city with an opportunity to assess the location, quantity, existing structures and utilization of the housing stock within the City of Medford. The registration grants the applicant the conditional privilege of doing business in the city, but it does not constitute a representation or a warranty by the city as to the legality of the business or its activities. The residential rental registration tax imposed by the terms of Sections 8.005 to 8.080 is a privilege tax imposed on a business at the time of issuance or renewal of a business license; the tax is for revenue purposes only and no part of the tax shall be considered to be a regulatory fee.

(3)  Neither the acceptance of the prescribed tax nor the issuance of the applicable license shall be construed to permit any activity otherwise prohibited by law or this code, or to waive any regulatory licensing requirement or fee imposed by any other sections of this code.

[Amd., Sec. 4, Ord. No. 1998-233, Oct. 15, 1998; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2006-229, Oct. 19, 2006.]


8.010 Definitions

The following terms as used in Section 8.005 to 8.070 shall mean:

(1) Business. Any activity, trade, profession, occupation, calling or regular pursuit carried on with the intent that profit be realized therefrom.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, all state and federally recognized not-for-profit corporations who either have an office or provide services within the City of Medford shall apply and be subject to the business license review process described in this chapter.

(2) Doing or transacting business. Any act or series of acts performed in the course of pursuit of a business activity.

(3) Expense. The cost of goods sold, the expense of services rendered, and all other expenses or disbursements, accrued or otherwise, ordinarily incidental to the operation of a business.

(4) Profit. The excess of gross receipts over expense.

(5) Person. A natural person, corporation or other legal entity.

(6) "Dwelling unit" means a structure or the part of a structure that is used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one person who maintains a household or by two or more persons who maintain a common household. "Dwelling unit" regarding a person who rents a space for a manufactured dwelling or recreational vehicle or regarding a person who rents moorage space for a floating home as defined in ORS 830.700, but does not rent the home, means the space rented and not the manufactured dwelling, recreational vehicle or floating home itself.

(7)  Secondary licensee.  A person, independent contractor or sub licensee who is not otherwise licensed under this Chapter operating out of a commercial location.  Shall include but not be limited to:  beauticians, nail technicians, yoga instructors, masseuses, tattoo artists.

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5645, Apr. 17, 1986; Amd. Ord. No. 2005-168, Aug. 18, 2005; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2006-229, Oct. 19, 2006; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2007-98, June 7, 2007.]


8.015 Business License Required

(1) No person, for himself or as agent or employee of another, shall do business within the city unless:
 
(a) Such business has been duly licensed as provided in Sections 8.005 to 8.070; and,
 
(b) The license is valid at the time of the transaction.

(2) In addition to the penalties provided by Section 8.900, this section may be enforced by means of a civil action in the Circuit Court for Jackson County wherein the city may seek an injunction and other appropriate relief.

(3)  No business license shall be issued to any person to engage in a business that does not comply with local, state or federal law. 

[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 1998-233, Oct. 15, 1998; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2013-128, Sept. 5, 2013; Amd. Ord. No. 2014-30, March 20, 2014; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2016-128, October 6, 2016.]

8.020 Issuance

Upon receipt of the application favorably endorsed as prescribed in Section 8.001, together with the required tax and any past due tax and penalty, the City Manager shall issue a business license to any applicant desiring to transact or conduct any lawful business within the city, unless the application is denied pursuant to Section 8.003. Licenses so issued shall be valid for the 12-month period beginning on the first day of doing business in the city and ending on the first day of the anniversary month of the calendar year next following.

[Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 1998-233, Oct. 15, 1998; Amd. Ord. No. 2005-169, Aug. 18, 2005; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2006-229, Oct. 19, 2006.]


8.030 Applications

(1) Business License:  An application for business license shall be submitted on a form provided by the City Manager, shall be signed by the owner or his duly authorized agent and shall contain the following information:

(a) Name of person or persons owning business;

(b) Assumed business name, if any;

(c) Address of business premises and business mailing address;

(d) Nature of business, including the primary or predominant business activity;

(e) Number of employees (full time and part time), if applicable;

(f) Number of living or space-rental units, if applicable;

(g) Whether any state and federal licenses and permits are required for the business and satisfactory proof that all such licenses and permits have been issued and are currently in effect; and

(h) Where the business premises of an applicant are situated outside of the city, the number of employees to be engaged in the transaction of the business within the city. The license issued on the basis of the application shall be valid only to permit the specified number of employees to transact business within the city at any one time; and

(i) Any other information pertinent to the application required by City Manager; and

(j) A verification by signature of the person submitting the application that the facts stated thereon are true as he reasonably believes.

(k) Whether there are any age-based restrictions on customer access to any portion of the premises or sales.

(2) Residential Rental Registration: The submission of the residential rental registration shall be on a form provided by the City Manager, shall be signed by the owner or his duly authorized agent and shall contain the following information:

(a) Property address of the rental dwelling(s)

(b) Number of bedrooms

(c) Year built

(d) Type of dwelling

(e) Contact Information

(f) Owner information (including all owner names, percentage of ownership, phone, contact name i.e., general partner or trustee, and mailing address).

(g) Type of Ownership

(3) License taxes shall be computed on the basis of information contained in the application and any other reliable information known to the Finance Director. No person shall knowingly sign or submit a business license application containing false information.

(4) The applicant shall notify the city within 30 days of any change of any information contained in the application. The application form shall contain a notice informing the applicant of this requirement. Failure to notify the city shall be treated as a misrepresentation.

(5)  The Finance Director or any designee may examine during normal business hours the books, papers and other records of any person to determine the accuracy of such information.

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7346, April 1, 1993; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 1998-233, Oct. 15, 1998; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2006-229, Oct. 19, 2006.]


8.035 Contents of Licenses

Licenses shall be issued to the applicant in the name of the business to be licensed and shall designate the nature of the business, the owner, the address, if any, of the business premises, the date of issuance and the date of expiration.

8.040 Two or More Business Premises; Two or More Businesses on Same Premises

The conducting of a business or businesses at two or more locations shall, for the purposes hereof, be deemed to be separate businesses and each shall be subject to the business license tax. A person engaged in the rental or leasing of real estate is not required to have more than one license, unless he has more than one business office in the city. If two or more businesses are carried on in the same premises by the same owners, one license issued in the name of the business to which the premises are primarily appropriated and based upon the total number of employees or other units on the whole premises shall be sufficient for all such activities; provided, any business activity leased, under concession to, or owned wholly or in part by a different person or persons on the same premises must be separately licensed.

8.045 Repealed Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2006-229, Oct. 19, 2006

 


8.050 Repealed Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2006-229, Oct. 19, 2006

 


8.055 Business License Term

(1) The business license term shall be the 12-month period beginning on the first day of doing business in the city and ending on the first day of the anniversary month of the calendar year next following. The business license tax shall be computed and paid on the basis contained in Section 8.060. The fee thus computed shall be for 12 months of business operation. Tax shall be due on the first day of the anniversary month each year, whether or not an application has been filed or license issued.

(2)  The temporary business license term shall be the 60-day period beginning on the first day of doing buisness in the city and ending 60 days later.  The temporary business license tax shall be computed and paid on the basis contained in Section 8.060.

(3) A person who has paid the tax for the year and goes out of business during that year shall be entitled to claim a prorata refund for the quarters beginning after the last day of business. A person who has not paid the tax and goes out of business shall pay only for those quarters when the person was in business without penalty.

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5798, Feb. 5, 1987; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2000-72, April 20, 2000; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2006-229, Oct. 19, 2006.]


8.060 License Tax

(1) Except as provided in Subsection (3), the license tax for any business taxed hereunder shall be as follows:
Basic Fee
$100.00


(2) The types of businesses listed below shall pay the basic fee, or may, at the option of the owner, be taxed in accordance with the following schedule:

Type

License Fee

Home Occupation Fee	$60.00
Secondary License Fee	$60.00
Temporary 60-day License

$40.00

Residential Rental Registration (in lieu of business license) effective January 1, 2007:

 

0-1 Units

$0.00

2+ units

Base Fee: $40.00, Plus $1.00 for each unit

(3) The tax imposed by this section shall be in addition to any regulatory or other permit fee or other tax imposed by the city.

[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 5645, Apr. 17, 1986; Amd. Ord. No. 5928, Aug. 6, 1987; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2000-72, April 20, 2000; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2003-178, June 19, 2003; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2005-174, Aug. 18, 2005.  Fee effective Oct. 1, 2005; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2006-229, Oct. 19, 2006.  Fee effective Nov. 1, 2006, except for the Residential Rental Registration, which shall be effective Jan. 1, 2007; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2007-98, June 7, 2007(effective July 1, 2007).]

8.065 Evidence of Doing Business

A public representation, by way of any medium of advertisement, that any business is being conducted in the city is prima facie evidence of the facts so represented without proof of responsibility for the publication.

8.070 Payment Due Dates

In the case of a business first commencing, business license taxes shall be paid in full within thirty days after the first day of doing business in the city. For each succeeding calendar year the tax shall be paid in full not later than the first day of the anniversary month. If the Finance Department is closed on the normal due date, then the next business day shall be the due date.
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 5798, Feb. 5, 1987; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2000-72, April 20, 2000.]

8.075 Past Due Taxes

(1) Taxes not paid in full by the due date shall be deemed delinquent and subject to a flat rate penalty of $25.00 or 10%, whichever is greater. Payment shall be deemed to have been made on the date it is delivered to the Finance Department or on the postmark date if mailed.

(2) A new, previously unlicensed, business shall be assessed for past due business license taxes for only one previous 12-month period before the year in which the business was first notified by the City that the tax was due, regardless of how long the business existed prior to such notification.

[Amd. Ord. No. 5633, Mar. 20, 1986; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2000-72, April 20, 2000; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2006-229, Oct. 19, 2006.]


8.080 Exemptions from License Requirements

The following persons are exempt from the tax imposed under Section 8.060:

(1) Any person who is exempt from taxation under Section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States and produces an IRS determination letter of proof thereof;

(2) Government agencies and instrumentalities.

(3) Persons whose only business transactions in the city consist of the following:

(a) Sales, exchanges or involuntary conversions of real property not held for sale in the ordinary course of trade or business, unless the real property is used in the trade or business in connection with the production of income;

(b) The sale of personal property acquired for household or other personal use by the seller;

(c) Interest and dividends earned from investments which are not part of a trade or business and gains or losses incurred from the sale of investments which are not a part of a trade or business;

(d) An hourly, daily, weekly, monthly or annual wage or salary or commissions paid by his employer.

(4) Public utilities covered by franchise ordinances and paying taxes or fees to the city under the terms of the franchise.

(5) Businesses located outside the city having no permanent or temporary place of business in the city.  However, service businesses located outside the city that perform services within the city shall not be exempt.  

(6) Interstate common carriers licensed by the applicable federal regulatory agency, but their local agents shall not be exempt.

(7) Businesses exclusively engaged in interstate commerce which have no activities in the city other than an office.

(8) Businesses in which the field of taxing has been specifically preempted by the State of Oregon or the federal government, including but not limited to:

(a) Insurance agents and insurers other than domestic insurers formed under the laws of the State of Oregon, and

(b) Alcoholic liquor and beverage distributors.

(9) Beggars.

(10) Residential day care or child-caring facilities which are not required to have a Conditional Use Permit under Chapter 10 of this Code.

(11) Foster homes as defined in ORS 418.625(2) and adult foster homes as defined in ORS 443.705(1).

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5414, Apr. 4, 1985; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5645, Apr. 17, 1986; Amd. Ord No. 7261, Dec. 3, 1992; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 7346, Apr. 1, 1993, effective July 1, 1993; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord No. 2006-229, Oct. 19, 2006; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2007-98, June 7, 2007; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-62, April 3, 2008; Amd. Ord. No. 2009-255, Dec. 3, 2009.]

8 Regulatory Licenses and Business Regulations (8.100)

8.100 Licenses Required

The regulatory licenses and license fees required under sections 8.100 to 8.820 shall be in addition to any business license and tax required under sections 8.005 to 8.080. The Finance Director may prescribe forms to be used in applying for regulatory licenses. Unless otherwise provided in sections 8.100 to 8.820, the term of all regulatory licenses shall be the same as that for the business license and the license fee shall be due at the time the first application for license is submitted and thereafter on the first day of the anniversary month of each succeeding calendar year.
[Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2000-72, April 20, 2000.]

8 Pawnbrokers and Secondhand Dealers (8.105 to 8.165)

8.105 Definitions

As used in Sections 8.105 to 8.165, the following words shall mean:

(1) Pawnbroker: A person engaged in the business of loaning money for himself or for any other person upon personal property, personal security, pawns or pledges, or the business of purchasing articles of personal property and reselling or agreeing to resell such articles to the vendors or their assigns at prices agreed upon at or before the time of such purchase.

(2) Pawnshop: Any room, store, or place in which a pawnbroker is engaged in, carries on, or conducts his business.

(3) Secondhand dealer: A person engaged in the business of buying from the general public any item of value, including but not limited to, goods, wares, or merchandise, whether new or used, for resale: jewelry, watches, precious stones, precious metals, firearms, bicycles, stereo equipment, hand tools, or musical instruments, power tools, antiques, furniture, CDs, DVDs, trading cards, or any other item of value. The term does not include dealers who only acquire such goods as trade-ins.

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2005-285, Dec. 15, 2005; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2014-159, Dec. 18, 2014; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2015-83, Aug. 20, 2015.]


8.110 Records Required

Every person engaged in the business of a pawnbroker or dealer in secondhand goods shall provide an electronic record utilizing the electronic reporting system in use by the city of all articles of any kind purchased or received, whether or not the property is new or used.  The electronic record shall at all times during business hours be open to the inspection of the chief of police or any police officer.

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2004-104, June 3, 2004; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2005-285, Dec. 15, 2005.]


8.115 Report Required

(1) Except as provided in Subsection (2), every pawnbroker and secondhand dealer shall utilize the city's electronic pawn reporting system to make an electronic report and the report shall be a full, true, and complete report of all goods, wares, merchandise, or things received on deposit, pledged, or purchased, whether or not the property is new or used.  The report shall show the hour of the day when the article was received on deposit, pledged, or purchased, and the number of the pawn ticket, amount loaned, amount purchased, a complete description of each article left on deposit, pledged or purchased and the name and address of the person from whom the article was acquired. No item shall be received unless the person from whom the article is acquired exhibits a driver's license or state-issued ID card and the identifying number is recorded on the report. Each pawn ticket issued shall be numbered consecutively, and if stubs are used in connection with the pawn ticket, each stub shall be numbered consecutively to conform to the ticket. If any article so left on deposit, pledged, or purchased has engraved thereon a number, word, or initial, or contains settings of any kind, the description of the article in the report shall contain the number, word, or initial and shall show the kind of settings and the number of each kind.  The electronic pawn reporting system will provide for an upload of a complete electronic report described in this section.  Each pawnbroker and secondhand dealer shall, within 24 hours, provide an electronic upload to the pawn reporting system of all transactions that occurred during that business day.

(2) No secondhand dealer shall be subject to the requirements of Sections 8.115(1) or 8.170 for the following types of property:  

(a)  property purchased from manufacturers or wholesale dealers having an established place of business;

(b)  property purchased in the open market or secured from a person doing business and having an established place of business in the city, but such property shall be accompanied by a bill of sale or other evidence of legitimate purchase and must be shown to the chief of police or a member of the police department upon written order of the chief of police;

(c)  used clothing;

(d)  pre-owned children's merchandise, including but not limited to toys, strollers and baby carriers;

(e)  new clothing with a retail value of less than 20 dollars ($20).

 [Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2004-104, June 3, 2004; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2005-285, Dec. 15, 2005; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2014-159, Dec.. 18, 2014; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2015-83, Aug. 20, 2015.]


8.120 [Repealed Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2004-104, June 3, 2004.]

 


8.125 [Repealed Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2004-104, June 3, 2004.]

 


8.130 Property Held Fifteen Days by Secondhand Dealer

No personal property purchased by a dealer in secondhand goods at his place of business shall be sold from that place of business for the space of fifteen days after the purchase.

[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2014-159, Dec. 18, 2014.]

8.135 [Repealed, Ord. No. 2010-171, Aug. 5, 2010.]

 


8.140 Time to Redeem

It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to allow a person accepting a loan for less than $20.00 a period of 60 days in which to pay the same before the same becomes forfeitable, and all sums over $20.00, a period of three months before the same becomes forfeitable.

8.145 Property Held Fifteen Days by Pawnbroker

No property purchased by any pawnbroker shall be sold from the place of business of such pawnbroker for a space of fifteen days.

[Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2014-159, Dec. 18, 2014.]

8.150 Property Held on Order of Police Chief or His Designee

Whenever the chief of police or his designee by written order notifies a secondhand dealer or pawnbroker not to sell any property so received on deposit or purchased, or permit the same to be redeemed, that property shall not be sold or permitted to be redeemed until such time as may be determined by the chief of police or his designee, not exceeding 15 days from the date of the notice. A copy of the notice shall be left with the secondhand dealer or pawnbroker.

[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2014-159, Dec. 18, 2014.]

8.155 Tags Required

A pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, receiving in pledge or otherwise an article, shall affix to the article a tag, upon which shall be written a number in legible characters, which number shall correspond to the number in the electronic pawn reporting system required to be kept as provided in Section 8.110.

[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2004-106, June 3, 2004.]


8.160 License Required

Every person who shall engage in the business of secondhand dealing or pawnbroker shall, before engaging in such business, obtain from the city a regulatory license.  Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers with less than 1000 transactions per annum shall pay a fee of $56.00 per annum.  Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers with 1000 or more transactions per annum shall pay a fee of $167.00 per annum. 

[Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2000-72, April 20, 2000; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2003-178, June 19, 2003; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2004-104, June 4, 2004; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2005-174, Aug. 18, 2005.  Fee effective Oct. 1, 2005; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2007-147, July 5, 2007.]


8.165 Signs

No person or persons shall exhibit any sign usually known as pawnbrokers' signs, such as three balls, or any number of balls, without first having obtained from the city a license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

8.170 Digital Photographs of All Purchased Property

Every person engaged in the business of a pawnbroker or dealer in secondhand goods shall provide a clear digital photograph of all purchased property. The digital photograph shall be uploaded into the city’s electronic pawn reporting system. This requirement does not apply to pawnbrokers accepting a pledge loan.  This section shall be effective March 22, 2015.

[Added, Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2014-159, Dec. 18, 2014, effective March 22, 2015.]
 
8 Social Gaming (8.180)

8.180 Social Gaming

Social gaming as authorized by state law, is permitted subject to the following restrictions:
(A)  No person may participate in social gaming other than a player as defined by ORS 167.117(16).
(B)  No person may act as “house player” or “house bank.”
(C)  All games shall be conducted without house odds.
(D)  No house income may be generated from the operation of the social game.
(E)  The person responsible for the premises where social gaming occurs shall not permit any individual  who is visibly intoxicated to participate in social gaming.
(F)  No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted to participate in a social game or to enter or remain upon the premises where social games are being played.
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2016-86, July 21, 2016.]

8 Goat Grazing for Vegetation Management (8.185)

8.8.185 Goat Grazing for Vegetation Management

The City Council of the City of Medford finds and declares that the purpose of this ordinance is to promote the safety and welfare of the general public by allowing and regulating the use of goats for the purpose of grazing for targeted vegetation removal on parcels of land within the City of Medford.
(A)   Definitions. Words and phrases used in this ordinance shall have the following meanings ascribed to them:
          (1) “Client” means any individual within the City who contracts with a contractor    to hire/rent one or more goats for the purpose of vegetation management.
         (2) “Contractor” means a person who owns one or more goats, and holds the goats   out for rental or hire.
         (3) “Goat handler” means any person employed by or under contract with a        
 Contractor for the purpose of handling, transporting, and overseeing goats 
 used for targeted vegetation management.
         (4) “Grazing” means targeted vegetation management.
         (5) “Herd” means the animals available to rent for the purpose of targeted grazing.

(B)   Business license required; regulatory license fees.
         (1) Contractor shall conduct business in the City without obtaining a business    license as described in Chapter 8.005 to 8.080 of this Code.
         (2) The City may issue a business license to a Contractor in accordance with the     
business licensing process outlined in Chapter 8.030 of this Code.
         (3) The City may include conditions, restrictions, or special provisions in the    
business license, including but not limited to conditions related to times of       
operation, fencing and containment, lighting, or other conditions, if, in the sole 
discretion of the City, the applicant’s materials or the nature of the property on
which the goats are to manage, warrant conditions, restrictions, or special   
provisions.
         (4) A license issued under this chapter is valid for one year, and may be renewed as described in Chapter 8.055 of this Code.
        (5) The application fee for a business license under this section shall be $100.00, as  required for a “basic fee” per Chapter 8.060 of this Code.
       (6) The application fee shall be paid to the City at the time of submitting a license    application or renewal.
       (7) No Contractor or Goat Handler shall conduct business in the City without a    
valid business license.

(C)  Contractor/Goat Handler requirements.
      (1) Contractors and/or goat handlers who transport the goats within city limits must possess a valid driver license, proof of motor vehicle registration, and proof of current automobile liability insurance that meets the requirements of this chapter and state law.
     (2) Every Contractor shall maintain accurate, current records for all employees and goat handlers employed by, contracting with, or otherwise affiliated with the company.
     (3) Contractors shall maintain accurate, current records for every animal in their possession that may be rented out for use under this subsection.
    (4) Contractors shall comply with all disease control requirements prescribed in Chapter 596 of the Oregon Revised Statutes.
(D)  Operational Requirements.
    (1) Contractors shall maintain records of all jobs performed by their herd, including which members of the herd participated in each job. The data shall include, at minimum, the location of the job; the number of animals on the job; the duration of the job in hours and/or working days; the goat handler(s) in charge of managing the herd; and the rental rate per hour, per animal.
   (2) The duration of grazing is limited to no more than 21 consecutive days on any one property, one-half acre or less in area.  On properties greater than one-half acre in area, the duration of grazing is limited to no more than 21 consecutive days in any one penned area of one-half acre or more in size. Goats may not return to a treated area for 30 days following a grazing treatment.
    (3) Contractor(s) and/or goat handler(s) shall ensure that the animal(s) are properly confined and only graze in areas designated by the property owner. The Contractor shall be liable for damage caused to property if the animals graze outside of the designated vegetation management area.
    (4) Contractors shall be responsible for keeping goats within limits of area of vegetation to be managed.

(E) Revocation, Suspension.
Violation of one or more of the requirements in this section constitutes a violation. Each day in which the violation(s) occurs constitutes a separate violation. In addition to the penalties provided in Section 8.900, violations of this section may be enforced by means of a civil action in the Circuit Court for Jackson County, wherein the City may seek an injunction and other appropriate relief.
[Added Ord. No. 2019-58, Jun. 20, 2019.]

8 Game Machines and Arcades (8.205 to 8.260)

8.205 [Repealed, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2013-32, Feb. 21, 2013.]

Repealed 

8.210 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8456, Aug. 21, 1997.]


8.215 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8456, Aug. 21, 1997.]


8.220 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8456, Aug. 21, 1997.]


8.230 [Repealed Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6089, May 19, 1988.]


8.232 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8456, Aug. 21, 1997.]


8.235 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8456, Aug. 21, 1997.]


8.240 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8456, Aug. 21, 1997.]


8.245 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8456, Aug. 21, 1997.]


8.250 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8456, Aug. 21, 1997.]


8.255 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8456, Aug. 21, 1997.]


8.260 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2013-32, Feb. 21, 2013.]

Repealed 

8 Public Dances (8.305 to 8.315)

8.305 Definition

As used in Sections 8.305 to 8.315, the following term shall mean:
Public Dance. Any dance where the general public is admitted and where people are permitted to dance for a compensation paid directly or indirectly to the owner, proprietor, manager, or operator thereof.

8.310 Dances Subject to Inspection and Supervision

Any public dance at all times shall be subject to police inspection and supervision.

8.315 Minors at Dances

No person shall permit or suffer any minor person under 16 years of age to attend or take part in a dance or remain in a dance hall unless such minor person is in company of at least one of his parents or legal guardian. No minor person under 16 years of age shall make any misrepresentation or false statement as to the age of himself or the age of any other person for the purpose of obtaining the admission of the person as to whose age such statement or representation is made to any dance hall, or the permission for that person to remain therein in violation of this chapter. No person shall represent himself to be a parent or legal guardian of any other person in order that the other person may obtain admission to a public dance hall, or be permitted to remain therein in violation of this chapter.

8 Vehicle for Hire (8.320 to 8.380)

8.320 Title, Intent, and Purposes of Sections 8.325 to 8.380

This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Vehicle for Hire Ordinance of the City of Medford.” The City Council of the City of Medford finds and declares that the purpose of this ordinance is to promote the safety and welfare of the general public by regulating vehicle for hire operators and their drivers within the City of Medford, as authorized by ORS 221.485 and 221.495. Nothing contained in this ordinance is intended or shall be construed to create any liability on the part of the City, its officers or employees for any injury or damage related to any provision of this ordinance, or by reason or in consequence of any act or omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this ordinance on the part of the City, its officers, or employees.
[Added Sec. 18, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]
 

8.325 Definitions

Words and phrases used in this ordinance shall have the following meanings ascribed to them:
(1) “Digital dispatch system” means an internet-based software application, website, platform, or interface that allows for the solicitation, arrangement, or provision of vehicle for hire services and the display of rates, calculation of fares, or acceptance of payment for vehicle for hire services.
(2) “Driver” means any individual person who operates a vehicle for hire within the City.
(3) “Limousine” means a luxury motor vehicle for hire whose chassis and wheelbase have been lengthened beyond the original manufacturer’s specifications, whether at the time of production or after.
(4) “Limousine Company” means any person operating one or more limousines for hire, other than as a driver, regardless of the legal form of the entity and regardless of whether the limousines so operated are owned by the company, leased, or owned by individual members of an entity.
(5) “Operator” means a person engaged in the business of furnishing or operating a business defined by this ordinance, whether upon contract or by offering such service to the public generally.
(6) “Taxi” means a motor vehicle for hire, other than a limousine or transportation network vehicle.
(7) “Taxi Company” means any person operating one or more vehicles for hire, other than as a driver, regardless of the legal form of the entity and regardless of whether the taxis so operated are owned by the company, leased, or owned by individual members of an entity. Taxi Companies do not include Transportation Network Companies.
(8) “Transportation Network” means one or more drivers working as independent contractors and utilizing a digital dispatch system, and using personal motor vehicles in the provision of transportation services.
(9) “Transportation Network Company or TNC” means a person that operates or facilitates a transportation network.
(10) “Transportation Network Vehicle or TNV” means a personal motor vehicle which is used as a vehicle for hire and is part of a transportation network.
(11) “Vehicle for Hire” means a motor vehicle used for the ground transportation of passengers for compensation within the City, including taxis, limousines and transportation network vehicles.  The following vehicles shall not be considered vehicles for hire for the purposes of this ordinance, and are forbidden from operating as a taxi, limousine, or transportation network vehicle: (a) Ambulances equipped and staffed so as to be capable of providing emergency medical services in conjunction with passenger transportation; (b) Courtesy vehicles used by a hotel, motel, car rental company, residential home, parking facility, or other business to transport that business' clients when transportation is secondary to the business' primary purpose and the transportation is free or contained in the general overhead of the business; (c) Non-motorized vehicles such as horse-drawn vehicles; (d) Property delivery vehicles used for delivering property exclusive of passenger transportation; (e) Shuttle vehicles and buses used for providing passenger transportation over a fixed route and time schedule; and (f) Volunteer-driven vehicles operated by a driver who is reimbursed for basic mileage expenses and who does not receive wages, salary, or other compensation.
(12) “Vehicle for hire agency” means a business engaged in furnishing or providing one or more vehicles for hire through a digital dispatch system or by any other means, regardless of whether such business has employees or delivers its services through independent contractors, including a transportation network company.
(13) “Vehicle for hire driver” means a person who carries on the vocation of driving a vehicle for hire.
[Added Sec. 19, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

8.330 Business License Required for Operators and Drivers; Regulatory License Fees

(1) No Operator shall conduct business in the City without obtaining the applicable regulatory license set out in subsection (2).
(2) The City may issue a License to an Operator if the company certifies on a form acceptable to the City that it is in compliance with all requirements of this chapter, including but not limited to driver and insurance requirements, operating standards, and any other code requirements, and actually meets all applicable standards and requirements.
(3) The City may include conditions, restrictions, or special provisions in the License, including but not limited to conditions related to routes, times of operation, lighting, alternative requirements or means of meeting requirements, or other conditions, if, in the sole discretion of the City, the applicant’s vehicles or operations warrant conditions, restrictions, or special provisions.
(4) The License issued under this chapter is valid for one year. Any renewal must be
approved by the City prior to the expiration date in order for the Operator to continue providing vehicle for hire services within the City.
(5) The application fee shall be based on the number of drivers operating for the Operator at the time of the application, and shall be intended to account for the City’s costs in administering this code and for the City’s costs in operating and maintaining streets within the City. The fee shall be $1,000 for Transportation Network Companies, $100 for Taxi Companies, and $60 for Drivers.
(6) The application fee shall be paid to the City at the time of submitting both initial and renewal License applications.
(7) No Operator or Driver shall conduct business in the City without a valid business license. 
[Added Sec. 20, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

8.335 Driver Requirements

(1) Drivers shall be at least 21 years of age and shall possess a valid driver license, proof of motor vehicle registration, and proof of current automobile liability insurance that meets the requirements of this chapter and state law.
(2) Every Operator shall maintain accurate, current records for all drivers employed by, contracting with, or otherwise affiliated with the company, including all drivers accessing the company’s digital network to operate in the City.  The records shall include the driver’s name, date of birth, address, social security number, criminal background check results, driver’s license information, motor vehicle registration, and automobile insurance.  Operators shall provide a person in compliance with this section written notice of compliance, who shall then submit the notice to the City as part of the business license application required by section 8.330(3).
(3) Prior to permitting a person to operate as a Driver, and annually thereafter, the Operator shall conduct, or have a qualified third party conduct, a criminal background check. The criminal background check shall include a search of no less than seven years of history, unless prohibited by law, in which case the duration of the search shall be the maximum number of years permitted by law. The criminal background check shall include local, state, and national criminal history databases and all accessible sex offender registries. Any person who is on a sex offender registry, or any person that has a record of a felony conviction within the previous seven years may not act as a driver. A record of a conviction of any of the following within the previous seven years will also disqualify a person from acting as a driver: crimes involving driving under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances, sexual offenses, or crimes involving physical harm or attempted physical harm to a person. The company or its agent shall maintain records of a criminal background checks for a period of at least two years. For purposes of this section, the term “conviction” includes convictions, bail forfeitures, and other final adverse findings.
(4) An Operator must revoke a driver’s authority to operate as a driver for their company and inform the City if it finds at any time that the standards set forth in this section are no longer being met by the driver. The Operator shall only reinstate a driver upon a finding by the company that all standards are again being met by the driver.
[Added Sec. 21, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

8.340 Insurance Requirements

(1) For all required insurance, Operators shall provide certificates of insurance naming the City, its officers, agents, and employees as additional insured parties and give at least 30 calendar days’ notice to the City before a policy is canceled, expires, or has any reduction in coverage.

(2) Insurance requirements of this section shall be satisfied by insurance issued by a licensed insurer or an eligible surplus lines insurer in the State of Oregon.

(3) The insurance limits for Operators are subject to statutory changes as to maximum limits of liability imposed on municipalities of the State of Oregon during the permit’s term, or other statutory changes.

(4) The adequacy of insurance coverage is subject to the review and approval of the City.

(5) Every Operator shall maintain continuous, uninterrupted coverage for the duration of the License and any operations in the City. Any lapse in insurance coverage, even if it is later backdated by the insurance company, is a violation of this chapter.

(6) Operators shall secure and maintain commercial general liability insurance with limits of not less than $1 million per occurrence and $2 million aggregate for claims arising out of, but not limited to, bodily injury and property damage incurred in the course of operating in the City.

(7) Taxi Companies operating any motor vehicles shall secure and maintain commercial automobile liability insurance covering those vehicles, with a combined single limit of not less than $1 million per occurrence for claims arising out of, but not limited to, bodily injury and property damage incurred in the course of operating in the City.

(8) TNC Service Periods Defined:
(a) Period 1: The TNC Driver has logged into the App or is otherwise connected to the TNC’s digital network, but has not yet accepted a request for a ride from a passenger. For example, the App is open and the driver is waiting for a match.
(b) Period 2: A passenger match has been accepted, but the passenger is not yet picked up (for example, the driver is on the way to pick up the passenger).
(c) Period 3: The passenger is in the vehicle.

(9) Upon City request or as part of an application, TNCs shall provide proof of current valid insurance for City approval covering all affiliated TNC Drivers and vehicles for hire operating for such company and satisfying the minimum requirements of Periods 1, 2, and 3.

(10) All TNCs shall maintain and provide the City with proof of the following automobile liability coverages:
(a) Primary insurance coverage during Period 1 with minimum liability limits of $50,000 per person for death and injury, $100,000 per incident for death and injury, and $25,000 for property damage, plus any other state compulsory coverage.
(b) Primary insurance coverage during Periods 2 and 3 with minimum liability limits of $1 million in combined single limit coverage for death, personal injury and property damage per incident; and $1 million in combined single limit under/uninsured motorist coverage for death, personal injury and property damage per incident.
(c) The required automobile liability insurance shall specifically recognize the driver’s provision of TNC and vehicle for hire services and shall comply with the laws of the State of Oregon and/or other applicable governing bodies.

(11) TNC drivers shall be responsible for maintaining all personal automobile liability insurance required by State law.
[Added Sec. 22, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

8.345 Operational Requirements

(1) TNCs shall maintain records of all trips made by all drivers for at least one year from the date of the trip. The data may be aggregated and/or anonymized, and shall include, at minimum, the locations by ZIP code of trip origination and destination, vehicle miles traveled, trip origination and completion times, trip duration, and passenger wait times from a driver’s acceptance of a request to passenger pick-up. The City may require a TNC to enter a data sharing agreement in order to receive a License.

(2) All vehicles operating for a TNC or Taxi Company shall be clearly marked with the company name or logo. Vehicles operating for a Taxi Company shall include the company name or logo, phone number, and a vehicle identification number in plain sight. Vehicles operated solely for TNC services shall be clearly marked as operating for the TNC, although any vehicle marking requirements imposed by a TNC may apply. The TNC’s software application or website shall display for the passenger the make, model, and license plate number of the TNC vehicle.

(3) TNC drivers may not accept street hails, and may only accept rides arranged through a TNC’s digital network.

(4) Operators shall implement and maintain at all times a zero tolerance policy on the use of drugs or alcohol applicable to all drivers employed by or affiliated with the company while providing vehicle for hire services. Companies shall provide notice of the zero tolerance policy on their website and/or have it clearly displayed in each vehicle. The notice must include contact information to report a complaint about a driver for possible violation of policy. A company shall immediately suspend a driver upon receipt of a passenger complaint alleging a violation of the zero tolerance policy, for at least the duration of the investigation of the complaint.

(5) Operators must provide reasonable accommodations to passengers with disabilities, including passengers accompanied by a service animal, passengers with hearing and visual impairments, and passengers with mobility devices, and must comply with all applicable requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
[Added Sec. 23, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

8.350 Audit

The City may audit Operators up to twice per calendar year to review compliance with this ordinance. Upon request, an Operator shall provide the City a sample of records for up to thirty (30) drivers affiliated with the Operator that have operated in the thirty (30) days preceding the audit.  An audit shall occur at a time and location designated by the City.  In addition to an audit, the City may require an Operator to produce records related to an investigation of a specific allegation of a violation of this ordinance or other applicable law, or to evaluate a complaint. Production of records for an investigation or to evaluate a complaint does not count toward the twice-per-year auditing limit.
[Added Sec. 24, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

8.355 Revocation, Suspension

In addition to the remedies provided for in section 8.900 and ORS 30.315, the City may suspend, revoke, or refuse to issue a license if an Operator or Driver has violated or not met any of the provisions of sections 8.330 through 8.380. A violation includes any failure to meet or maintain any of the requirements or qualifications set forth in sections 8.330 through 8.380, including the procedures and requirements for obtaining and maintaining a business license, the making of any material misrepresentation, or if an Operator or Driver is otherwise engaged in unlawful activity.
[Added Sec. 25, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

8.360 License Effective Date

Any Vehicle for Hire Agency License that is current as of the effective date of this ordinance, shall remain valid, until June 30, 2018, unless the License holder wishes to apply for a new license under this chapter.
[Added. Sec. 26, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

8.365 Charges for Vehicle for Hire Services

(1) Calculation and Display of Charges. All charges for vehicle for hire services shall be calculated and displayed by a taximeter or digital dispatch system. When charges are to be displayed by a taximeter, the taximeter shall be placed in the vehicle for hire so that the reading dial showing the amount to be charged is illuminated and readily discernible to passengers.

(2) Charges to be Registered Only When Vehicle for Hire is Engaged. No taximeter or digital dispatch system shall be operated in any manner so as to cause any charge to be registered thereon except during the time while the vehicle for hire is engaged by a passenger.

(3) Taximeter or Digital Dispatch System to be in Continuous Operation. No passenger shall be carried in any vehicle for hire unless the taximeter or digital dispatch system is in operation, whether or not the trip is entirely within or partially within and partially without the boundaries of the City. The taximeter or digital dispatch system shall be in continuous operation during the entire time that a passenger is being transported for compensation.

(4) Specialized charges. A vehicle for hire agency may impose a specialized charge to carry extra passengers or to deliver goods or other items so long as such specialized charge is clearly calculated and displayed before any service is provided.
[Added Sec. 27, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

8.370 Use of Direct Route Required

A vehicle for hire driver employed to carry a passenger to a definite point shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passenger safely and expeditiously to his destination.
[Added Sec. 28, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

8.375 Smoking Prohibited

(1) It shall be unlawful for any vehicle for hire driver to smoke in the presence of any passenger without the consent of such passenger.
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in a vehicle for hire if oxygen tanks or other devices containing inflammable materials are present in the vehicle.
(3) A violation of this section constitutes a violation.
[Added Sec. 28, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

8.380 Taximeter Inspection

Every taximeter shall be inspected and tested for accuracy by the vehicle for hire agency at least once every six months.
[Added Sec. 30, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]


8 Taxicabs [Repealed]

8.400 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

 

8.405 [Repealed, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

 

8.410 [Repealed, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

 

8.415 [Repealed, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2008-172, Aug. 21, 2008.]

 


8.420 [Repealed, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2008-172, Aug. 21, 2008.]

 


8.425 [Repealed, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

 

8.430 [Repealed, Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

 

8.435 [Repealed, Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2008-172, Aug. 21, 2008.]

 


8.440 [Repealed, Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

 

8.445 [Repealed, Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2008-172, Aug. 21, 2008.]

 


8.450 [Repealed, Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

8 Limousines (8.451 to 8.499)

8.451 [Repealed, Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

 

8.452 [Repealed, Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

  


8.455 [Repealed, Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

 

8.460 [Repealed, Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

 

8.465 [Repealed, Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2008-172, Aug. 21, 2008.]

 


8.470 [Repealed, Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

 

8.475 [Repealed, Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

 

8.480 [Repealed, Sec. 19, Ord. No. 2008-172, Aug. 21, 2008.]

 


8.485 [Repealed, Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

 

8.490 [Repealed, Sec. 21, Ord. No. 2008-172, Aug. 21, 2008.]

 


8.495 [Repealed, Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]

  


8.496 Horse Drawn Vehicle License

No person shall operate a horse drawn vehicle on a public right-of-way without first obtaining a license as provided herein.
[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 1998-52, March 19, 1998.]

8.497 Horse Drawn Vehicle Regulations

(1) The operator of a horse drawn vehicle shall apply for a license and pay a $108.00 annual regulatory license fee as provided in Section 8.100.

(2) No person shall operate a horse drawn vehicle unless the person is twenty-one years of age or older and has not been convicted of any crime set forth in Section 8.335.

(3) The operator of a horse drawn vehicle shall maintain the vehicle in a clean, proper and safe state of repair. Any animals used in the operation shall be gentle and manageable; and the operator shall take every reasonable precaution to ensure the safety of the passengers and the public.

(4) Horse drawn vehicles and/or the horses which draw them shall be equipped with devices designed to catch and hold horse manure so that it does not fall on the ground. If any manure is spilled, the operator shall clean it up immediately.

(5) No person shall operate a horse drawn vehicle unless the operator is covered by liability insurance providing coverage of $100,000.00 for property damage or destruction; $300,000.00 coverage for bodily injury or death of any person, $500,000.00 coverage for each occurrence; or in lieu of such coverage, a single limit liability insurance policy of not less than $500,000.00 covering all claims per occurrence. A certificate of insurance naming the City of Medford as an additional insured shall be filed with the Finance Director at the time of application for the regulatory license as provided in Section 8.100. The operator shall require the insurer to provide a written notice of cancellation to the Finance Director if any insurance policy is canceled.

(6) The operator of a horse drawn vehicle shall comply with all ordinances, statutes and regulatory provisions of the City of Medford, State of Oregon, and other regulatory agencies.

[Added Sec. 2, Ord. No. 1998-52, March 19, 1998; Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2003-178, June 19, 2003; Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2005-174, Aug. 18, 2005.  Fee effective Oct. 1, 2005; Amd. Sec. 17, Ord. No. 2017-96, Oct. 19, 2017, effective Dec. 1, 2017.]


8.498 Operation Prohibited on Designated Streets

(1) No operator of a horse drawn vehicle shall operate the vehicle on the following streets, except for the purpose of crossing those streets, at intersections marked by a traffic control device: Riverside; Central; McAndrews between Crater Lake Avenue and Sage Road; Stewart; Barnett; Biddle Road; Crater Lake Highway; Court; and I-5.

(2) The operator of a horse drawn vehicle shall operate the vehicle in a manner that does not unreasonably obstruct motor vehicle traffic.

[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 1998-52, March 19, 1998.]

8.499 Cancellation of License

If the City Council finds that a licensed horse drawn vehicle operator has failed to comply with the provisions of 8.496 to 8.498 or has caused or permitted any violation by the operator=s employee(s), the Council may direct the operator to appear before it at a regular or special meeting and show cause why the operator=s license should not be suspended or revoked. After the hearing, if the council finds any violation to have occurred, the Council may suspend or revoke the license on such terms and conditions as the Council may deem proper.
[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 1998-52, March 19, 1998.]

8 Armored Car Service, Safe and Lock Companies, Security Alarm Companies (8.500 to 8.585)

8.500 Definitions

For the purposes of Sections 8.500 to 8.585, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the following meaning:

(1) "Shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.

(2) "Armored car service" means any firm, person, partnership, or corporation engaged in the business of transporting cash or other valuables by means of armored cars; provided, however, that term shall not include any armored car service while engaged in interstate commerce.

(3) "Key" means a mechanical, electromechanical, electronic, electromagnetic or other device for operating a lock.

(4)  "Lock" means a mechanical, electromechanical, electronic, electromagnetic or other device that is designed to control access from one area to another or control the use of a device in a structure or vehicle.

(5)  "Locksmith" means a person who services, installs, repairs, rebuilds, rekeys, repins or adjusts locks, hardware peripheral to locks, safes, vaults, safe deposit boxes or mechanical or electronic security systems.

(6)  "Safe and lock companies" means any firm, person, partnership, or corporation engaged in the sale, service, repair, or maintenance of safes and locks.

(7) "Security alarm companies" means any firm, person, partnership, or corporation engaged in the business of selling, trading, servicing, repairing, or maintaining security alarms or security alarm systems.

(8) "License" means an operator’s license issued pursuant to Sections 8.500 to 8.585.

[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2010-111, June 3, 2010; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2010-196, Sept. 2, 2010.]


8.505 Fees Required for Armored Car Service, Locksmith, Safe and Lock Companies, Security Alarm Companies

In addition to fees outlined in Section 8.060, any armored car service, locksmith, safe and lock company, or security alarm company shall have the following non-refundable annual fees:

Operator's Fee - $50.00

Employee ID Card - $30.00 (Employee ID Card fee will be waived if employee has proof of a current, valid license from the State of Oregon Construction Contractors Board.)

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-78, May 4, 2000; Replaced, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2010-111, June 3, 2010; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2010-196, Sept. 2, 2010.]


8.510 Operator's License Required

(1)  No person shall engage in an armored car service, locksmith, safe and lock company, or security alarm company business in the city without a current, valid business license.

(2)  No person shall operate an armored car service, locksmith, safe and lock company, or security alarm company business without a current, valid Employee ID Card as set forth in Section 8.525.

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-63, April 20, 2000; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2010-111, June 3, 2010; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2010-196, Sept. 2, 2010.]


8.515 Application for Operator's License; Fingerprints and Photograph; Application Fee

(1) Applications for operator's licenses issued hereunder shall be made upon blank forms prepared and made available by the Police Department and shall state:

(a) The full name, age, residence, present and previous occupations of the applicant;

(b) Whether the person signing the application is a citizen of the United States;

(c) A specific description of the location of the principal place of business of the applicant;

(d) The number of years of experience the applicant has had in the field for which the application is made;

(e) The length of time applicant has been a bona fide resident of the State of Oregon immediately preceding the filing of the application;

(f) References from five reputable citizens of the county;

(g) Such other information as the Police Department shall find reasonably necessary to effectuate the general purpose of Sections 8.500 to 8.585 and to make a fair determination of whether the terms of Sections 8.500 to 8.585 have been complied with.

(2) The application required hereunder shall be accompanied by a full set of fingerprints and a recent photograph.

[Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2000-72, April 20, 2000; Amd. Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2003-178, June 19, 2003; Amd. Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2005-174, Aug. 18, 2005.  Fee effective Oct. 1, 2005; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2007-147, July 5, 2007; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2010-111, June 3, 2010.]


8.520 Investigation by the Police Department

Within 15 days after receipt of an application as provided for herein, the Police Department shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant and the proposed operation and report the results thereof to the Finance Director.

[Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2010-111, June 3, 2010.]


8.525 Standards for Issuance of License

(1) An employee ID card shall be issued by the Police Department upon receipt of written application and a fee as set forth in Section 8.505, if and only if the Police Department finds:

(a) That the applicant has not been convicted of any of the following crimes or any similar crimes in any degree at any time:

(i) Any felony crime committed against another person.

(ii) Any person who is a registered sex offender.

(iii) Any felony crime involving use of a weapon.

(iv) Any felony property crime within ten (10) years of the date of this application.

(v) Any drug offense within five (5) years of the date of this application.

(vi) Any misdemeanor person crime within five (5) years of the date of this application.

(vii)  Any misdemeanor property crime within five (5) years of the date of this application.

(viii) Any misdemeanor crimes against public order within two (2) years of the date of this application.

(b) That the applicant is a natural born or a fully naturalized citizen of the United States.

(c) That the applicant did not knowingly make any false statement in the application for the license.

(2) The Finance Director shall revoke the license issued under this section whenever the person to whom the license was issued fails to meet the qualifications set out in this section after a permit has been issued to that person. A person whose license is denied or revoked may reapply after one year if he meets the qualifications set forth in this section for a new applicant.

[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 6762, Nov. 1, 1990; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2010-111, June 3, 2010.]


8.530 Standards Applicable to Employees

All employees of any person having or applying for a license hereunder shall meet the standards set forth in Section 8.515 above and shall be subject to all regulations of Sections 8.500 to 8.585. In the case of a safe and lock company, the requirements of this section shall apply only to those employees who actually engage in the repair, maintenance, adjustment, setting, or installation of safe locks, safes, and vaults.

[Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2010-111, June 3, 2010; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2010-196, Sept. 2, 2010.]


8.535 Appeal

Any person aggrieved by a ruling of the Police Department relating to Section 8.525 shall have the right to appeal to the Finance Director under the procedures set out in Section 8.004 of this code.

[Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2010-111, June 3, 2010.]


8.540 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2000-63, April 20, 2000.]


8.545 Term of Employee ID Card and Operator's Licenses; Fees

(1)  An operator's license and employee ID card shall be valid for the same term as the business license.

(2)  Operator's licenses may be renewed annually upon payment of the annual fees as set forth in Section 8.505 unless suspended or revoked for cause.  Operator's licenses are not transferable, and a contract purchaser or other purchaser, lessee or assignee of a licensed business shall not do business without first applying for an operator's license and other licenses under the terms of Section 8.515.

[Amd. Sec.10, Ord. No. 2000-72, April 20, 2000; Amd. Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2003-178, June 19, 2003; Amd. Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2005-174, Aug. 18, 2005.  Fee effective Oct. 1, 2005; Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2007-147, July 5, 2007; Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2010-111, June 3, 2010.]


8.550 [Repealed, Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2010-111, June 3, 2010.]

 


8.565 Information and False Reports

No armored car service, locksmith, safe and lock company, or security alarm company holding a license granted under the provisions of Sections 8.500 to 8.585 shall divulge to anyone other than his employer, except as may be required by law, any information obtained by him in such employer's service. No armored car service, locksmith, safe and lock company or security alarm company holding a license granted under the provisions of Sections 8.500 to 8.585 shall make a false report or account to his employer.

[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2000-78, May 4, 2000; Amd. Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2010-111, June 3, 2010; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2010-196, Sept. 2, 2010.]


8.570 Notice of Employee’s Status Change

Within three days of the termination of employment of any employe or other person of any licensee, notice of such termination shall be given by the licensee in writing to the Police Department. Failure to comply with this section shall result in revocation of the license of an armored car service, locksmith, safe and lock company, or security alarm company.

[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2000-78, May 4, 2000; Amd. Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2010-111, June 3, 2010; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2010-196, Sept. 2, 2010.]


8.575 Subsequent Revocation

If at any time new facts arise or become known to the Finance Director which would be sufficient to warrant refusal or withholding of a license under the terms of Sections 8.500 to 8.585, the Finance Director shall notify the licensee of the facts and further inform the licensee that unless the same are satisfactorily explained and Sections 8.500 to 8.585 complied with, the license shall be revoked.

[Amd. Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2010-111, June 3, 2010.]


8.580 Uniforms

No licensee regulated by Sections 8.500 to 8.585 and not a member of the police or fire department shall wear a uniform, cap, badge, or buttons at the time in use by the members of the police or fire departments. A person desiring to provide any service regulated by this chapter shall use no distinctive uniform, cap, badge or buttons to be worn by any such person or employe thereof until the form, design, and color thereof shall have been first submitted to and approved by the Police Department.

[Amd. Sec. 17, Ord. No. 2010-111, June 3, 2010.]


8.585 Carry and Post License Certificates

The licensees hereunder shall cause a certificate of such license to be displayed at all times in a conspicuous place in or on his place of business described in such license. The licensee and his employees shall carry on his person at all times when performing services as a licensee under this chapter an identification card issued by the Police Department. The licensee hereunder shall furnish to the Police Department a current list of all employees employed by him at all times.

[Amd. Sec. 18, Ord. No. 2010-111, June 3, 2010.]

8 Alarm Systems (8.605 to 8.695)

8.605 Definitions

As used in this ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires:

(1) "Agent" means a person, other than a burglar alarm salesman as defined in section 8.505, who is designated by the principal to be responsible for premises protected by an alarm system during the principal's absence or unavailability. The term "agent" does not include any person who receives any salary, fee, bonus or other valuable consideration for performing the duties of an agent unless such person is a bona fide employee of the principal having substantial duties paramount and not directly related to his capacity as agent.

(2) "Alarm system" means a device or system of interconnected devices, including hardware and related appurtenances, designed to give warning of activities indicative of felony and criminal conduct.

(3) "Annunciator" means that part of an alarm system, other than an automatic dialer, which communicates the fact that the system has been triggered.

(4) "Audible annunciator" means an annunciator which gives alarm by means of a bell, siren, buzzer or similar sound producing device mounted at some location other than wholly within a building; or which, when activated, is clearly audible at a distance of fifty feet or more outside of any building in which it is mounted.

(5) "Automatic dialer" means a device which is programmed to select a telephone number and deliver a warning message or signal over standard telephone lines using telephone voice communication equipment.

(6) "Chief" means the chief of police of the City of Medford, or a police officer under his jurisdiction designated by him to exercise any power or duty conferred under this chapter.

(7) "Department" means the City of Medford Police Department.

(8) "City of Medford telephone line" means a telephone line which rings or terminates on the premises of the City of Medford.

(9) "False alarm" means any activation of an alarm system upon or following which communication is made to the department that an alarm has been triggered, except alarms resulting from one of the following causes:

(a) Criminal activity or unauthorized entry,
 
(b) Natural or unnatural disaster, electrical service interruption, or telephone line malfunction not caused by the principal or an agent of the principal. If the alarm, when communicated to the department before an officer is dispatched to investigate is clearly identified to the department as resulting from authorized entry, authorized system test, or other non-criminal cause, it shall not be considered as a false alarm. If police units, responding to an alarm and checking the protected premises according to standard department operating procedure, do not discover any evidence of unauthorized entry or criminal activity, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the alarm is false. Entries in the police department "Daily Bulletin" shall be prima facie evidence of the facts stated therein with regard to alarms and responses.

(10) "On-premise annunciator" means an annunciator which is designed to give warning only to a person or persons on the protected premises, and which is neither an "audible" or "remote" annunciator as those terms are defined in this section.

(11) "Principal" means the person, firm or corporation whose premises are protected by an alarm system. In the event that a building having more than one tenant is protected by a single alarm system, the term "principal" means the building owner.

(12) "Protected premises" means all of that contiguous area, including buildings, protected by a single alarm system and under common ownership and use.

(13) "Remote annunciator" means an annunciator located at a terminal on the premises of a burglar alarm company, or other location not a part of the protected premises.

(14) "Sensor" means that part of an alarm system which is designed to detect the happenings of some event or existence of some condition indicative of criminal activity or unauthorized entry.

(15) "Visual annunciator" means an annunciator installed entirely on the protected premises and which gives inaudible warning by means of a flashing light or other visible signal.

(16) "This ordinance" shall mean sections 8.605 through 8.695 of this code.

(17) "Fiscal year" means July 1 through June 30.

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7961, Sept. 21, 1995.]

8.610 Classification of Alarm Systems

Alarm systems shall be classified as follows:

(1) A Class I alarm system is one which incorporates a remote annunciator installed on the premises of the department or the Communications Center.

(2) A Class II alarm system is one which incorporates an automatic dialer programmed to select a City of Medford telephone line.

(3) A Class III alarm system is one which incorporates a remote annunciator installed at a place other than on the premises of the city, and which does not incorporate an automatic dialer.

(4) A Class IV alarm system is one which incorporates an automatic dialer not programmed to select a City of Medford telephone line.

(5) A Class V alarm system is one in which the only annunciator is an audible annunciator located at the protected premises, and which does not incorporate an automatic dialer.

(6) Exempt alarm systems are:
 
(a) Those which incorporate only an on-premise annunciator, a visual annunciator, or any combination thereof;
 
(b) alarm systems owned, maintained and monitored by any government law enforcement agency to protect their premises; and
 
(c) alarm systems protecting property of the City of Medford.

8.615 Class I Alarm Systems

(1) Class I alarm systems are prohibited.

8.620 Class II Alarm Systems

(1) Class II alarm systems are prohibited

8.625 Class III Alarm Systems

(1) Any agent receiving an indication of an alarm activation shall attempt to verify the alarm prior to reporting it to the police by either
 
(1) telephoning the premises where the alarm activation is located,
 
(2) monitoring the location by audio devices or
 
(3) monitoring the location by video devices.
 
(a) Exceptions to this section are holdup and panic alarms.
 
(b) Failure to attempt to verify an alarm prior to notifying the police is a violation punishable by a fine of up to $250.
 
(2) Any agent receiving an indication of an alarm activation shall notify a responsible person having access to the protected premises.

(3) Any person reporting to the police on any alarm from a Class III alarm system shall give the following information:
 
(a) The alarm system permit number, and principal or business name;
 
(b) The type of premises (warehouse, residence, etc.) and the name, if any, by which the premises are known;
 
(c) The address of the protected premises, which shall be repeated a second time at the end of the message;
 
(d) The name and telephone number of some responsible person having access to the protected premises; and
 
(e) The type of criminal activity indicated, e.g., burglary in progress, robbery, etc.


(4) If the Class III alarm system incorporates an audible annunciator, it shall be subject to the requirements specified in section 8.635.

[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 7961, Sept. 21, 1995; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2000-55, April 6, 2000.]

8.630 Class IV Alarm Systems

(1) Any person reporting to the police on any alarm from a Class IV alarm system shall first verify the alarm as specified in 8.625 (1), and give the information specified in section 8.625(2 ).

(2) No Class IV alarm system shall be programmed to select any telephone line the user of which has not previously given consent to such programming.

(3) If the Class IV alarm system incorporates an audible annunciator, it shall be subject to the requirements specified in section 8.635.

[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 7961, Sept. 21, 1995.]

8.635 Class V Alarm Systems

(1) Each Class V alarm system shall be so programmed that each audible annunciator will automatically silence within fifteen minutes after being activated, and will not sound again unless a new act or circumstance triggers a sensor.

(2) No test of a Class V alarm system shall be conducted between the hours of 8:00 p.m. of any day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day.

(3) The application for a Class V alarm system permit shall list the name and phone number of at least one responsible person (other than the principal or a member of his household) having access to the premises who may be notified and assist the police in the event the alarm is activated. The principal shall immediately notify the director of communications of any changes in this information.

(4) The director of communications may, by written notice, require the posting of the information required by subsection (3) on the protected premises.

8.640 Alarm System Requirements, Generally

(1) No alarm system shall be installed, used or maintained in violation of any of the requirements of this code, or of any applicable statute, law or administrative regulation of the United States of America, the State of Oregon, or any administrative rule-making body thereof.

(2) The alarm company shall be responsible for training the permit holder on the use of the system and causes of false alarms. The alarm company shall also stress the effect false alarms have on the criminal justice system and the risks to police of responding to alarms. This training can be accomplished by written material, pre-recorded video information, or other means that have been approved by the Chief of Police

(3) The holder of an alarm system permit shall be responsible for training and re-training all employees, family members and other persons who may make regular use of the protected premises and who may, in the normal course of their activities, be in a position to accidentally trigger a sensor. Such training shall include procedures and practices to avoid accidental alarms, and steps to follow in the event the system is accidentally triggered.

(4) The holder of an alarm system permit shall, at all times, be responsible for the proper maintenance and repair of the system, and for the repair or replacement of any component, method of installment, design feature or like condition which may give rise to a false alarm.

[Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 7961, Sept. 21, 1995; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8282, Feb. 6, 1997.]

8.645 Permits Required

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to use or maintain any alarm system without a current valid permit therefor.

(2) City police may refuse to respond to an alarm from a system without a permit.

(3) No permit shall be required for an exempt alarm system as defined in section 8.610, and the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to such systems.

(4) Violation of this provision shall be a violation. Each day during which the violation is maintained or continued shall be deemed a separate violation.

(Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2000-55, April 6, 2000.]

8.650 Permit Application

Each application for an alarm system permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the chief, and shall contain the following information:

(1) The name, address and telephone number of the principal of the protected premises.

(2) The type of premises (home, office, variety store, etc.) and any business name by which the premises is known.

(3) The address of the protected premises, including, if it is in a residential, commercial or industrial complex (office building, apartment house, shopping center, etc.), any name by which the complex is commonly known.

(4) The name, address, and telephone number of the alarm company.

(5) The application shall be accompanied by the fee prescribed under section 8.660.

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2008-48, March 6, 2008.]


8.655 Issuance of Permit

Upon receipt by the finance director of the permit application and fee, the chief shall undertake whatever investigation he deems necessary. If it appears to the chief that the proposed system will comply with the provisions of this chapter, he shall so notify the finance director who shall issue to the applicant a permit bearing an identifying number, specifying the class of alarm system for which it is issued, and setting forth the expiration date of the permit. The City shall not, by the issuance of any alarm system permit, be obligated to respond or accord any priority to an alarm from such system.

8.660 Permit Fees

The fees for alarm system permits and renewals shall be as follows:

Class III: $32.00

Class IV: $32.00

Class V: $32.00

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6952, Aug. 1, 1991; Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2000-72, April 20, 2000; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2005-250, Nov. 3, 2005; Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2007-147, July 5, 2007.]


8.665 Term of Permit and Renewal

(1) Class III, IV, and V alarm system permits shall expire on the first day of the anniversary month following the year of issue.

(2) An alarm system permit may be transferred to a new location upon completion of the alarm permit address change form and its submission to the finance director.  A person who has paid the permit fee for the year and terminates their alarm permit during that year shall be entitled to claim a prorata refund for the quarters beginning after the last day at original location. 

(3) Renewal permits shall be dated the first day of the anniversary month each year. The renewal permit will not be issued until the fee is paid and a late charge of $15 will be assessed on all permit holders who do not pay the renewal fee prior to expiration of their existing permits. The renewal application shall contain the principal's signed statement that there have been no changes in principal, protected premises or class of alarm system. A suspended permit may be renewed only as provided in section 8.690.

[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6952, Aug. 1, 1991; Amd. Ord. No. 2000-197, Oct. 5, 2000; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-48, March 6, 2008.]


8.670 Inspection of Alarm Systems

Prior to issuing an alarm system permit, and at any time thereafter during the term thereof, the chief may inspect any alarm system for which a permit is required. Such inspection shall be for the purpose of ascertaining that information furnished by the applicant or permittee is correct, and that the system is maintained in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.

8.675 Current Information Required

Within ten days following any change of circumstances which renders obsolete any of the information submitted pursuant to section 8.650, the permittee shall file an amendment to his application setting forth the currently accurate information. No additional fee shall be required.

[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2008-48, March 6, 2008.]


8.680 False Alarm Fees

(1) As a condition of any alarm system permit issued under the provisions of this chapter, the permittee shall pay to the City of Medford within 30 days of invoice, for false alarms generated by the permittee's alarm system a fee according to the following schedule:

(a) First false alarm - No charge

(b) Subsequent false alarms within the next 12 months:

Second false alarm $53.00

Third false alarm $106.00

Fourth false alarm $212.00

Fifth or more false alarm $424.00

(2) Any person who has been assessed a false alarm fee may appeal such charge to the chief by giving written notice to the chief within 30 days of invoice assessing such charge. Upon receipt of the appeal notice, the chief shall appoint one or more of his supervisory officers to investigate the circumstances of the alarms upon which the appeal is based. The investigator shall notify the appellant of a time certain, not less than two weeks nor more than four weeks following the date upon which the appeal was filed, at or before such time certain the appellant shall file in writing with the investigator whatever factual information he deems relevant in support of his appeal. If the investigator determines the charge to have been made in error he shall order the invoice canceled and notify the appellant and the finance director of such determination, which shall be final. If the investigator determines the charge to be proper, he shall make a full report of his findings and file the same, together with any information filed with him by the appellant, with the chief. The investigator's determination shall be filed with the chief within 45 days of the time on which the appeal was filed. The chief shall make a final determination on the disputed charges and mail notice thereof to the appellant within 60 days after the filing of the appeal. If the chief determines that any of the disputed charges are valid, the permit holder shall pay such charges within 30 days after notice of the final decision of the chief is mailed to him. Such decision shall be final and not subject to further appeal, notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance governing appeals.

[Amd . Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5958, Aug. 20, 1987; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 7961, Sept. 21, 1995; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8282, Feb. 6, 1997; Amd. Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2003-178, June 19, 2003; Amd. Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2005-174, Aug. 18, 2005.  Fee effective Oct. 1, 2005; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2005-250, Nov. 3, 2005; Amd. Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2007-147, July 5, 2007; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2008-48, March 6, 2008.]


8.685 Suspension of Permits

(1) The following shall be grounds for suspension by the chief of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter:

(a) Any false or incomplete statement made on the permit application.

(b) Programming of an automatic dialer to select any City of Medford telephone line.

(c) Maintenance, installation or use of the alarm system in violation of any applicable law, ordinance or regulation, including the requirements of this chapter.

(d) Failure to provide current information as required in sections 8.625, 8.630, 8.635 and 8.675.

(e) Testing or deliberate activation of a Class II alarm system other than as authorized in section 8.620.

(2) If the chief determines that there is cause for the suspension of a permit, he shall mail a notice of suspension to the principal, stating that the suspension will be effective thirty days after the date of mailing, unless a notice of appeal is filed with the Finance Director on or before the effective date.

(3) Persons operating an alarm system covered by this chapter after the alarm permit has been suspended shall be in violation of a violation punishable by a fine of up to $250.

[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 5958, Aug. 20, 1987; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 7961, Sept. 21, 1995; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 8282, Feb. 6, 1997; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2000-55, April 6, 2000; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2008-48, March 6, 2008.]


8.688 Appeals of Suspension Orders

(1) Any person who is sent a notice of suspension under section 8.685 may appeal the suspension action to the Finance Director by giving written notice to the Finance Director within 30 days after mailing of the notice of suspension. The filing of a Notice of Appeal shall stay the suspension until disposition of the appeal.

(2) If a timely notice of appeal is received, the Finance Director shall notify the permit holder of the time and place of the appeal hearing and shall make a final decision after considering all the evidence presented. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Code of Medford, the decision of the Finance Director to suspend an alarm permit shall be final and may not be appealed to the City Council.

[Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 8282, Feb. 6, 1997.]

8.690 Reinstatement After Suspension

A principal whose alarm system permit has been suspended may have the permit reinstated upon payment of a reinstatement fee of $50.00.

[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 8282, Feb. 6, 1997; Amd. Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2003-178, June 19, 2003; Amd. Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2005-174, Aug. 18, 2005.  Fee effective Oct. 1, 2005; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2005-250, Nov. 3, 2005; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2008-48, March 6, 2008.]


8.691 Repealed Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2008-48, March 6, 2008

 


8.692 Notices

(1) Notice or billing from the city to any permit holder shall be deemed to have been given or rendered on the date such notice or billing is deposited in the U. S. mail, first class postage, prepaid, addressed to the permit holder at the address shown in the city's permit records. A certificate signed by the person who mailed the notice shall be prima facie evidence of the facts stated therein with respect to such notice.

(2) Notice to the city or payment under this ordinance shall be effective when received at the appropriate city office.

8.695 Fire Alarms

(a) Except for fire alarms protecting property of the City of Medford, fire alarm annunciators shall not be located on city premises and the city shall not monitor such alarms.

(b) No person shall install, activate, maintain, or use a fire or smoke alarm which incorporates or activates an automatic dialer programmed to select a telephone line which rings or terminates on the premises of the City of Medford. Violation of this subsection (b) shall be a violation.

[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2000-55, April 6, 2000.]

8 Ambulances [Repealed]

8.700 [Repealed Ord. No. 7252, Nov. 19, 1992.]


8.715 [Repealed, Ord. No. 7252, Nov. 19, 1992.]


8.720 [Repealed, Ord. No. 7252, Nov. 19, 1992.]


8.725 [Repealed, Ord. No. 7252, Nov. 19, 1992.]


8 Car Rental Tax (8.750 to 8.768)

8.750 Title

This subchapter may be referred to as the City of Medford Rental Car Tax.

[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2005-119, June 16, 2005.]


8.751 Definitions

 Except where the context otherwise requires, the following definitions govern the construction of the City of Medford Rental Car Tax.
(1) “Rental Car” includes, without limitation, all automobiles; pickups; trucks, vans, and other motor vehicles designed and used primarily for the transportation of property, and any motorized passenger vehicles which are capable of being used on the highways of Oregon, offered by an operator under this code.   
(2) “City Council” means the City Council of the City of Medford, Oregon.
(3)  “Commercial Establishment” means any person or other entity who generates gross revenues   by providing rental cars for a rental fee at any location within the corporate limits of the City.
(4)  “Operator” means any person operating a commercial establishment
(5)  “Renter” means a natural person, sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation estate, trust or any other entity in the name of which a motor vehicle is rented under this subchapter.
(6)  “Rental or Renting” means obtaining  the use of a rental car from a commercial establishment at any location within the City for a rental fee.  Excluded are leases or other transactions where title of a motor vehicle is permanently or temporarily transferred from the commercial establishment to any other person or entity, fees or charges for fueling, car seats, GPS devices, satellite radio, and similar devices, supplies, and commodities.  If the rental originates at any location within the City, but the rental fee is collected at some other location outside the City, the operators who provided the rental car within the City shall be responsible for remittance of the tax, based on the total rental fee, wherever collected.
(7)  “Rental Fee, Rent, or Gross Rent” means the gross fee, whatever the basis of its calculation, paid to a commercial establishment by any person for the rental of a Rental Car.
(8)  “Tax” means either the tax payable or due by the person, operators or commercial establishment during the reporting period.
(9)  “Transacting Business” means a commercial establishment’s solicitations to rent rental cars via the printed or telecommunications media, or arrangements for or obligation of payment for rental of a rental car.
[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2005-119, June 16, 2005; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2016-100, Aug. 18, 2016; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2020-86, Jul. 16, 2020.]
 


8.752 Tax Imposed

 For the privilege of renting a rental car, on and after August 1, 2020, each renter shall pay a tax in the amount of twelve and one-half percent (12.5%) of the gross rent charged by the operators.  The tax constitutes a debt owed by the renter to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operators or to the city.  The renter shall pay the tax to the operators at the time the rent is paid.  The operators shall enter the tax on its records when rent is collected if the operators keeps records on the cash accounting basis; and when earned if the operators keeps records on the accrual accounting basis.  If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid by the renter to the operators with each installment.  If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operators of the commercial agency, the Chief Financial Officer may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the city.  In all cases, the rent paid or charged for rental shall exclude the sale of any goods, services and commodities other than the furnishing of rental cars.  

 [Added, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2005-119, June 16, 2005; Amd. Ord. No. 2013-137, Oct. 3, 2013; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2020-86, Jul. 16, 2020.]


8.753 Collection of Tax by Operator; Rules for Collection

 For the privilege of renting a rental car, on and after August 1, 2020, each renter shall pay a tax in the amount of twelve and one-half percent (12.5%) of the gross rent charged by the operators.  The tax constitutes a debt owed by the renter to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operators or to the city.  The renter shall pay the tax to the operators at the time the rent is paid.  The operators shall enter the tax on its records when rent is collected if the operators keeps records on the cash accounting basis; and when earned if the operators keeps records on the accrual accounting basis.  If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid by the renter to the operators with each installment.  If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operators of the commercial agency, the Chief Financial Officer may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the city.  In all cases, the rent paid or charged for rental shall exclude the sale of any goods, services and commodities other than the furnishing of rental cars. 
[Added, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2005-119, June 16, 2005; Amd. Ord. No. 2013-137, Oct. 3, 2013; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2020-86, Jul. 16, 2020.]
 


8.754 Operator's Duties

Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this ordinance at the same time as the rent is collected from every renter. The amount of tax shall be separately stated upon the operator's records, and any receipt rendered by the operator. No operator of a commercial agency shall advertise that the tax or any part of the tax will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, when added, any part will be refunded, except in the manner provided by this ordinance.

[Added, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2005-119, June 16, 2005.]


8.755 Exemptions

 No tax imposed under this ordinance shall be imposed upon:
(1)  A rental fee which Oregon or Federal law exempts from the tax.
(2)  A travel trailer, camper or motor home, as defined in ORS 366.512, whose registration fee is allocated to counties pursuant to ORS 390.134(4).
 [Added, Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2005-119, June 16, 2005; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2020-86, Jul. 16, 2020.]
 


8.756 Registration of Operator; Form and Contents; Execution; Certification of Authority

Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a rental car company in this city shall register with the Finance Director on a form provided by that office. Operators engaged in business at the time this ordinance is adopted must register not later than thirty (30) calendar days after this adoption. Operators starting business after this ordinance is adopted must register within fifteen (15) calendar days after commencing business. The privilege of registration after the date of imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax regardless of registration. Registration shall set forth the name under which an operator transacts or intends to transact business, the location of the place or places of business and such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as the Finance Director may require. The registration shall be signed by the operator. The Finance Director shall, within ten days after registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each registrant to collect the tax from the occupant, together with a duplicate thereof for each additional place of business of each registrant. Certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the Finance Director upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon its sale or transfer. Each certificate and duplicate shall state the place of business to which it is applicable and be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and come to the notice readily of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. Said certificate shall, amount other things, state the following:

(a) The name of the operator;

(b) The address of the business;

(c) The date upon which the certificate was issued;

(d) "This Car Rental Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Car Rental Tax Ordinance of the City of Medford by registration with the Finance Director for the purpose of collecting from renters the car rental tax imposed by said City and remitting said tax to the Finance Director. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, or to operate a commercial establishment without strictly complying with all local applicable laws including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of the City of Medford. This certificate does not constitute a permit."

 

[Added, Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2005-119, June 16, 2005.]


8.757 Due Date; Returns and Payments

(1) The tax imposed by this ordinance shall be paid by the renter to the operator at the time that rent is paid. All amounts of such taxes collected by any operator are due and payable to the Finance Director on a monthly basis on or before the last day of the month immediately following for the preceding month; and are delinquent if not paid by the due date.

(2) On or before the last day of each month a return for the preceding month's tax collections shall be filed with the Finance Director. The return shall be filed in such form as the Finance Director may prescribe by every operator liable for payment of tax.

(3) Returns shall show the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period. The Finance Director may require returns to show the total rentals upon which tax was collected or otherwise due, gross receipts of operator for such period and an explanation in detail of any discrepancy between such amounts, and the amount of rents exempt, if any.

(4) The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the amount of the tax due, to the Finance Director at his office either by personal delivery or by mail. If the return is mailed, the postmark date shall be considered the date of delivery for determining delinquencies.

(5) For good cause, the Finance Director may extend for not to exceed one month the time for making any return or payment of tax. No further extension shall be granted, except by the City Council upon approval. Any operator to whom an extension is granted shall pay interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month on the amount of tax due without proration for a fraction of a month. If a return is not filed, and the tax and interest due is not paid by the end of the extension granted, then the interest shall become a part of the tax for computation of penalties described elsewhere in this ordinance.

[Added, Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2005-119, June 16, 2005.]


8.758 Penalties and Interest

(1) Original Delinquency. Any operator who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due and who fails to remit any tax imposed by this ordinance prior to delinquency shall pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax due in addition to the amount of the tax.

(2) Continued Delinquency. Any operator who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due, and who failed to pay any delinquent remittance on or before a period of sixty days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of fifteen percent (15%) of the amount of the tax due plus the amount of the tax and the ten percent (10%) penalty first imposed.

(3) Fraud. If the Finance Director determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this ordinance is due to fraud or intent to evade the provisions thereof, a penalty of twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this section.

(4) Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this ordinance shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof without proration for portions of a month, on the amount of the tax due, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

(5) Penalties Merged With Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall be merged with and become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.

(6) Petition for Waiver. Any operator who fails to remit the tax herein levied within the time herein stated shall pay the penalties herein stated provided, however, the operator may petition the City Council for waiver and refund of the penalty or any portion thereof and the City Council may, if a good and sufficient reason is shown, waive and direct a refund of the penalty or any portion thereof.

[Added, Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2005-119, June 16, 2005.]


8.759 Deficiency Determinations; Fraud, Evasion, Operator Delay

(1) Deficiency Determination. If the Finance Director determines that the returns are incorrect, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of the facts contained in the return or returns or upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one, or more than one period, and the amount so determined shall be due and payable immediately upon service of notice as herein provided after which the amount determined is delinquent. Penalties or deficiencies shall be applied as set forth in Section 16.808.

(a) In making a determination the Finance Director may offset overpayments, if any, which may have been previously made for a period or periods, against any underpayment for a subsequent period or periods, or against penalties, and interest, on the underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in Section 16.808.

(b) The Finance Director shall give to the operator or occupant a written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the Finance Director. In the case of service by mail of any notice required by this ordinance the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Post Office.

(c) Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this ordinance or authorized rules and regulations, every deficiency determination shall be made and notice thereof mailed within three years after the last day of the month following the close of the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period expires later.

(d) Any determination shall become due and payable immediately upon receipt of notice and shall become final ten days after the Finance Director has given notice thereof, provided, however, the operator may petition for redemption and refund if the petition is filed before the determination becomes final as herein provided.

(2) Fraud, Refusal to Collect, Evasion. If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect said tax or to make, within the time provided in this ordinance, any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this ordinance, or makes a fraudulent return or otherwise wilfully attempts to evade this ordinance, the Finance Director shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the Finance Director has determined the tax due that is imposed by this ordinance from an operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to report and remit said tax, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest, and penalties, provided for by this ordinance. In case such determination is made, the Finance Director shall give a notice in the manner aforesaid of the amount so assessed. Such determination and notice shall be made and mailed within three years after discovery by the Finance Director of any fraud, intent to evade or failure or refusal to collect said tax, or failure to file return. Any determination shall become due and payable immediately upon receipt of notice and shall become final within ten days after the Finance Director has given notice thereof, provided, however, the operator may petition for redemption and refund if the petition is filed before the determination becomes final as herein provided.

(3) Operator Delay. If the Finance Director believes that the collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the city will be jeopardized by delay, or if any determination will be jeopardized by delay, he shall thereupon make a determination of the tax or amount of tax required to be collected, noting the fact upon the determination. The amount so determined as herein provided shall be immediately due and payable, and the operator shall immediately pay same determination to the Finance Director after service of notice thereof, provided, however, the operator may petition, after payment has been made, for redemption and refund of such determination, if the petition is filed within ten days from the date of service of notice by the Finance Director.

 

[Added, Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2005-119, June 16, 2005.]


8.760 Redeterminations

(1) Any person against whom a determination is made under Section 8.759, or any person directly interested, may petition for a redetermination and redemption and refund within the time required in Section 8.759. If a petition for redetermination and refund is not filed within the time required therein, the determination becomes final at the expiration of the allowable time.

(2) If a petition for redetermination and refund is filed within the allowable period, the Finance Director shall reconsider the determination, and, if the person has so requested in his petition, shall grant the person an oral hearing and shall give him ten days notice of the time and place of the hearing. The Finance Director may continue the hearing from time to time as may be necessary.

(3) The Finance Director may decrease or increase the amount of the determination as a result of the hearing and if an increase is determined such increase shall be payable immediately after the hearing.

(4) The order or decision of the Finance Director upon a petition for redetermination of redemption and refund becomes final ten (10) days after service upon the petitioner of notice thereof, unless appeal of such order or decision is filed with the City Council within the ten (10) days after service of such notice.

(5) No petition for redetermination of redemption and refund or appeal therefrom shall be effective for any purpose unless the operator has first complied with the payment provisions hereof.

[Added, Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2005-119, June 16, 2005.]


8.761 Security for Collection of Tax

(1) The Finance Director, whenever he deems it necessary to insure compliance with this ordinance, may require any operator subject thereto to deposit with him such security in the form of cash, bond, or other security as the Finance Director may determine. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the Finance Director but shall not be greater than twice the operator's estimated average monthly liability for the period for which he files returns, determined in such manner as the Finance Director deems proper, or Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000), whichever amount is less. The amount of the security may be increased or decreased by the Finance Director subject to the limitations herein provided. As set forth in 8.766, the operator has a right to appeal to the City Council any decision of the Finance Director made under this section.

(2) Any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable or at any time within three years after any determination becomes final, the Finance Director may bring an action in the courts of this State, or any other state, or of the United States in the name of the City of Medford to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest.

[Added, Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2005-119, June 16, 2005.]


8.762 Lien

The tax imposed by this ordinance together with the interest and penalties herein provided and the filing fees paid to the County Clerk of Jackson County, Oregon, and advertising costs which may be incurred when same becomes delinquent as set forth in this ordinance shall be and, until paid, remain a lien from the date of its recording with the County Clerk of Jackson County, Oregon, and superior to all subsequent recorded liens on all tangible personal property (other than rental cars) used in the office of an operator within Medford and may be foreclosed on and sold as may be necessary to discharge said lien, if the lien has been recorded with the County Clerk of Jackson County, Oregon. Notice of lien may be issued by the Finance Director whenever the operator is in default in the payment of said tax, interest and penalty and shall be recorded with the County Clerk of Jackson County, Oregon and a copy sent to the delinquent operator. The personal property subject to such lien may be foreclosed on and sold as provided by law. Any lien for taxes as shown on the records of the proper County Official shall, upon the payment of all taxes, penalties, and interest thereon, be released by the Finance Director when the full amount determined to be due has been paid to the city and the operator or person making such payment shall receive a receipt therefor stating that the full amount of taxes, penalties, and interest thereon have been paid and that the lien is thereby released and the record of lien is satisfied.

[Added, Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2005-119, June 16, 2005.]


8.763 Refunds

(1) Operators Refunds. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty, or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Finance Director under this ordinance, it may be refunded, provided a verified claim in writing therefor stating the specific reason upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the Finance Director within three years from the date of payment. The claim shall be made on forms provided by the Finance Director. If the claim is approved by the Finance Director, the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any amounts due and payable from the operator from whom it was collected or by whom paid and the balance may be refunded to such operator, his administrators, executors or assignees.


(2) Renter Refunds. Whenever the tax required by this ordinance has been collected by the operator, and deposited by the operator with the Finance Director, and it is later determined that the tax was erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Finance Director, it may be refunded by him to the renter, provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific reason on which the claim is founded, is filed with said Finance Director within three years from the date of payment.

[Added, Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2005-119, June 16, 2005.]


8.764 Collection Fee

Every operator liable for the collection and remittance of the tax imposed by this ordinance may withhold five percent (5%) of the net tax due to cover the operator's expense in the collection and remittance of said tax.

[Added, Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2005-119, June 16, 2005.]


8.765 Administration

(1) Park Improvement Fund. The Finance Director shall deposit all of the proceeds of the car rental tax as they are received into the Park Improvement Fund. The Park Improvement Fund shall be used for the purpose of financing capital improvements within the Leisure Services Plan for the City of Medford for development of park facilities.

(2) Records Required from Operators; Form. Every operator shall keep accounting books and records of the rentals. All such records and books shall be retained by the operator for a period of three years and six months after they come into being.

(3) Examination of Records; Investigations. The Finance Director or any person authorized in writing by him may examine during normal business hours, the books, papers and accounting records relating to rentals of any operator after notification to the operator liable for the tax and may investigate the business of the operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. To assist in this process, the Finance Director may request certified copies of annual tax returns covering operator.

(4) Confidential Character of Information Obtained - Disclosure Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for the Finance Director or any person having an administrative or clerical duty under the provisions of this ordinance to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a Car Rental Tax Registration Certificate, or pay a car rental tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of either, or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person, provided that nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent:

(a) The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by another City of Medford official, employee, or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this ordinance; or collecting taxes imposed hereunder.

(b) The disclosure after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer himself, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to any paid tax, any unpaid tax or amount of tax required to be collected, or interest, and penalties; further provided, however, that the city attorney approves each such disclosure referred to in this paragraph when in his opinion the public interest would suffer thereby;

(c) The disclosure of the names and addresses of any persons to whom Car Rental Registration Certificates have been issued.

(d) The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city.

[Added, Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2005-119, June 16, 2005; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2017-81, July 20, 2017.]


8.766 Appeals to City Council

Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Finance Director may appeal to the City Council of the City of Medford pursuant to Medford Code 1.025.

[Added, Sec. 17, Ord. No. 2005-119, June 16, 2005.]


8.767 Severability

If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance, or any part thereof, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional (or otherwise invalid), such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance or any part thereof. The legislative body hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional (or otherwise invalid).

[Added, Sec. 18, Ord. No. 2005-119, June 16, 2005.]


8.768 Violations

It is unlawful for any operator or other person so required to fail or refuse to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the Finance Director or to render a false or fraudulent report, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this ordinance.

[Added, Sec. 19, Ord. No. 2005-119, June 16, 2005.]

8 Transient Lodgings Tax (8.800 to 8.820)

8.800 Title

This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Transient Lodgings Tax Ordinance of the City of Medford."

8.801 Definitions

Except where the context otherwise requires, the following definitions govern the construction of this ordinance.

(1) "Transient Lodging" means:
(a) Hotel, motel and inn dwelling units that are used for temporary overnight human occupancy;
(b) Spaces used for parking recreational vehicles or erecting tents during periods of human occupancy; or
(c) Houses, cabins, condominiums, apartment units or other dwelling units, or portions of any of these dwelling units that are used for temporary human occupancy.

(2) "City Council" means the City Council of the City of Medford, Oregon.

(3) "Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession for lodging or sleeping purposes of any transient lodging.

(4) "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, fraternity, sorority, public or private dormitory, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

(5) "Cash accounting" means the lodging tax collector does not enter the rent due from a transient on his records until rent is paid.

(6) "Accrual accounting" means the lodging tax collector enters the rent due from a transient on his records when the rent is earned whether or not it is paid.

(7) "Rent" means the total retail price, including all charges other than taxes, rendered for the sale, service or furnishing of transient lodging whether or not received by the lodging tax collector, for the occupancy of transient lodging valued in money, goods, labor, credits, property, or other consideration valued in money, without any deduction.

(8) "Rent package plan" means the consideration charged for both food and rent where a single rate is made for the total of both. The amount applicable to rent for determination of transient room tax under this ordinance shall be the same charge made for rent when consideration is not a part of a package plan. This concept is intended to follow state law regarding services included in the fee for purposes of determining the total retail price.

Example taken from State of Oregon Administrative Rules 150-320-305

Example 1: The ABC Bed and Breakfast charges $100 per night for a room. Guests are provided a breakfast that is included in the per-night fee. Guests may also have lunch or dinner at ABC and may charge the cost of these meals to their room. ABC will collect tax on $100 per night because the breakfast is included in the room fee. The tax does not apply to any charges for optional meals purchased by ABCfs guests.

Example 2: The High Mountain Resort offers winter lodging packages for customers. Customers can purchase a weekend package that includes two nights lodging and two ski lift tickets for a nearby ski resort for $250. Their regular charge for weekend lodging during the winter for a two night stay is $200. The state lodging tax will be collected on $200 because that represents the charge for providing lodging.

Example 3: The Highlife Hotel charges a standard room rate based on single occupancy. The Young family has two children and a dog. They rent a room for one night. The basic room rate is $80 per night. There is a $10 charge for a second adult. There is no charge for the children. The Youngs request a crib that costs an additional $10. There is also a $10 charge for the family dog. The state lodging tax applies to all of the additional fees as well as the standard room rate. The total amount subject to tax is $110.

(9) "Tax" means either the tax payable by the transient, or the aggregate amount of taxes due from an lodging tax collector during the period for which he is required to report his collections.

(10) "Chief Financial Officer" means the Chief Financial Officer of the City of Medford, Oregon.

(11) "Transient" means any individual who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy in transient lodging for a period of twenty-seven consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of paid calendar days as full days. The day a transient checks out of the transient lodging shall not be included in determining the 27-day period if the transient is not charged rent for that day by the lodging tax collector. Any such individual so occupying space in transient lodging shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 27 days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the lodging tax collector and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior to and subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance may be considered. A person who pays for lodging on a monthly basis, irrespective of the number of days in such month, shall not be deemed a transient.

(12) "Transient Lodging Intermediary" or "Lodging Intermediary" means a person other than a transient lodging provider that facilitates the retail sale of transient lodging and:

(a) Charges for the occupancy of the transient lodging;
(b) Collects the consideration charged for occupancy of the lodging; or
(c) Receives a fee or commission and requires the lodging provider to use a specified third-party entity to collect the consideration charged for occupancy of the lodging.

(13) "Transient Lodging Provider" or "Lodging Provider" means a person that furnishes lodging.

(14) "Transient Lodging Tax Collector" or "Lodging Tax Collector" means a transient lodging provider or a transient lodging intermediary.

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2004-215, Nov. 4, 2004; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2015-117, November 19, 2015; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2019-59, June 20, 2019.]


8.802 Tax Imposed

For the privilege of occupancy in any transient lodging, on and after August 1, 2020,

(1)  A tax of eleven percent (11%) is imposed on any consideration rendered for the sale, service or furnishing of transient lodging. The tax remains at nine (9%) for any such transaction occurring prior to August 1, 2020 and on or after January 1, 2006.

(a) The tax must be computed on the total retail price, including all charges other than taxes, paid by a person for occupancy of the transient lodging.

(b) The total retail price paid by a person for occupancy of transient lodging that is part of a travel package may be determined by reasonable and verifiable standards from books and records kept in the ordinary course of the lodging tax collector’s business.

(c) The tax shall be collected by the lodging tax collector that receives the consideration rendered for occupancy of the transient lodging.

(d ) The tax imposed by this subsection is in addition to and not in lieu of any state transient lodging tax.

(2) The transient shall pay the tax to the lodging tax collector of the transient lodging at the time the rent is paid. The lodging tax collector shall enter the tax on his records when rent is collected if the lodging tax collector keeps his records on the cash accounting basis and when earned if the lodging tax collector keeps his records on the accrual accounting basis. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid by the transient to the lodging tax collector with each installment. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the lodging tax collector of the transient lodging, the Chief Financial Officer may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the city.

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5316, Dec. 6, 1984, effective Jan. 1, 1985; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-243, Dec. 21, 2000, effective Jan. 1, 2001; Amd. Ord. No. 2005-261, Nov. 17, 2005; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2015-117, November 19, 2015; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2019-59, June 20, 2019; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2020-80, Jun. 18, 2020]


8.803 Collection of Tax by Operator; Rules for Collection

(1) The lodging provider that collects the consideration charged for occupancy of a transient lodging business, or a transient lodging intermediary as described in Section 8.801(12) of this Code, as applicable, is responsible for collecting any lodging tax and shall file a return of the tax with the City of Medford Chief Financial Officer, or with any tax administrator identified by the City, reporting the amount of tax due during the reporting period to which the return relates.

(2) Every lodging tax collector renting rooms in this city, the occupancy of which is not exempted under the terms of this ordinance, shall collect a tax from the occupant. The tax collected or accrued by the lodging tax collector constitutes a debt owing by the operators or the transient lodging intermediaries, as applicable, to the city. In addition the tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the city.

(3) In all cases of credit or deferred payment of rent, the payment of tax to the lodging tax collector may be deferred until the rent is paid, and the lodging tax collector shall not be liable for the tax until creditors are paid or deferred payments are made.

(4) The Chief Financial Officer shall enforce provisions of this ordinance and shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with this ordinance as may be necessary to aid in the enforcement.

(5) The rate imposed by section 8.802 shall be rounded to the nearest whole cent.

[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 5316, Dec. 6, 1984, effective Jan. 1, 1985; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2000-243, Dec. 21, 2000, effective Jan. 1, 2001; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2015-117, November 19, 2015; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2019-59, June 20, 2019; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2020-80, Jun. 18, 2020.]

@


8.804 Operator's Duties

Each lodging tax collector shall collect the tax imposed by this ordinance at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated upon the lodging tax collector's records, and any receipt rendered by the lodging tax collector. No lodging tax collector shall advertise that the tax or any part of the tax will be assumed or absorbed by the lodging tax collector, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, when added, any part will be refunded, except in the manner provided by this ordinance.

[Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2015-117, November 19, 2015; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2019-59, June 20, 2019.]


8.805 Exemptions

No tax imposed under this ordinance shall be imposed upon:

(1) Transient Lodging in a hospital, health care facility, long term care facility or any other residential facility that is licensed, registered or certified by the Department of Human Services or the Oregon Health Authority;

(2) A dwelling unit in a facility providing treatment for drug or alcohol abuse or providing mental health treatment;

(3) Transient Lodging in a private residence that is used by members of the general public for temporary human occupancy for fewer than 30 days per year;

(4) Transient Lodging, the consideration for which is funded through a contract with a government agency and the purpose of which is to provide emergency or temporary shelter; other than this temporary emergency exception, the taxes herein apply to state and local government workers;

(5) Transient Lodging at a nonprofit youth or church camp, nonprofit conference center or other nonprofit facility; or

(6) Transient Lodging that is leased or otherwise occupied by the same person for a consecutive period of 27 days or more during the year. The requirements of this subsection are satisfied even if the physical dwelling unit changes during the consecutive period, if:
 
(a) All dwelling units occupied are within the same facility; and
 
(b) The person paying consideration for the transient lodging is the same person throughout the consecutive period.
 
[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2015-117, November 19, 2015]
 

8.806 Registration of Operator; Form and Contents; Execution; Certification of Authority

(1) Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an lodging tax collector in this city shall register with the Chief Financial Officer on a form provided by him. Lodging tax collectors engaged in business at the time this ordinance is adopted must register not later than thirty (30) calendar days after this adoption. Lodging tax collectors starting business after this ordinance is adopted must register within fifteen (15) calendar days after commencing business. The privilege of registration after the date of imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax regardless of registration.

(2) Registration shall set forth:
(a) The name under which a lodging tax collector transacts or intends to transact business;
(b) The location of the transient lodging;
(c) Any such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as the Chief Financial Officer may require; and
(d) The signature of the lodging tax collector.

(3) The Chief Financial Officer shall, within ten days after registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each registrant to collect the tax from the occupant, together with a duplicate thereof for each additional place of business of each registrant. Certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the Chief Financial Officer upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon its sale or transfer. Each certificate and duplicate shall state the place of business of the transient lodging to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and come to the notice readily of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy.

Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following:
(a) The name of the lodging tax collector;
(b) The address of the transient lodging;
(c) The date upon which the certificate was issued; and
(d) "This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Transient Lodgings Tax Ordinance of the City of Medford by registration with the Chief Financial Officer for the purpose of collecting from transients the room tax imposed by said City and remitting said tax to the Chief Financial Officer. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, or to operate transient lodging without strictly complying with all local applicable laws including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of the City of Medford. This certificate does not constitute a permit."

[Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2115-117, November 19, 2015; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2019-59, June 20, 2019.]

 
 

8.807 Due Date; Returns and Payments*

(1) The tax imposed by this Chapter shall be paid by the occupant to the lodging tax collector at the time that rent is paid. All amounts of such taxes collected by any lodging tax collector are due and payable to the Chief Financial Officer on or before the last day of each month. The return shall be filed by every lodging tax collector liable for payment of tax, in such form as the Chief Financial Officer may prescribe.

(2) Returns shall show the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period. The Chief Financial Officer may require returns to show the total rentals upon which tax was collected or otherwise due, gross receipts of lodging tax collector for such period and an explanation in detail of any discrepancy between such amounts, and the amount of rents exempt, if any.

(3) The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the amount of the tax due, to the Chief Financial Officer at his office either by personal delivery by mail or by any commercially reasonable means, including but not limited to electronic or telephonic transfer, or private delivery service (PDS). For purposes of determining delinquencies, the date of delivery is the date the return and tax are received by the Chief Financial Officer. If the return is delivered in person, it must be received on or before the due date during business hours. (8am-5pm, Monday-Friday). 

(4) For good cause, the Chief Financial Officer may extend the time for making any return or payment of tax for a period not to exceed one month. No further extension shall be granted, except by the City Council upon appeal. Any lodging tax collector to whom an extension is granted shall pay interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month on the amount of tax due without proration for a fraction of a month. If a return is not filed, and the tax and interest due is not paid by the end of the extension granted, then the interest shall become a part of the tax for computation of penalties described elsewhere in this ordinance.

[Amd. Section 1, Ord. No. 7062, Feb. 6, 1992; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2004-215, Nov. 4, 2004; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2015-117, November 19, 2015; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2019-59, June 20, 2019; Amd. Sec. 1, ORd. No. 2020-12, Feb. 6, 2020.]


8.808 Penalties and Interest

(1) Original Delinquency. Any lodging tax collector who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due and who fails to remit any tax imposed by this ordinance prior to delinquency shall pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax due in addition to the amount of the tax.

(2) Continued Delinquency. Any lodging tax collector who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due, and who failed to pay any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of fifteen percent (15%) of the amount of the tax due plus the amount of the tax and the ten percent (10%) penalty first imposed.

(3) Fraud. If the Chief Financial Officer determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this ordinance is due to fraud or intent to evade the provisions thereof, a penalty of twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this section.

(4) Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any lodging tax collector who fails to remit any tax imposed by this ordinance shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof without proration for portions of a month, on the amount of the tax due, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

(5) Penalties Merged With Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall be merged with and become a part of the tax herein required to be

paid.

(6) Petition for Waiver. Any lodging tax collector who fails to remit the tax herein levied within the time herein stated shall pay the penalties herein stated provided, however, the lodging tax collector may petition the City Council for waiver and refund of the penalty or any portion thereof and the City Council may, if a good and sufficient reason is shown, waive and direct a refund of the penalty or any portion thereof.

[Amd. Ord. No. 6696, Aug. 16, 1990; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2004-215, Nov. 4, 2004; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2019-59, June 20, 2019.]

 

8.809 Deficiency Determinations; Fraud, Evasion, Operator Delay

(1) Deficiency Determination. If the Chief Financial Officer determines that the returns are incorrect, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of the facts contained in the return or returns or upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one, or more than one period, and the amount so determined shall be due and payable immediately upon service of notice as herein provided after which the amount determined is delinquent. Penalties or deficiencies shall be applied as set forth in Section 8.808.

(a) In making a determination the Chief Financial Officer may offset overpayments, if any, which may have been previously made for a period or periods, against any underpayment for a subsequent period or periods, or against penalties, and interest, on the underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in Section 8.808.

(b) The Chief Financial Officer shall give to the lodging tax collector or occupant a written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the lodging tax collector at his address as it appears in the records of the Chief Financial Officer. In the case of service by mail of any notice required by this ordinance the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Post Office.

(c) Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this ordinance or authorized rules and regulations, every deficiency determination shall be made and notice thereof mailed within three years after the last day of the month following the close of the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period expires later.

(d) Any determination shall become due and payable immediately upon receipt of notice and shall become final within ten days after the Chief Financial Officer has given notice thereof, provided, however, the lodging tax collector may petition for redemption and refund if the petition is filed before the determination becomes final as herein provided.

(2) Fraud, Refusal to Collect, Evasion. If any lodging tax collector shall fail or refuse to collect said tax or to make, within the time provided in this ordinance, any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this ordinance, or makes a fraudulent return or otherwise willfully attempts to evade this ordinance, the Chief Financial Officer shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the Chief Financial Officer has determined the tax due that is imposed by this ordinance from an lodging tax collector who has failed or refused to collect the same and to report and remit said tax, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such lodging tax collector the tax, interest, and penalties, provided for by this ordinance. In case such determination is made, the Chief Financial Officer shall give a notice in the manner aforesaid of the amount so assessed. Such determination and notice shall be made and mailed within three years after discovery by the Chief Financial Officer of any fraud, intent to evade or failure or refusal to collect said tax, or failure to file return. Any determination shall become due and payable immediately upon receipt of notice and shall become final within ten days after the Chief Financial Officer has given notice thereof, provided, however, the lodging tax collector may petition for redemption and refund if the petition is filed before the determination becomes final as herein provided.

(3) Lodging tax collector Delay. If the Chief Financial Officer believes that the collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the city will be jeopardized by delay, or if any determination will be jeopardized by delay, he shall thereupon make a determination of the tax or amount of tax required to be collected, noting the fact upon the determination. The amount so determined as herein provided shall be immediately due and payable, and the lodging tax collector shall immediately pay same determination to the Chief Financial Officer after service of notice thereof, provided, however, the lodging tax collector may petition, after payment has been made, for redemption and refund of such determination, if the petition is filed within ten days from the date of service of notice by the Chief Financial Officer.

[Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2019-59, June 20, 2019.]


8.810 Redeterminations

(1) Any person against whom a determination is made under Section 8.809, or any person directly interested, may petition for a redetermination and redemption and refund within the time required in Section 8.809. If a petition for redetermination and refund is not filed within the time required therein, the determination becomes final at the expiration of the allowable time.

(2) If a petition for redetermination and refund is filed within the allowable period, the Chief Financial Officer shall reconsider the determination, and, if the person has so requested in his petition, shall grant the person an oral hearing and shall give him ten days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing. The Chief Financial Officer may continue the hearing from time to time as may be necessary.

(3) The Chief Financial Officer may decrease or increase the amount of the determination as a result of the hearing and if an increase is determined such increase shall be payable immediately after the hearing.

(4) The order or decision of the Chief Financial Officer upon a petition for redetermination of redemption and refund becomes final ten (10) days after service upon the petitioner of notice thereof, unless appeal of such order or decision is filed with the City Council within the ten (10) days after service of such notice.

(5) No petition for redetermination of redemption and refund or appeal therefrom shall be effective for any purpose unless the lodging tax collector has first complied with the payment provisions hereof.

[Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2004-215, Nov. 4, 2004; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2019-59, June 20, 2019.]

 

8.811 Security for Collection of Tax

(1) The Chief Financial Officer, whenever he deems it necessary to insure compliance with this ordinance, may require any lodging tax collector subject thereto to deposit with him such security in the form of cash, bond, or other security as the Chief Financial Officer may determine. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the Chief Financial Officer but shall not be greater than twice the lodging tax collector's estimated average monthly liability for the period for which he files returns, determined in such manner as the Chief Financial Officer deems proper, or Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00), whichever amount is less. The amount of the security may be increased or decreased by the Chief Financial Officer subject to the limitations herein provided. The lodging tax collector has a right to appeal to the City Council any decision of the Chief Financial Officer made under this section.

(2) Any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable or at any time within three years after any determination becomes final, the Chief Financial Officer may bring an action in the courts of this State, or any other state, or of the United States in the name of the City of Medford to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest.

[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2004-215, Nov. 4, 2004; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2019-59, June 20, 2019.]

@


8.812 Lien

The tax imposed by this ordinance together with the interest and penalties herein provided and the filing fees paid to the County Clerk of Jackson County, Oregon, and advertising costs which may be incurred when same becomes delinquent as set forth in this ordinance shall be and, until paid, remain a lien from the date of its recording with the County Clerk of Jackson County, Oregon, and superior

to all subsequent recorded liens on all tangible personal property used in the transient lodging of an lodging tax collector within Medford and may be foreclosed on and sold as may be necessary to discharge said lien, if the lien has been recorded with the County Clerk of Jackson County, Oregon. Notice of lien may be issued by the Chief Financial Officer whenever the lodging tax collector is in default in the payment of said tax, interest and penalty and shall be recorded with the County Clerk of Jackson County, Oregon and a copy sent to the delinquent lodging tax collector. The personal property subject to such lien may be foreclosed on and sold as provided by law.

Any lien for taxes as shown on the records of the proper County Official shall, upon the payment of all taxes, penalties, and interest thereon, be released by the Chief Financial Officer when the full amount determined to be due has been paid to the city and the lodging tax collector or person making such payment shall receive a receipt therefor stating that the full amount of taxes, penalties, and interest thereon have been paid and that the lien is thereby released and the record of lien is satisfied.

[Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2015-117, November 19, 2015; Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2019-59, June 20, 2019.]


8.813 Refunds

(1) Lodging tax collectors Refunds. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty, or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Chief Financial Officer under this ordinance, it may be refunded, provided a verified claim in writing therefor stating the specific reason upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the Chief Financial Officer within three years from the date of payment. The claim shall be made on forms provided by the Chief Financial Officer. If the claim is approved by the Chief Financial Officer, the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any amounts due and payable from the lodging tax collector from whom it was collected or by whom paid and the balance may be refunded to such lodging tax collector, his administrators, executors or assignees.

(2) Transient Refunds. Whenever the tax required by this ordinance has been collected by the lodging tax collector, and deposited by the lodging tax collector with the Chief Financial Officer, and it is later determined that the tax was erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Chief Financial Officer, it may be refunded by him to the transient, provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific reason on which the claim is founded, is filed with said Chief Financial Officer within three years from the date of payment.

[Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2019-59, June 20, 2019.]

@

@

@

@

@


8.814 Collection Fee

Every lodging tax collector liable for the collection and remittance of the tax imposed by this ordinance may withhold five percent (5%) of the net tax due to cover the lodging tax collector's expense in the collection and remittance of said tax.

[Amd. Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2019-59, June 20, 2019.]


8.815 Administration

(1) Special Fund. The Chief Financial Officer shall deposit twenty-five percent of the proceeds of the transient lodgings tax as they are received in a special fund to be known as the "Community Promotions Fund", forty-one percent into the General Fund, and thirty-four percent into the Park Improvement Fund. The Community Promotions Fund shall be used for the purpose of promoting, directly or through contract, the use of the City of Medford for recreational, cultural, convention and tourist-related activities and services. However, the city council may by resolution transfer all or part of the balance remaining in the Community Promotions Fund at the end of any fiscal year to the General Fund.

(2) Records Required from Lodging tax collectors; Form. Every lodging tax collector shall keep guest records of room sales and accounting books and records of the room sales. All records shall be retained by the lodging tax collector for a period of three years and six months after they come into being.

(3) Examination of Records; Investigations. The Chief Financial Officer or any person authorized in writing by him may examine during normal business hours, the books, papers and accounting records relating to room sales of any lodging tax collector after notification to the lodging tax collector liable for the tax and may investigate the business of the lodging tax collector in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the lodging tax collector, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. To assist in this process, the Chief Financial Officer may request certified copies of annual tax returns covering lodging tax collector.

(4) Confidential Character of Information Obtained - Disclosure Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for the Chief Financial Officer or any person having an administrative or clerical duty under the provisions of this ordinance to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate, or pay a transient occupancy tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of either, or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person, provided that nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent:
(a) The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by another City of Medford official, employee, or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this ordinance; or collecting taxes imposed hereunder;
(b) The disclosure after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer himself, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to any paid tax, any unpaid tax or amount of tax required to be collected, or interest, and penalties; further provided, however, that the city attorney approves each such disclosure referred to in this paragraph when in his opinion the public interest would suffer thereby;
(c) The disclosure of the names and addresses of any persons to whom Transient Occupancy Registration Certificates have been issued; and
(d) The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city.

[Amd. Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2019-59, June 20, 2019; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2020-80, Jun. 18, 2020.]


8.816 [Repealed Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2004-215, Nov. 4, 2004.]

 


8.817 [Repealed Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2004-215, Nov. 4, 2004.]

 


8.818 Appeals to City Council

Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Chief Financial Officer may appeal to the City Council of the City of Medford by filing a notice of appeal with the Chief Financial Officer within ten (10) days of the service or the mailing of the notice of the decision given by the Chief Financial Officer. The Chief Financial Officer shall transmit said notice of appeal, together with the file of said appealed matter to the City Council who shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The City Council shall give the appellant not less than ten (10) days written notice of the time and place of hearing of said appealed matter. Action by the City Council on appeals shall be by resolution, passed by a majority of the members present at the meeting where such appeal is considered.

[Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2004-215, Nov. 4, 2004; Amd. Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2019-59, June 20, 2019.]


8.819 Severability

If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance, or any part thereof, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional (or otherwise invalid), such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance or any part thereof. The legislative body hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional (or otherwise invalid).

8.820 Violations

It is unlawful for any lodging tax collector or other person so required to fail or refuse to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the Chief Financial Officer or to render a false or fraudulent report, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this ordinance.

[Amd. Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2019-59, June 20, 2019.]

8 Miscellaneous Regulations (8.825 to 8.900)

8.825 Liquor License Application

1.  Fee:  The applicant for any type of liquor license shall pay the appropriate processing fee as follows:

New outlet application $100.00

Annual renewals or temporary applications $35.00

Change in ownership $75.00

Change in location $75.00

Change in privilege $75.00

Change in business name $75.00

Fees must be paid before the application is considered by the city council.

2.  Processing.

(a)  The City adopts as valid grounds for unfavorable recommendations the standards of the OLCC now existing and as hereafter modified.

(b)  Staff will review applications for valid grounds for unfavorable recommendations.

(c)  If staff finds no valid grounds for unfavorable recommendations, staff shall forward a favorable recommendation to OLCC.

(d)  If staff finds valid grounds for an unfavorable recommendation, the application will be set for City Council hearing within 30 days.

(e)  Council will forward an unfavorble recommendation to OLCC on applications in which valid grounds for an unfavorable recommendation are sustained after a hearing.

[Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2000-72, April 20, 2000; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-242, Dec. 21, 2000; Amd. Ord. No. 2006-269, Dec. 7, 2006.]


8.830 Gun Calibre Regulated

No person operating a shooting gallery shall permit the use of guns therein in excess of .22 calibre.

8.835 Handbill Advertising

(1) Except as provided in Subsection (2) of this section, no person shall place any handbill, paper, sticker, or any advertising matter of any kind pertaining to commercial enterprises in or on any automobile or place a sticker of such nature upon the windshield without the express consent of the owner thereof.

(2) Subsection (1) of this section shall not apply to handbills or stickers of the United States, state, county, or municipality such as those seeking to prevent forest fires, or to enforce traffic rules, and the like.

8.840 Close-out Sales

(1) For the purpose of this section, close-out sales shall mean any offer to sell to the public or sale to the public of goods, wares, or merchandise on the implied or direct representation that such sale is in anticipation of termination of a business at its present location, or that such sale is to include goods, wares, or merchandise previously obtained or derived from a sale by referee in bankruptcy, a receiver or an assignee for the benefit of creditors. Any sale advertised specifically or in substance to be, an "adjustment" sale, "creditor's" sale, "assignee's" sale, "adjuster's" sale, "must-vacate" sale, "quitting-business" sale, "receiver's" sale, "loss-of-lease" sale, "forced-out-of-business" sale, "removal" sale, or "liquidating" sale, shall be deemed a close-out sale within the meaning of this code, unless proven otherwise by the person conducting same. Any sale advertising specifically or in substance to be a "fire" sale or a sale of smoke-or-water damaged goods shall be deemed a close-out sale within the meaning of this code when such sale is not conducted by the person suffering the loss as the result of such damage.

(2) No person, whether as owner, employee or agent, shall continue in business for more than 90 days after the commencement of a close-out sale.

(3) No person, whether as owner, employee, or agent, shall conduct or engage in any business or in any trade at the same location where a close-out sale has been conducted less than one year previously:
 
(a) If such business or trade is conducted under the same marketing procedure as in the said category of business as the business or trade conducted at the time of the close-out sale as defined or listed in the most recent Department of Commerce Business Census report forms; and
 
(b) If such person was the owner or operator of the business or trade at the time of the close-out sale.

(4) Any person who violates this section, or who by fraud or misrepresentation aids another person in violating this section, shall be guilty of a violation.

[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2000-55, April 6, 2000.]

8.900 Penalties, collection

(1) Violation of any provision of chapter 8 of this code shall be a violation. Every day in which the violation is caused or permitted to exist constitutes a separate violation. The violation penalty is in addition to any other penalty interest or charge imposed by this code.

(2) Delinquent taxes and fees, penalty and interest imposed by chapter 8 of this code, except the violation penalty, may be collected in a civil action.

(3) When all or part of a section or provision of Chapter 8, Code of Medford, is repealed by Ordinance No. 5110, the code provision repealed remains in force for the purpose of collecting delinquent taxes or imposing penalties for non-payment of taxes due and owing for fiscal 1983-84 and prior years and for the purpose of authorizing the accusation, prosecution, conviction and punishment of a person who violated the code provision before the effective date of the repealing ordinance.

[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2000-55, April 6, 2000.]


8 Competitive Franchise Application Rule - Local Rule (8.1000 to 8.1006)

8.1000 Title and Application

These code sections shall be known as City of Medford Competitive Franchise Application Rule - Local Rule (CFAR-LR). Any application for a cable franchise agreement submitted to the City pursuant to 47 CFR §76.41 shall contain the requisite information set forth herein. The City shall evaluate applications and grant franchise licenses on the criteria set forth herein.

[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2007-78, April 19, 2007.]


8.1001 Definitions

As used in this CFAR-LR, definitions shall be as follows:

(1) "Affiliated Entity" or "Affiliate" means any entity having ownership or control in common with the Grantee, in whole or in part, including, without limitation, Grantee’s Parent Corporations and any subsidiaries or affiliates of such Parent Corporations.

(2) "Applicant" or "Applicant" means an applicant for a cable franchise pursuant to the provisions of the Competitive Franchise Application Rule ("CFAR") set forth in Part 76 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, §76.41, and includes the Parent Corporation, its subsidiaries and Principals.

(3) "City Manager" means the City Manager or his or her designee.

(4) "Control" is not limited to majority stock ownership, but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised.

(5) "Interest" includes officers, directors and shareholders owning five percent or more of the Applicant’s outstanding stock or any equivalent voting interest of a partnership or joint venture.

(6) "Parent Corporation" includes any entity with ownership or control of the Applicant.

(7) "Principal" includes any person, firm, corporation, partnership, joint venture, affiliates, or other entity, who or which owns or controls five percent or more of the voting stock (or any equivalent voting interest of a partnership or joint venture) of the Applicant.

(8) "Public Way" means any highway, street, road, alley, public right-of-way or public utility easement, including those controlled by the county and the state governments, within the corporate limits of the City now existing and as annexed during the term of this franchise.

(9) "Regulatory Authority" includes any governmental or quasi-governmental organization or entity with jurisdiction over all or any portion of the Applicant or its operations.

[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2007-78, April 19, 2007.]


8.1002 Competitive Franchise Application Requirements for CFAR Applications

(1) Instructions and Definitions.

An Applicant shall include the requisite information set forth below, in writing, in its franchise application, in addition to any information required by 47 CFR §76.41 and applicable state and local laws and the application fee set by resolution of the City. An Applicant shall also provide any additional information requested by the City that is relevant to the evaluation of the application under the criteria adopted herein and applicable law.

The City shall accept and review only those applications that include complete responses to every element of the information required in this application. Submission of an application that does not include the requisite information set forth below and the application fee shall not commence the time period for granting or denying the application set forth in 47 C.F.R. §76.41(d). If the City requests any additional information from the Applicant, the time period set forth in 47 C.F.R. §76.41(d) shall be tolled from the date the information is requested until the date it is received by the City.

Upon request, the Applicant shall immediately submit additional or updated information as necessary to ensure the requisite information provided is complete and accurate throughout the City’s review of the application.

Upon request, the City will promptly provide access to documents or information in its possession or control that are necessary for the completion of this application, provided that the Applicant does not otherwise have access to such documents or information and that such documents or information are subject to disclosure under Oregon public records laws.

For the purposes of this application, the terms, phrases, and their derivations set forth below shall have the meanings given unless the context indicates otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.

[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2007-78, April 19, 2007.]


8.1003 Requisite Information

All Applications under this ordinance shall contain the following information:

(A) Identification and Ownership Information.

(1) Identification of Applicant and Proposed Franchisee.

(a) State the name, address, telephone number and web site (if applicable) of the Applicant and the proposed franchisee (if different from Applicant).

(b) State the name, address, primary telephone number and primary e-mail address of all individual(s) authorized to represent the Applicant before the City during their consideration of the franchise(s) requested, including the Applicant’s primary contact and any additional authorized contacts.

(2) Business Structure.

(a) Corporation:

(i) If Applicant is a corporation, please list all officers and members of the Board of Directors, their principal affiliations and their addresses;

(ii) Attach a certified copy of the Articles of Incorporation and Bylaws of the corporation; and

(iii) State whether the Applicant is directly or indirectly controlled by another corporation or legal entity. If so, attach an explanatory statement and respond to questions (2)(a)(i) and (ii) above concerning the controlling corporation.

(b) Partnership:

(i) If Applicant is a partnership, please describe the structure of the partnership and the Interests of general and limited partners.

(ii) State whether the Applicant is controlled directly or indirectly by any corporation or other legal entity. If so, respond to (2)(a)(i) – (ii) or (2)(b)(i) above, as applicable, concerning the controlling entity.

(3) Experience

(a) Current Franchises.

List whether the Applicant or any Affiliate owns more than five percent of the system. For each system include name of system, address, communities served, number of subscribers, number of homes passed, date of system award, duration (start and end date) of franchise, status of construction, and percent of penetration of homes passed as of most recently available date (indicate date). Also include name, title, and telephone number of system manager.

(b) Potential Franchises.

List communities where the Applicant or any Affiliate currently has a formal or informal request pending for an initial franchise, the renewal of a franchise, or the approval of a transfer of ownership. Include name of communities, date of application, date of expected action, estimated number of homes.

(4) Management Structure.

Attach a management/organizational chart, showing the management structure of the

Applicant. Also, provide a similar chart showing the relationship of the Applicant to all general partners, Parent Corporations, subsidiaries, Affiliates and all other subsidiaries of Parent Corporations, including a brief description of each entity’s relationship to the Applicant.

(5) Management Agreement.

State whether there are any management agreements existing or proposed between the Applicant and any Parent Corporation or Affiliate related to construction and operation of the Applicant’s planned system. If yes, attach a copy of any such agreement.

(6) Management Fees

List all entities entitled to receive management or other fees for the income produced by the Applicant’s planned systems.

Identify amounts or percentages of fees for each such entity.

(B) LEGAL QUALIFICATIONS.

(1) Media Cross-Ownership.

State whether the Applicant or an Affiliate directly or indirectly owns, operates, controls or has an Interest in any of the following, or whether the Applicant holds or operates any company or business operating jointly with any of the following:

(a) A national broadcast television network (such as ABC, CBS or NBC, etc.).

(b) A television broadcast station whose predicted Grade B contour, computed in accordance with Section 73.684 of the FCC's rules, overlaps in whole or in part the City’s service area, or an application for license to operate such a station.

(c) A telecommunications or telephone company whose service area includes any portion of the City’s service area.

If the response to any of the above is affirmative, state the name of the Applicant or Affiliate, the nature and percentage of ownership or Interest and the company that is owned or in which the Interest is held.

(2) Equal Employment Opportunity and Affirmative Action.

Applicant shall attach any current FCC certification(s) for its existing cable system holdings, if any, or indicate its intention to apply for and abide by same.

(3) Franchise Violations.

State whether the Applicant or any Affiliate been found in violation by a Regulatory Authority or franchising authority of any franchise ordinance or agreement, contract or regulation governing a cable system. If so, identify the judicial or administrative proceeding, giving the date, name of tribunal and result or disposition of that proceeding.

(4) Other Violations.

State whether the Applicant been found in violation by a Regulatory Authority of any other type (e.g. utility) of franchise, ordinance, agreement, permit, contract or regulation. If so, identify the judicial or administrative proceeding, giving the date, name of tribunal and result or disposition of that proceeding.

(C) Financial Qualifications.

(1) For Applicants with existing operations: provide audited financial statements, including statements of income, balance sheets and cash flow statements, together with any notes necessary to the understanding of the financial statements for the last three fiscal years for the Applicant and any Parent Corporation.

(2) For Applicants who are new (start-up) entities: provide pro forma projections for the next five fiscal years, if available, but at a minimum the next three fiscal years from the date of the application.

(D) Technical Qualifications, Planned Services and Operations.

(1) Describe the Applicant’s planned initial and proposed cable services geographic area, including a map and proposed dates for offering service to each area;

(2) If the Applicant has or asserts existing authority to access the public right of way in any of the initial or proposed service areas listed in (D)(1) above, state the basis for such authority or asserted authority and attach the relevant agreements or other documentation of such authority;

(3) Describe with particularity the Applicant’s planned residential Cable services, including basic cable services, cable programming service tier, and any additional pay-per-view, on-demand or digital services; and the projected rates for each category or tier or service;

(4) Describe with particularity the Applicant’s planned system technical design, upstream and downstream capacity and speed, provision for analog or digital services or packages, distribution of fiber, and planned count of households per residential node;

(5) Describe with particularity the Applicant’s planned non-residential cable services;

(6) Describe the Applicant’s planned construction and extension or phase schedule, as applicable, including system extension plans or policy; describe current status of the Applicant’s existing or proposed arrangements with area utilities, including pole attachments, vault, or conduit sharing agreements as applicable;

(7) Describe the Applicant’s plan to ensure that the safety, functioning and appearance of property and convenience and safety of other persons not be adversely affected by installation or construction of the Applicant’s facilities, and that property owners are justly compensated for any damages caused by the installation, construction, operation or removal of the facilities; also state the proposed allocation of costs of installation, construction, operation or removal of facilities between the Applicant and the subscriber;

(8) Describe the availability and cost of a device to enable a subscriber to block obscene or indecent programming; and

(9) Describe the Applicant’s plan to comply with the subscriber privacy protections set forth in 47 U.S.C. §551.

(E) Proposed Franchise Terms.

State the franchise terms proposed by the Applicant for each of the following:

(1) Term (Duration) of Franchise (not to exceed 20 years);

(2) With respect to PEG:

(a) PEG access, including channel capacity, programming, a description of proposed services, facilities and equipment, and the Applicant’s plan for interconnections with existing PEG facilities and designated PEG providers in existing CITY cable franchise areas to provide PEG programming of adequate technical quality; and

(b) PEG capital support;

(3) With respect to Institutional Networks:

(a) Capacity and services to be provided, including a description of the network and equipment to be installed, activated, maintained or interconnected with existing institutional networks, potential sites to be served, and proposed technical means of interconnection, where applicable; and

(b) Institutional network capital support;

(4) Franchise fee payments, including a statement of all planned categories of cable revenue included in "gross revenues" for purposes of the fee (or a detailed description of the fee base if not based on gross revenues), and any proposed limitation on the City’s access to relevant books and records to verify timely and accurate payment;

(5) Amount of insurance coverage planned for Applicant operations, services and activities on behalf of the City; the scope of the coverage; and the length of time the policy is planned to be effective;

(6) Amount of performance bond in favor of the City to ensure the Applicant observes, fulfills and performs each term and condition of the franchise; any limitations on the exercise of the bond; and length of time the bond is planned to be effective;

(7) Terms of indemnity to be provided to the City;

(8) Existing Public Way authority, if any, and terms of use of the Public Way in the City;

(9) Technical and operational standards, including performance testing and appropriate sanctions for failure to meet standards; and

(10) Customer service and consumer protection standards or policies, including but not limited to telephone, billing and repair response times, customer service representative (CSR) ratio to subscriber base, the method of evaluating the adequacy of customer service, reporting procedures and penalties for failure to meet standards.

For each item listed above, the Applicant shall provide a summary with sufficient detail to demonstrate the manner in which each term proposed by the Applicant compares to corollary or reasonably related terms in any cable franchise currently in effect in the City, the most recent needs ascertainment conducted by or on behalf of the City, and local customer service standards.

(F) MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.

(1) State whether the Applicant contemplates the provision of any cable services on its system under an Open Video Systems ("OVS") regulatory regime, within the meaning of Section 653 of the 1934 Communications Act (47 U.S.C. §573).

(2) Provide a short narrative describing the Applicant’s experience in and plans for providing Equal Employment Opportunity, Affirmative Action and Minority Business Enterprise utilization.

(3) Provide a short narrative describing the Applicant’s experience in and/or goals for satisfactory cable subscriber customer service.

(4) Explain how the Applicant is competitive.

[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2007-78, April 19, 2007.]

 


8.1004 Affidavit of Applicant

Each application shall be accompanied by an affidavit substantially in the form set forth below:

(1) This application of the Applicant is submitted by the undersigned who has been duly authorized to make the representations within on behalf of the Applicant and certifies the representations are true and correct.

(2) The Applicant recognizes that all representations are binding on it and that material misrepresentations or omissions, or failure to adhere to any such representation may result in a denial of a CFAR franchise application by the City.

(3) Consent is hereby given to the City, its officers, employees, representatives and agents to make inquiry into the legal, character, technical, financial and other qualifications of the Applicant by contacting any persons or organizations named herein as references, or by any other appropriate means.

(4) The Applicant recognizes that information submitted is open to public inspection and subject to the Oregon Public Records Law.

City has advised the Applicant to be familiar with the Oregon Public Records Law, and the Applicant has specifically identified any information it considers proprietary.

(5) In the event that the City receives a request from another party to disclose any information which the Applicant has deemed proprietary, the City will tender to the Applicant the defense of any request to compel disclosure.

(6) By submitting information which the Applicant deems proprietary or otherwise exempt from disclosure, the Applicant agrees to defend and hold harmless the City from any claim for disclosure including but not limited to any expenses including out-of-pocket costs and attorneys’ fees, as well as any judgment entered against the City for the costs and fees including attorney fees of the party requesting disclosure.

All Affidavits shall bear the notarized signature of Applicants Authorized representative.

[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2007-78, April 19, 2007.]


8.1005 Application Fee

The City shall, by resolution, set an application fee sufficient to cover the reasonable cost of processing applications under this CFAR-LR.

Upon request of the Applicant, the City may reduce or waive the application fee. In evaluating such a request, the City will consider the following factors: (1) the size of the proposed franchise area; (2) the number of potential subscribers in the proposed franchise area; (3) the financial hardship to the Applicant (including any parent corporation or affiliate); and (4) other information relevant to the cost of processing the application and/or the Applicant’s ability to pay the fee.

[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2007-78, April 19, 2007.]


8.1006 Review Process

(1) Acceptance of Application.

Within 5 business days of receipt of an application, the City Manager shall review the application to ensure all requisite information is included in the application.

(A) If the application is not complete, staff will immediate notify the Applicant in writing, listing the requisite information that is required to complete the application and notifying the Applicant the that time period for granting or denying the application set forth in 47 C.F.R. § 76.41(d) will not begin to run until such information is received.

(B) If the application is complete, the City Manager will immediately notify the Applicant in writing that all requisite information has been received.

(2) Review.

City Manager shall review all completed applications based on the review criteria set forth herein. If, during the review of an application, staff requires additional information from the Applicant, staff will promptly request the information from the Applicant, in writing, along with a notification that the time period for granting or denying the application set forth in 47 C.F.R. § 76.41(d) will be tolled until such information is received by the City. After completing the review, City Manager shall provide an analysis of the application to the City Council.

(3) Public Hearing.

The City shall hold a public hearing affording participants a process substantially equivalent to that required by 47 U.S.C. §546(c)(2) governing renewal of cable franchises.

(4) Review Criteria.

The City Manager may recommend to the City deny and City may deny an application if, based on the information provided in the application, at the public hearing and/or any terms of a proposed franchise agreement:

(A) The Applicant does not have the financial, technical, or legal qualifications to provide cable service;

(B) The Applicant will not provide adequate public, educational, and governmental access channel capacity, facilities, or financial support, as evidenced by the most recent needs ascertainment conducted by or on behalf of the City, or other relevant study of community needs; or

(C) The Applicant’s proposed terms do not comply with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations including, but not limited to, local customer service standards, or relevant existing contractual obligations of the City.

[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2007-78, April 19, 2007.]


8 Economic Improvement Districts (8.2000 - 8.2019)

8.2000 Purpose

The purpose of this Chapter is to establish procedures for the creation of two types of Economic Improvement Districts, one in which the assessment is mandatory and applied to all properties except Exempt Properties, the second type in which the property owner can decide whether to be assessed, a voluntary assessment, as authorized by state law. The City will be ultimately responsible for administering and operating any Economic Improvement District, although the administration and operation may be carried out by others under contract with the City. All costs of administering and operating any Economic Improvement District will be paid entirely from assessments and fees actually received from the District; the City will not pledge its credit on behalf of the District; and the City will not loan funds to the District.

[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2013-105, July 11, 2013.]
 

8.2001 Definitions

The following words and phrases when used in this Chapter shall have the following meanings, except where the context requires a different meaning:

A. "Advisory Committee" means as allowed by ORS 223.119, a committee of persons representative of the owners and tenants of property within an Economic Improvement District and may consist of an existing association of property owners or tenants or both.

B.  "Economic Improvement" means:
1. The planning or management of development or improvement activities.
 
2. Landscaping, maintenance and provision of security for public areas.
 
3. The promotion of commercial activity or public events.
 
4. The conduct of activities in support of business recruitment and development.
 
5. The provision of improvements in parking systems or parking enforcement.
 
6. Any other economic improvement activity that specially benefits property.
 
C. "Preliminary Economic Improvement Plan" means a plan prepared by the property owners or tenants within the proposed District or their designees setting out:
 
1. A description of economic improvements proposed to be carried out;
 
2. The number of years, to a maximum of three, in which assessments are proposed to be levied;
 
3. A preliminary estimate of annual cost of the proposed economic improvements;
 
4. The proposed boundaries designated by map or perimeter description of an Economic Improvement District within which subject properties would be assessed to finance the cost of the economic improvements;
 
5. The proposed formula for assessing the cost of the economic improvements against subject properties;
 
6. A preliminary estimate of the cost of City administration of the proposed Economic Improvement District; and
 
7. A statement of why the proposed economic improvements are not likely to be satisfactorily and equitably accomplished except through establishment of an Economic Improvement District.

D. "Final Economic Improvement Plan" means a plan setting out:
 
1. A description of economic improvements to be carried out;
 
2. The number of years, to a maximum of three, in which assessments will be levied;
 
3. The annual cost of the proposed economic improvements;
 
4. The boundaries designated by map or perimeter description of the Economic Improvement District within which subject properties will be assessed to finance the costs of the Economic Improvement District;
 
5. The formula for assessing the cost of the economic improvements against subject properties; and
 
6. The cost of City administration of the Economic Improvement District.

E. "Lot" means a lot, block, or parcel or land.

F. "Owner" means the owner of the title to real property or the contract purchaser of record as shown on the last available complete assessment roll in the Office of the County Assessor.

G. "Subject Properties" means the real property within an Economic Improvement District except for Exempt Property.

H. "Exempt Property" means:
 
1. Residential real property and any portion of a structure used for residential purposes. In the event a structure is used for both residential and non-residential purposes, the land on which the structure is located shall not be Exempt Property. For purposes of this subsection, "residential real property" and "residential purposes" shall not include hotels and hotel uses, as defined in this Code, and motels and motel uses, as defined in this Code regarding Transient Lodging Taxes.
 
2. Property owned or being purchased by religious organizations.

3. Parking Lots.

[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2013-105, July 11, 2013.]
 

8.2002 Council Control

If the Council determines that economic improvements would be appropriate and would afford a special benefit to subject properties within a particular District, the Council, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, may establish an Economic Improvement District and provide for payment of all or a portion of the cost by collection of assessments on either a mandatory or voluntary basis. The Council may decline for any reason within its sole discretion to establish a proposed Economic Improvement District. This Chapter shall not give to any person the right to have an Economic Improvement District established.

[Added, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2013-105, July 11, 2013.]
 

8.2003 State Statutes Apply

Statutory provisions applicable to Economic Improvement Districts shall be followed by the City and by owners in all cases. The provisions of this Chapter are intended to supplement and to implement the statutory provisions.

[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2013-105, July 11, 2013.]
 

8.2004 Preliminary Institution of Economic Improvement District

A. The Council may consider creation of an Economic Improvement District whenever owners of Subject Properties file with the City Manager a petition for the establishment of a District or the Mayor files a report recommending the establishment of a District. A petition or report shall contain a Preliminary Economic Improvement Plan.

B. The Council may adopt a resolution directing the City Manager to begin the Economic Improvement District formation process if the Council finds that the economic improvements would afford a special and peculiar benefit to subject properties within the Economic Improvement District different in kind or degree from that afforded to the general public.

[Added, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2013-105, July 11, 2013.]
 

8.2005 Final Plan and Ordinance Preparation

A. Immediately following Council adoption of a resolution under Section 8.2004(B), the City Manager shall prepare for the City Council a report including but not limited to:
 
1.    Ownership of properties in the district;
 
2.    Status of payments of taxes and city liens and other fees and charges;
 
3.    A proposed Final Economic Improvement Plan; and
 
4.    Recommendations of the Advisory Committee.

B. The report also shall be accompanied by a proposed ordinance that:
 
1.    States the Council’s intention to proceed with formal notification regarding the proposed Economic Improvement District;
 
2.    States whether the assessments will be mandatory or voluntary;
 
3.    Contains the information in the Final Economic Improvement Plan, which may be included by attachment of the Plan as an exhibit; and
 
4.    Directs notice to be given in the manner provided by Section 8.2007.

[Added, Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2013-105, July 11, 2013; Amd. Ord. No. 2013-129, Sept. 5, 2013.]
 
 

8.2006 Consideration of Final Plan and Ordinance

On consideration of the report and ordinance, the Council may approve, modify, or reject the report including any aspect of the Final Economic Improvement Plan, and the ordinance. If the Council determines that the proceedings for the proposed Economic Improvement District should go forward, the Council shall adopt the ordinance including any modifications.

[Added, Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2013-105, July 11, 2013.]
 

8.2007 Notice to Owners

A. Following adoption of the ordinance under Section 8.2006, the City Manager shall mail notice to the property owners within the proposed Economic Improvement District which contains the following information:
 
1.  The Council’s intent to form an Economic Improvement District;
 
2.  Assessment on benefitted properties;
 
3.  The formula for determining the assessment; 
 
4.  The scope of the improvements and the description of the district boundaries;
 
5.  The estimated cost of the proposal and that it may be reduced to the amount of money actually  received;
 
6.  The classification or types of properties which are exempt;
 
7.  The proposed final plan is on file with the City Manager and may be viewed at City Hall or online if available online;
 
8.  The date, time and place of the hearing
 
9.  The proposal can be modified as a result of public testimony;
 
10.  If owners of property upon which greater than thirty-three percent (33%) of the total amount of the assessment is levied oppose creation of the District, then the District shall not be formed and the assessment shall not be made; and
 
11.  Any owner who fails to submit written objection to the formation of the district or the classification of its property before or at the public hearing on assessment shall have waived challenges to the classification.

[Added, Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2013-105, July 11, 2013.]
 

8.2008 Hearing, Exemption Process and Resolution Establishing District

A. The Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed Economic Improvement District at the time and place stated in the notice to owners of properties. The public hearing shall be held no sooner than 30 days after mailing the notice. 

B. At the public hearing on consideration of the District ordinance, City Council shall hear objections to the formation of the district, and objections to classification of property for assessment.

C. Objections to Formation of District.  If owners of property upon which greater than thirty-three percent (33%) of the total amount of the assessment is levied oppose creation of the District, then the District shall not be formed and the assessment shall not be made. 

D. Objections to Classification for Assessment.  Property owners who file objections to classification of exemption shall have the burden of proving their property is exempt from the assessment.  The 
City Manager shall present the City’s case for the classification.  Decisions of City Council with respect to assessment classification are final. 

E.  The Council may continue the hearing to such other time and place as it may deem appropriate. At the hearing, persons supporting or objecting to the proposed improvement and assessment shall be entitled to be heard.

F. If the Council, at the conclusion of the hearing, finds that the economic improvements will afford a special and peculiar benefit to subject properties within the Economic Improvement District different in kind or degree from that afforded to the general public and that the Economic Improvement District should be established, then the Council may adopt a resolution stating those findings and establishing the District.

[Added, Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2013-105, July 11, 2013.]
 

8.2009 Preparation and Notice of Assessments

A. Following Council adoption of a resolution establishing an Economic Improvement District based on the final Economic Improvement Plan, the City Manager shall prepare the proposed assessment for each lot in the District that is a subject property and shall file a proposed assessment ordinance, with a list of proposed assessments attached, with the City Council. The amount of assessment shall be based on the cost of the economic improvements and the cost of City administration of the Economic Improvement District.

B. Following preparation of the proposed assessments, the City Manager shall mail to the owner of each lot to be assessed a notice containing the following information:
 
1.    The description of the property being assessed.
 
2.    The name of the District.
 
3.    The duration of the assessment (life of the District) and the total cost of the project, the assessment formula, and the amount of the assessment on the property.
 
4.    If owners of property upon which greater than thirty-three percent (33%) of the total amount of the assessment is levied oppose creation of the District, then the District shall not be formed and the assessment shall not be made; and
 
5.    Testimony shall be taken on the scope of improvements, estimated cost of proposal, total assessment, and formation of the district.
 
6.    The time, date and place of the hearing;
 
7.    Written objections may be filed with the City Manager prior to the hearing or made orally at the hearing. An objection to the assessment must explain the reasons the assessment is incorrect or exceeds the amount of benefit.
 
8.    An owner who fails to submit a written objection before or at the public hearing shall be deemed to have waived challenge to assessment;
 
9.  The assessment is due and payable immediately, and that it may be paid in quarterly-annual installments. The amount of interest if any and the fact there will be billing charges.  Failure to pay could result in collection and judicial action.
 
10.  Property included in the District and assessed cannot be withdrawn from the District and the assessment will continue through the life of the District.
 
11.  The name and phone number of a City staff person who can answer questions.

[Added, Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2013-105, July 11, 2013.]
 

8.2010 Hearing on Assessments

A. The Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed assessment ordinance. The public hearing shall be held no sooner than 30 days after mailing the notice. The Council may continue the hearing to a date and time certain. At the hearing, property owners supporting or objecting to being assessed, to the amount of the assessment or to the formation of the District, shall be entitled to be heard.

B. Written objections shall be considered to have been received by the Council at the hearing if actually received at the hearing or if received by the City Manager prior to commencement of the hearing.

C. If the Council at the hearing receives written objections to the formation of the District from owners of property upon which more than thirty-three percent (33%) of the total value of assessments are levied, then the Economic Improvement District shall not be established and assessments shall not be made.

D. At the hearing, persons supporting or objecting to the proposed improvement and assessment shall be entitled to be heard. The Council shall consider any objections and may adopt, correct, modify, or revise the proposed assessment ordinance.

E. Council may adopt an ordinance approving the assessment.  Council may change the assessment if it finds that the assessment exceeds the benefit of the improvements.  Notwithstanding the adoption of an ordinance to create the District, the scope of improvements may change to correspond to money collected.

[Added, Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2013-105, July 11, 2013.]
 

8.2011 Assessments

A. The Council shall not levy assessments in an Economic Improvement District in any year that exceed one percent of the true cash value of all the real property located within the District.

B. Any new owner of benefitted property or any owner of benefitted property that was exempted from assessment may subsequently agree to the assessment of the property. The Council shall apply the assessment formula to the property and apportion the costs to the property for the remaining time in which the assessment is levied.

C. The assessed property may not be relieved from liability for that assessment for any reason including change of ownership.

[Added, Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2013-105, July 11, 2013.]
 

8.2012 Limitation on Boundaries

The Council shall include within the Economic Improvement District only City-owned property that is zoned for commercial or industrial use.

[Added, Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2013-105, July 11, 2013.]
 

8.2013 Expenditure of Moneys

Money derived from assessments levied under this Chapter and from interest earned on that money shall be spent only for the economic improvements and for the cost of City administration of the Economic Improvement District described in the final Economic Improvement Plan.

[Added, Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2013-105, July 11, 2013.]
 

8.2014 Limitation on Expenditures

Money spent for carrying out a final Economic Improvement Plan shall be limited to money actually received from assessments or from other public or private contributions to assist in carrying out the Plan.  City may transfer by interfund loan money into and out of fund established for Economic Improvement District.

[Added, Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2013-105, July 11, 2013.]
 

8.2015 Administration

The City Manager shall be responsible for administration of the economic improvements to be carried out. Subject to the requirements of any labor agreements to which the City is a party and to any applicable requirements of state law, the Council in its discretion may authorize an agreement or agreements with an Advisory Committee to provide all or part of the economic improvements described in the final economic improvement plan.  In that event, the Manager and the Advisory Committee shall prepare for Council consideration contracts for the work. In each case, the contract for work shall include not less than the following:

A.   A description of the work to be done;

B.    A description of the method of compensation for the work;

C.    A description of records to be kept by the contractor to evidence performance of the work and of the documentation to be provided to the City to justify payment for work;

D.   A description of any liability to be born and insurance to be provided by the contractor; and

E.    A description of the rights of the City to terminate the contract prior to its completion.

[Added, Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2013-105, July 11, 2013.]
 

8.2016 Cost of Administration

The cost of City administration of an Economic Improvement District shall be five per cent (5%), which is an estimation of the actual cost of administrative services provided by the City related to the District.

[Added, Sec. 17, Ord. No. 2013-105, July 11, 2013.]
 
 

8.2017 Surplus upon Termination of District

Following the normally scheduled termination of an Economic Improvement District, including the payment of all obligations and costs of administration incurred on behalf of the District, if there remain excess funds from assessments paid by owners of subject properties, then the City Council, by ordinance, shall provide for either:

A. The return of the excess funds to the owners of subject properties in amounts proportionate to the amounts of the assessments they paid for the District;

B. Use of the excess funds for continued provision of the economic improvements until the excess funds are fully spent;

C. Use of part of the excess funds as provided in B and return of the balance of the excess funds as provided in A; or

D. Continuation of the Life of the District.

[Added, Sec. 18, Ord. No. 2013-105, July 11, 2013.]
 

8.2018 Continuation of Assessments Extending the Life of the District

If the Council determines that it is necessary to levy assessments upon subject property in the District for longer than the period of time specified in the assessment ordinance that created the District, the Council shall enact an ordinance that provides for continued assessments for a specified number of years, to a maximum of three. The assessment of lots under such an ordinance shall be subject to the procedures required by Sections 8.2007 through 8.2010.

[Added, Sec. 19, Ord. No. 2013-105, July 11, 2013.]
 

8.2019 Entry and Collection of Assessments

A. On adoption of an assessment ordinance under Section 8.2010(E), the City Recorder shall file the assessment for each lot in the Finance Department.  The Finance Department shall treat each assessment as an account payable.  Payments are subject to penalties and interest as for operators under section 8.808 of the Municipal Code.  Failure to pay may result in collections and judicial action. 

B. The assessments may be paid in quarterly-annual payments.

[Added, Sec. 20, Ord. No. 2013-105, July 11, 2013.]
 
8 Tax on Marijuana Businesses (8.3000 - 8.3145)

8.3000 Repealed Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2016-11, Jan. 21, 2016


 

8.3001 Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2016-11, Jan. 21, 2016


 

8.3002 Repealed Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2016-11, Jan. 21, 2016


 

8.3003 Repealed Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2016-11, Jan. 21, 2016

 

8.3004 Repealed Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2016-11, Jan. 21, 2016


 

8.3005 Repealed Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2016-11, Jan. 21, 2016

 
 

8.3006 Repealed Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2016-11, Jan. 21, 2016

 
 

8.3007 Repealed Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2016-11, Jan. 21, 2016

 
 

8.3008 Repealed Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2016-11, Jan. 21, 2016

 
 
 

8.3009 Repealed Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2016-11, Jan. 21, 2016

 
 
 
 

8.3100 Definitions

“Marijuana item” has the meaning given that term in Oregon Laws 2015, chapter 614, section 1.
“Marijuana retailer” means a person who sells marijuana items to a consumer in this state.
“Retail sale price” means the price paid for a marijuana item, excluding tax, to a marijuana retailer by or on behalf of a consumer of the marijuana item.

[Added Sec. 1. Ord. No. 2016-148, Dec. 15, 2016.]
 

8.3105 Tax Imposed

As described in section 34a of House Bill 3400 (2015), the City of Medford hereby imposes a tax of three percent on the retail sale price of marijuana items by a marijuana retailer in an area subject to the jurisdiction of the city.
[Added Sec. 2. Ord. No. 2016-148, Dec. 15, 2016.]
 

8.3110 Collection

(1)  The tax shall be collected at the point of sale of a marijuana item by a marijuana retailer at the time at which the retail sale occurs and remitted by each marijuana retailer that engages in the retail sale of marijuana items.  The tax collected by a marijuana retailer constitutes a debt owing to the City, and is due and payable to the City’s Finance Director on a monthly basis on or before the last day of the month immediately following for the preceding month. 
(2)  A marijuana retailer shall make a return to the Finance Director, on forms provided by the City, specifying the total sales and the amount of tax collected. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted. For good cause shown, the Finance Director may extend the time for filing a return or paying the tax for not more than one (1) month. Any further extension may be granted only by the Council.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2016-148, Dec. 15, 2016.]
 

8.3115 Alternative Collection Method; Penalties and Enforcement; Conflict of Laws

(1) Pursuant to ORS 305.620, the Finance Director may enter into an intergovernmental agreement with the Oregon Department of Revenue to collect the 3 percent tax imposed under section 8.3105.  Excepting sections 8.3120(2) and 8.3140 the terms and conditions of the IGA
shall apply in lieu of this Ordinance.
(2) If the Finance Director enters into an intergovernmental agreement pursuant to this section, the provisions of ORS 475B.710, ORS 475B.715, and ORS 475B.755 shall apply to every marijuana retailer subject to this Ordinance.
(3)  In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this Ordinance and the provisions of the intergovernmental agreement, the provisions of the intergovernmental agreement shall apply.
[Added Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2016-148, Dec. 15, 2016.]
 

8.3120 Administration and Enforcement

(1) The Finance Director shall enforce the provisions of this Ordinance and shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with this Ordinance as may be necessary to aid in its enforcement.
(2) Every Marijuana Retailer shall keep complete and accurate electronic records in an accounting format established by the Finance Director relating to the sale of marijuana items. All records shall be kept for a period of five (5) years. The Finance Director shall have the right to inspect such records at all reasonable times.
(3) If an extension is granted, a Marijuana Retailer shall pay interest at the rate of three (3) percent per month on the amount of the tax due, without proration for a fraction of a month. If a return is not filed and if the tax and interest due are not paid in full by the end of the extension period, the interest shall become part of the tax for computation of penalties prescribed in section 8.3125.
[Added Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2016-148, Dec. 15, 2016.]
 

8.3125 Penalties & Interest

(1) Any Marijuana Retailer that fails to remit any portion of the tax imposed within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax.
(2) Any Marijuana Retailer that fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of sixty days following the date on which the remittance became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of fifteen (15) percent of the amount of the tax, in addition to the amount of the tax and penalty first imposed.
(3) If the Finance Director determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this Ordinance is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto, in addition to the penalties stated in subsection 8.3125(1) & 8.3125(2), if applicable.
(4) In addition to the penalties imposed, any Marijuana Retailer that fails to remit any tax imposed shall pay interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month or fraction
thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.
(5) Every penalty imposed, and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section, shall become a part of the tax required to be paid.
[Added Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2016-148, Dec. 15, 2016.]
 

8.3130 Appeal

Any Marijuana Retailer aggrieved by any decision of the Finance Director with respect to the amount of tax imposed or interest and penalties may appeal to the Council by filing a notice of appeal using the Uniform Appeal and Hearing Procedure set out at section 1.025 of the Code.
[Added Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2016-148, Dec. 15, 2016.]
 

8.3135 Actions to Collect

(1) Within three years after the tax becomes payable or within three years after a determination becomes final, the City may bring an action in the name of the city in the courts of this state, another state or the United States to collect the amount delinquent and penalties and interest.
(2) In lieu of filing an action for the recovery, the City may submit any outstanding tax to a collection agency if such taxes are more than thirty (30) days delinquent. So long as the City has complied with ORS 697.105, the City may add to the amount owing an amount equal to the collection agency fees, not to exceed the greater of fifty (50) dollars or fifty (50) percent of the outstanding tax, penalties and interest owing.
[Added Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2016-148, Dec. 15, 2016.]
 

8.3140 Violation of Ordinance

(1) Violation of a provision of this Ordinance constitutes a violation punishable by a fine as set forth in section 1.100 of the Code. Each day in which a violation is caused or permitted to exist constitutes a separate violation.

(2) Notwithstanding section 8.3140(1), violation of section 8.3125(3) constitutes a crime, and shall be punishable as set forth in section 5.990(1) of the Code.

(3) The remedies provided by this section are not exclusive and shall not prevent the City from exercising any other remedy available under the law, nor shall the provisions of this ordinance prohibit or restrict the City or other appropriate prosecutor from pursuing criminal charges under state law.

[Added Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2016-148, Dec. 15, 2016.]


8.3145 Severability

The sections, subsections, paragraphs and clauses of this Ordinance are severable. The invalidity of one section, subsection, paragraph, or clause shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, subsections, paragraphs and clauses.

[Added Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2016-148, Dec. 15, 2016.]


8 Ban on Polystyrene Foam Disposable Food Service Ware

8.4000 Definitions

As used in Sections 8.4000 through 8.4002, the following mean:

A.  “Food vendor” includes, but is not limited to, shops, sales outlets, restaurants, bars, pubs, coffee shops, cafeterias, caterers, convenience stores, liquor stores, grocery stores, supermarkets, delicatessens, non-profit organizations, mobile food trucks, vehicles or carts, and roadside stands.
 
B.  “Provide” includes, but is not limited to, active serving, giving away, selling, delivering, packaging, and providing.

C.  “Prepared foods” includes, but is not limited to, food or beverages that are packaged, cooked, chopped, sliced, mixed, brewed, frozen, squeezed, and otherwise prepared on the premises.  “Prepared foods” do not encompass (1) any raw meat product unless it can be consumed without any further preparation; or (2) pre-packaged food that is delivered to the food vendor wholly encased, contained, or packaged in a container or wrapper, and sold or otherwise provided by the food vendor in the same container or packaging.

D.  “Polystyrene foam” is a thermoplastic petrochemical material made form a styrene monomer and expanded or blown using a gaseous agent (expanded polystyrene) including, but not limited to, fusion of polymer spears (expandable bead polystyrene), injection molding, form molding, an extrusion blown molding (extruded from polystyrene).

E.  “Disposable service ware” is a single-use disposable product used by the food vendor for serving prepared food that includes, but is not limited to, plates, trays, bowls, cups, lids, straws, utensils, and hinged or lidded containers (clamshells).

[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2015-11, Feb. 5, 2015.]
 

8.4001 Prohibition

No food vendor shall provide prepared food in polystyrene foam.

[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2015-11, Feb. 5, 2015.]
 

8.4002 Exceptions

The food vendor must demonstrate both of the following to qualify for a financial hardship exemption:

(1)  a gross income under $300,000 on its tax filing for the most recent tax year; and

(2)  with respect to each specific and necessary polystyrene foam disposable food service ware, that there is no feasible alternative that would cost the same or less than polystyrene foam disposable food service ware.

[Added, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2015-11, Feb. 5, 2015.]

9 Building

9 Building Code (9.100)

9.100 Adoption of Oregon Structural Specialty Code, as Modified

(1) The 2019 Oregon Structural Specialty Code and State and local adopted appendices as published and copyrighted by the International Code Council, as modified and adopted by the Director of the State Department of Consumer and Business Services, are hereby adopted and incorporated as an ordinance of the City of Medford to be administered and enforced along with such further amendments contained herein, such code to be referred to as the Building Code. At least one copy of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code and appendices, comprising the Building Code, are on file in the City of Medford Building Safety Department.

(2)  Section 114.5 of the Building Code is modified by adding the following:
Penalties.  Penalties for violations of the Building Code or any other code administered and enforced pursuant to Chapter 9 of the Medford Code shall be as prescribed in Section 9.661 of the Medford Code.

(3) In addition to the appendix chapters listed in Section 101.2.1.1 of the State Building Code, Appendix B: Board of Appeals: F: Rodentproofing": H: Signs; and J Grading are adopted as published.
(4)  Chapter 32: Encroachments into the Public Right-of-Way is hereby adopted as published.

(5) Table 1-A, including footnotes, is deleted.  See Medford Code Section 9.270, Table 9-A and B, for fees.

[Amd. Ord. No. 2002-216, Dec. 5, 2002; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2007-97, May 17, 2007; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2008-159, Aug. 7, 2008; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2011-63, Apr. 7, 2011; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2014-147, Dec. 4, 2014; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-08, Jan. 18, 2018; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]


9 Residential Specialty Code (9.101)

9.101 Adoption of Oregon Residential Specialty Code, as Modified

(1)  The 2017 Oregon Residential Specialty Code and State adopted appendices as published and copyrighted by the International Code Council, Inc., as modified and adopted by the Director of the State Department of Consumer and Business Services are hereby adopted and incorporated as an ordinance of the City of Medford to be administered and enforced along with such further amendments contained herein, such code to be referred to as the Residential Code. At least one copy of said code is on file in the City of Medford Building Safety Department.  

 (2) Section R327 of the 2017 Oregon Residential Specialty Code, as amended on January 24, 2019, including sections R327.4 through R327.4.8, pertaining to wildfire hazard mitigation, as published and copyrighted by the International Code Council, Inc., as modified and adopted by the Director of the State Department of Consumer and Business Services is hereby adopted and incorporated as an ordinance of the City of Medford. 

(3)   Residential Permit Fees shall be as shown in Medford Code Section 9.270, Table 9-B, 9-C, 9-E, 9-F, 9-J, and 9-K.

(4)  “Penalties. Penalties for violations of the Building Code or any other code administered and enforced pursuant to Chapter 9 of the Medford Code shall be as prescribed in Section 9.661 of the Medford Code.”

[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2007-97, May 17, 2007; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2008-244, Dec. 4, 2008; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2011-63, Apr. 7, 2011; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2014-147, Dec. 4, 2014; Amd. Sec. 1., Ord. 2018-08, Jan. 18, 2018; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. 2019-79, Oct. 17, 2019; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

9 Energy Efficient Specialty Code (9.110)

9.110 Adoption of Zero Energy Ready Commercial Code, as Modified

The 2019 Zero Energy Commercial Code as published and copyrighted by the International Code Council, as modified by the Director of the State Department of Consumer and Business Services are hereby adopted and incorporated as an ordinance of the City of Medford to be administered and enforced, such code to be referred to as the Energy Code. At least one copy of said Code is on file in the City of Medford Building Safety Department.

[Added, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2011-63, Apr. 7, 2011; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2014-147, Dec. 4, 2014; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]


9 Solar Installation Specialty Code (9.120)

9.120 [Repealed, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019]

9 Mechanical Code (9.150)

9.150 Adoption of Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code, as Modified

(1) The 2019 Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code and appendices as published and copyrighted by the International Code Council, as modified by the Director of the State Department of Consumer and Business Services, are hereby adopted and incorporated as an ordinance of the City of Medford to be administered and enforced along with such further amendments as are contained herein, such code to be referred to as the Mechanical Code. At least one copy of said Code is on file in the City of Medford Building Safety Department.

(2) See Medford Code Section 9.270, Tables 9-C, 9-D, and 9-E, for fees.

[Amd. Ord. No. 2002-217, Dec. 5, 2002; Amd. Ord. No. 2004-18, Feb. 5, 2004; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2007-97, May 17, 2007; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-244, Dec. 4, 2008; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2011-63, Apr. 7, 2011; AMd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2014-147, Dec. 4, 2014; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

9 Plumbing Code (9.200)

9.200 Adoption of Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code, as Modified

(1) The 2017 Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code and State adopted appendices as published and copyrighted by the Uniform Plumbing Code, and as modified by the Director of the State Department of Business and Consumer Services is hereby adopted and incorporated as an ordinance of the City of Medford to be administered and enforced along with such further amendments as are contained herein, such code to be referred to as the Plumbing Code. At least one copy of said code is on file in the City of Medford Building Safety Department.

(2) Wherever used in the regulations herein above incorporated, the term "Building Official" shall refer to the Building Safety Director of the City of Medford or his designee.

(3) Plumbing permit fees shall be as shown in Medford Code Section 9.270, Table 9-F, 9-G, 9-H, and 9-I.

[Amd. Ord. No. 2002-218, Dec. 5, 2002; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2007-97, May 17, 2007; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2008-244, Dec. 4, 2008; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2011-63, Apr. 7, 2011; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2014-147, Dec. 4, 2014; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2018-08, Jan. 18, 2018; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

9 Electrical Code (9.250 to 9.255)

9.250 Adoption of State of Oregon Electrical Specialty Code, as Modified

(1) The 2017 Oregon Electrical Specialty Code as published by the National Fire Protection Association and as modified by the Director of the State Department of Business and Consumer Services is hereby adopted and incorporated as an ordinance of the City of Medford to be administered and enforced along with such further amendments as are contained herein, said code to be referred to as the Electrical Code. At least one copy of such code is on file in the City of Medford Building Safety Department.

(2) Wherever used in the regulations herein incorporated, the terms "Administrator" or "department" shall refer to the Building Safety Director of the City of Medford or his authorized designee.

(3) The Building Safety Director is authorized to disconnect any electrical installation or equipment which has been connected in violation of this code or before approval for service has been given, or to give notice to the person in control of the premises, requiring such person to so disconnect it; and it shall be unlawful for any person in control of the premises thereafter to permit such installation to remain connected to a source of electrical energy after such notice has been given. Where the Building Safety Director or his designee has given such notice, or has disconnected any such service for the reasons above set forth, he shall thereupon attach to the premises a notice which shall state that the wiring or apparatus has been disconnected by the City of Medford for lack of compliance with this code.

 [Amd. Sec. 1, Ord, No. 7858, April 20, 1995; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2002-219, Dec. 5, 2002; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2007-97, May 17, 2007; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2008-244, Dec. 4, 2008; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2011-63, Apr. 7, 2011; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2014-147, Dec. 4, 2014; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2018-08, Jan. 18, 2018; Amd. sec. 7, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]


9.251 Electrical Permit

(1) Duly issued Electrical Permits shall expire after 180 days of inactivity on the work for which the electrical permit is issued. A new permit may be required in the event that the work is to commence after the permit has expired.

(2) Any person who knowingly does any electrical work for which a permit is required without first having obtained such a permit shall be charged an investigative fee that is the average or actual additional cost of ensuring that a building or structure is in conformance with this code and shall be in addition to the required permit fees.  This shall not be the exclusive remedy for any such violation.

(3) Except as provided in ORS 479.540, no person shall work on any new electrical installation for which a permit has not been issued.

(4) Electrical Permit Fees shall be as shown in Medford Code Section 9.270, Table 9-B and 9-J.
 
Amd. Sec. 2, 7858, April 20, 1995; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2002-219, Dec. 5, 2002; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2008-244, Dec. 4, 2008; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2011-63, Apr. 7, 2011; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]
 


9.252 Repealed Ord. No. 8447, Aug. 7, 1997.]


9.253 Plan Review Requirements

Electrical plan review is required for installations as set forth in Oregon Administrative Rules 918-311-0000 through 918-311-0060 as of March 12, 1999, which are adopted and incorporated by this reference.
[Added, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 7848, April 20, 1995; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2002-219, Dec. 5, 2002.]

9.254 Electrical Minor Labels

Minor labels are authorized for minor installations as set forth in Oregon Administrative Rules 918-309-0210 through 918-309-0260 as of March 12, 1999, which are adopted and incorporated by this reference. [Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 7858, April 20, 1995; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2002-219, Dec. 5, 2002; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

9.255 Temporary Permits

Temporary permit requirements and procedures as set forth in Oregon Administrative Rule 918-309-0080 as of March 12, 1999, are adopted and incorporated by this reference.
[Added, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 7858, April 20, 1995; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2002-219, Dec. 5, 2002.]

9.270 Permit Fees

(1) Building permit fees for new construction additions, alterations and repairs shall be calculated using the construction valuation and Table 9-A.

(2) The final determination of valuation, occupancy and/or construction type under any of the provisions of this section shall be made by the Building Safety Director.

(3) Valuation of construction shall be determined by the greater of either the value stated by the applicant or one of the following methods:

(3.1) Calculated by using the "Building Valuation Data" table published by the International Code Council on April 1 each year, multiplied by the square footage of the structure.

(3.2) 1 & 2 Family Dwelling carports, decks, covered porches, covered patios, and garage conversions to habitable space shall be 50% of the valuation for "R-3 Residential" on the referenced Building Valuation Data table.

(3.3) Alterations and repairs, use 20% of the valuation on the referenced Building Valuation Data table.

(4) Permit Fee Tables.

TABLE 9-A
BUILDING PERMIT FEES
Commercial, institutional and residential, new construction, additions, alterations and repairs. The fees on this table are based on valuation as determined by section 9.270.

TOTAL VALUATION

PERMIT FEE

$1.00 to $5,000

$50 minimum

$5,001 to $25,000

$50 for the first $5,000, plus $6.50 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $25,000.

$25,001 to $50,000

$179 for the first $25,000, plus $4.73 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.

$50,001 to $100,000

$297 for the first $50,000, plus $3.15 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.

$100,001 and up

$455 for the first $100,000, plus $2.63 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof.


 TABLE 9-B
OTHER BUILDING PERMIT-RELATED FEES

1. Inspections outside of normal business hours.

$50 per hour (minimum charge 2 hours).

2. Reinspection fees assessed under the provisions of section 109.

$50 each.

3. Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated.

$50 per hour.

4. Plan Review

65% of Building Permit fee based on Table 9-A

5. Fire Life Safety Plan Review (when required)

40% of Building Permit fee based on Table 9-A. Add to Plan Review fee.

6. Additional plan review required by changes, additions, or revisions to approved plans

$50 per hour (minimum charge ½ hour)

7. Plan Review for Master Plan.

First structure, standard plan review fee. Subsequent identical plans, fee is 50% of the original plan review fee.

8. Work started without permits investigation fee.

Equal to and in addition to the building permit fee. See section 9.661 for civil penalties.

9. Change of Occupancy Inspection

$100

10. 100-year floodplain application under section 9.701

$50 (1 & 2 Family Residential only)

$100 (all others)

11. Scan documents for E-Plans submittal.

$5 per sheet, minimum charge $20

12. Phased Permits.

Phased Permits: Each phase of a phased development project shall be assessed a permit and plan review fee as set forth in Table 9-A, based on the stated value plus a $50 registration fee. The final total construction valuation of all phases shall not be less than the total valuation as determined by section 9.270.

13. Shell Buildings and Tenant Spaces

The construction value of a shell building is based on 80% of the total value determined by section 9.270. The permit fee for tenant improvements are based 20% of total project valuation determined by section 9.270.

14. Foundation only permits.

(Not available for 1 & 2 Family Dwellings)

Building Permit fee based on 10% of total project valuation, determined by section 9.270, with a $50 minimum and a $1,500 maximum. Fee is non-deductible.

15. Temporary Certificate of Occupancy Inspection

$50 for each specialty code for which an inspection is needed. Temporary Certificate of Occupancy must be renewed every 30 days.

16. Solar Installation permit and plan review. (prescriptive)

$150 (includes electrical & plumbing)

 

 

17. Solar installation permit and plan review (non-prescriptive)

Calculated per Table 9-A and 9-B item #4 (Does not include electrical & plumbing; see Tables 9-F, 9-G, and 9-J)

18. Appeal to Unified Board of Appeals per Medford Municipal Code section 9.662

$50

 

TABLE 9-C
RESIDENTIAL MECHANICAL PERMIT FEES
For 1 & 2 Family dwelling installation, replacement or relocation of non-portable mechanical equipment or mechanical work.

TYPE OF PERMIT

FEE

Furnace burner, including duct work, vent and liner 

$36.00 per appliance

Floor Furnace and Vent

$18.00 per appliance

Space Heater and Vent

$18.00 per appliance

Appliance Vent (Separate)

$9.00 per appliance

Extend HVAC and Ducts

$18.00

Air Conditioner 

$18.00 per appliance

Separate Air Handler

$22.50 per appliance

Stationary Evaporative Cooler

$13.50 per appliance

Vent Fan (Single Duct)

$9.00 per appliance

Vent (Apart from Heating/Cooling)

$13.50 per appliance

Exhaust Hood with Duct

$13.50 per appliance

Gas Piping

$6.00

Unclassified Equipment

$13.50 per appliance

Wood Burning Stove, Fireplace, Or Fireplace Insert

$13.50 per appliance

Zero Clearance. Gas Logs

$13.50 per appliance

Fire Dampers

$13.50 each

Minimum Permit Fee

$50.00

 

TABLE 9-D
COMMERCIAL MECHANICAL PERMIT FEES
For multi-family dwelling, commercial, industrial or institutional installation, replacement or relocation of non-portable mechanical equipment or mechanical work.
Valuation includes the dollar value of all mechanical materials, equipment, labor overhead and profit.

VALUATION

MECHANICAL PERMIT FEE

 $1 to $2000

 $50 minimum

$2,000 to $10,000

$50.00 for the first $2,000 plus $16.13 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $10,000

$10,001 to $100,000

$195.20 for the first $10,000 plus $10.98 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000

$100,001 and above

$1,183.40 for the first $100,000 plus $7.54 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, over $100,000

 

TABLE 9-E
OTHER MECHANICAL PERMIT-RELATED FEES
These fees are applicable to both Table 9-C and 9-D except where noted.

1. Inspections outside of normal business hours.

$50 per hour (minimum charge 2 hours)

2. Reinspection fees

$50 Each

3. Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated.

$50 per hour.

4. Plan review fee.

25% of Mechanical Permit fee (where required by mechanical code section 106.5.4)

5. Additional plan review required by changes, additions, or revisions to approved plans.

$50 per hour (minimum charge ½ hour)

 

TABLE 9-F
RESIDENTIAL PLUMBING PERMIT FEES
One and Two Family dwellings only.

1 Bathroom/1 Kitchen (includes first 100 feet of water/sewer lines, hose bibs, ice maker, underfloor low-point drains and rain-drain packages)

$289

2 Bathrooms/1 Kitchen

$334

3 Bathrooms/ 1 Kitchen

$379

Each Additional Bathroom (over 3)

$45

Each Additional Kitchen (over 1)

$60

Residential Fire Suppression System - (Fee Based on Square Footage of the Structure)

0 to 2,000 sq. ft. - $105

2,001 to 3,600 sq. ft. - $140

3,601 to 7,200 sq. ft. - $175

7,200 sq. ft. and greater - $210

FIXTURE

PERMIT FEE

Disposal

$15

Sink

$15

Lavatory

$15

Tub & Shower

$15

Shower (separate)

$15

Water Closet/Bidet/Urinal

$15

Sewer – 1st 100 Feet

$28

Sewer – Each Add. 100 Feet

$20

Storm Drain – 1st 100 Feet

$15

Storm Drain – Each Add. 100 Feet

$15

Hose Bib

$15

Septic Tank Abandonment

$15

Refrigerator Water Supply

$15

Hydronic Heating

$40

Dishwasher

$15

Drinking Fountain

$15

Washing Machine

$15

Water Heater

$40

Floor Drains

$15

Water – 1st 100 Feet

$28

Water – Each Add. 100 Feet

$20

Swimming Pool/Spa

$40

Catch Basin

$15

Sump Pump

$15

Special Waste Connection

$40

Gas/Vent

$15

Replace Polybutylene Pipe

$40

 Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the minimum inspection fee is $50.00.

  TABLE 9-G
COMMERCIAL PLUMBING PERMIT FEES
Commercial, Industrial and Dwellings other than one- and two- family dwellings.

FIXTURE

PERMIT FEE

Swimming Pool/Spa/Hot Tub

$40

Back Flow Device/Lawns

$40

Special Waste Connection

$40

Replace Polybutylene Pipe

$40

Hydronic Heating

$40

Sewer – 1st 100 Feet

$40

Sewer – Each Add. 100 Feet

$22

Storm Rain Drain – 1st 100 feet

$40

Storm Drain – Each Add. 100 Feet

$22

Water – 1st 100 Feet

$40

Water – Each Add. 100 Feet

$22

Plumbing – 1 to 3 Fixtures

$50

Plumbing – 4 to 10 Fixtures

$123

Plumbing – 11 Plus Fixtures

$123 base fee plus $15 for every fixture over ten

Plan Review

25% of the Plumbing Permit Fee

 Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the minimum inspection fee is $50.00.

Fixture Description:
For the purposes of this section, "fixtures" includes but are not limited to the following: Testable backflow prevention devices (other than atmospheric vacuum breakers), Area Drain, Bathtubs, Bidets, Catch Basin, Clothes Washers, Dental Units or Cuspidors, Drinking Fountains, Floor Drains, Hose Bibbs or Sill Cocks, Interceptors, Laundry Tubs, Receptors, Showers, Sinks, Trough Drains, Urinals, Water Closets, Water Heaters.

 

TABLE 9-H
RAINWATER HARVESTING SYSTEM PERMIT FEES OR
GRAY WATER REUSE SYSTEM PERMIT FEES

Value of Work

Permit Fee

$1.00 to $500.00

$45.00

$501.00 to $2,000.00

$45.00 for the first $500.00, plus $5.00 for each additional $100.00 or fraction thereof

$2,001.00 to $25,000.00

$120.00 for the first $2,000.00, plus $19.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof

$25,001.00 to $50,000.00

$557.00 for the first $25,000.00, plus $15.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof

$50,001.00 to $100,000.00

$890.00 for the first $50,000.00, plus $9.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof

$100,001.00 and up

$1,382.00 for the first $100,000.00, plus $8.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof.

Reinspection fees

$50.00

Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated (minimum of one hour)

$50.00 Per Hour

Plan Review

25% of the Permit Fee

 

 TABLE 9-I
MEDICAL GAS SYSTEM PERMIT FEES

Value of Work

Permit Fee

$1.00 to $500.00

$50.00

$501.00 to $2,000.00

$50.00 for the first $500.00, plus $5.00 for each additional $100.00 or fraction thereof.

$2,001.00 to $25,000.00

$125.00 for the first $2,000.00, plus $18.00 for each additional $1000.00 or fraction thereof.

$25,001.00 to $50,000.00

$540.00 for the first $25,000.00, plus $14.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof.

$50,001.00 to $100,000.00

$890.00 for the first $50,000.00, plus $9.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof.

$100,001.00 and up

$1,340.00 for the first $100,000.00, plus $8.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof.

Reinspection fees

$50.00

Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated (minimum of one hour)

$50.00 Per Hour

Plumbing Plan Review

25% of the Plumbing Permit Fee

 

 TABLE 9-J
ELECTRICAL PERMIT FEES
For all residential (per dwelling unit), commercial, industrial and institutional buildings.

Services Included:

Cost

Number of Inspections per Permit Allowed

1000 sq. ft. or less

$96.00

4

Each additional 500 sq. ft. or portion thereof

$17.00

 

Limited Energy:

 

 

1 & 2 Family Residential

$22.00

 2

Multifamily Residential

$40.00

 2

 

 

 

Service or Feeders

 

 

Installation, Alterations or Relocation

 

 

200 amps or less

$55.00

2

201 amps to 400 amps

$65.00

2

401 amps to 600 amps

$115.00

2

601 amps to 1000 amps

$150.00

2

over 1000 amps or volts

$340.00

2

Reconnect only

$45.00

2

Temporary Service or Feeders

 

 

Installation, Alterations or Relocation

 

 

200 amps or less

$45.00

2

201 amps to 400 amps

$60.00

2

401 amps to 600 amps

$90.00

2

Over 600 amps or volts

$342.00

2

Branch Circuits

 

 

New, Alterations or Extension Per Panel

 

 

(a) The fee for branch circuits (with purchase of service or feeder)

 

 

Each branch circuit

$2.50

 2

(b) The fee for branch circuit (without purchase of service or feeder fee)

 

 

First branch circuit

$40.00

 2

Each additional branch circuit

$2.50

 2

Miscellaneous (Service or Feeder not included)

 

 

Each pump or irrigation circuit

$45.00

2

Each sign or outline lighting

$45.00

2

Signal circuit(s) or a limited energy panel, alteration or extension

 

$45.00 

 

2

Inspections outside normal business hours.

$50 per hour (minimum charge 2 hours)

 
Each additional inspection over the allowable in any of the above, per inspection

$50.00

 2

Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated (minimum of one hour)

$50.00 per hour

 

 

Work started without permit Investigation Fee

Equal to and in addition to the building permit fee. See section 9.661 for civil penalties

 

Renewable Energy System

 

 

5 KVA or less

$79.00

2

5.01 KVA to 15 KVA

$79.00

2

15.01 KVA to 25 KVA

$156.00

2

25.01 KVA and above

$156 + 2.00 per KVA

 

FEES

 

 

A. Enter total of above fees

$________

 

B. Enter 25% of line A for Plans Review In accordance with Oregon Electrical Administrative Rules 918-311-0000 through 918-311-0060

$________

 
 
TABLE 9-K
MANUFACTURED DWELLING PERMIT FEES
For new or relocated manufactured homes and cabana.

Manufactured Dwelling Placement: (Includes review of the plot plan, installation inspection and final inspection, electrical feeder, water/sewer connection. This permit fee does not include retaining walls over four feet high or basement construction under a manufactured dwelling.)

$303 per installation

Earthquake-Resistant Bracing System Installation (when not part of the original manufactured dwelling installation)

$110 per installation.

Reinspection Fee

$50.00

Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated

$50.00 per hour. (minimum of one hour)

All other structures not specified above.

See Table 9-A for permit fee.

 [Added, Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2011-63, Apr. 7, 2011.]

9 Permit Fees (9.270)

9.270 Permit Fees

(1) Building permit fees for new construction additions, alterations and repairs shall be calculated using the construction valuation and Table 9-A.

(2) The final determination of valuation, occupancy and/or construction type under any of the provisions of this section shall be made by the Building Safety Director.

(3) Valuation of construction shall be determined by the greater of either the value stated by the applicant or one of the following methods:

(3.1) Calculated by using the "Building Valuation Data" table published by the International Code Council twice each year, multiplied by the square footage of the structure.

(3.2) 1 & 2 Family Dwelling carports, decks, covered porches, covered patios, and garage conversions to habitable space shall be 50% of the valuation for "R-3 Residential" on the referenced Building Valuation Data table.

(3.3) Alterations and repairs, use 20% of the valuation on the referenced Building Valuation Data table.

(4) Permit Fee Tables.

TABLE 9-A
BUILDING PERMIT FEES
Commercial, institutional and residential, new construction, additions, alterations, demolition or repairs. The fees on this table are based on valuation as determined by section 9.270(3).

TOTAL VALUATION

PERMIT FEE

$1.00 to $5,000

$60 minimum

$5,001 to $25,000

$60 for the first $5,000, plus $7.80 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $25,000.

$25,001 to $50,000

$200 for the first $25,000, plus $5.85 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.

$50,001 to $100,000

$340 for the first $50,000, plus $3.84 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.

$100,001 and up

$532 for the first $100,000, plus $3.25 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof.


 TABLE 9-B
OTHER BUILDING PERMIT-RELATED FEES

1. Inspections outside of normal business hours

$60 per hour (minimum charge 2 hours)

2. Reinspection fees assessed under the provisions of Section 109

$60 per hour (minimum charge 2 hours)

3. Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated

$60 per hour (minimum charge 2 hours)

4. Plan Review

65% of Building Permit Fee based on Table 9-A

5. Fire Life Safety Plan Review (when required)

40% of Building Permit Fee based on Table 9-A.
Add to Plan Review fee.

6. Additional plan review required by changes, additions, or revisions to approved plans

$60 per hour (minimum charge ½ hour)

7. Plan Review for Master Plan.

First structure, standard plan review fee. Subsequent identical plans, fee is 50% of the original plan review fee.

8. Work started without permits

See Section 9.270(5)

9. Change of Occupancy Inspection

$200

10. 100-year floodplain application under Section 9.701

Review letters of map revision or amendment

$75 (1 & 2 Family Residential only)

$150 (all others)

11. Scan documents for E-Plans submittal

$5 per sheet, minimum charge $20

12. Phased Permits

Phased Permits: Each phase of a phased development project shall be assessed a permit and plan review fee as set forth in Table 9-A, based on the stated value plus a $100 registration fee. The final total construction valuation of all phases shall not be less than the total valuation as determined by section 9.270(3).

13. Shell Buildings and Tenant Spaces

The construction value of a shell building is based on 80% of the total value determined by section 9.270(3). The permit fee for tenant improvements are based 20% of total project valuation determined by section 9.270(3).

14. Foundation only permits

(Not available for 1 & 2 Family Dwellings)

Building Permit fee based on 10% of total project valuation, determined by section 9.270, with a $100 minimum and a $2,000 maximum. Fee is non-deductible.

15. Temporary Certificate of Occupancy Inspection

$50 for each specialty code for which an inspection is needed. Temporary Certificate of Occupancy must be renewed every 30 days.

16. Solar Installation permit and plan review. (prescriptive)

          
               $150 (includes electrical & plumbing) 

 

17. Solar installation permit and plan review (non-prescriptive)

Calculated per Table 9-A and 9-B item #4 (Does not include electrical & plumbing; see Tables 9-F, 9-G, and 9-J)

18. Appeal to Unified Board of Appeals per Medford Municipal Code Section 9.662

$150 refundable by board action or if appeal is withdrawn no later than 48 hours before hearing.

 

TABLE 9-C
RESIDENTIAL MECHANICAL PERMIT FEES
For 1 & 2 Family dwelling installation, replacement or relocation of non-portable mechanical equipment or mechanical work.

TYPE OF PERMIT

FEE

Furnace burner, including duct work, vent and liner 

$40 per appliance

Floor Furnace and Vent

$20 per appliance

Space Heater and Vent

$20 per appliance

Appliance Vent (Separate)

$10 per appliance

Extend HVAC and Ducts

$20

Air Conditioner/Heat Pump (including ductless) 

$20 per appliance

Separate Air Handler

$25 per appliance

Stationary Evaporative Cooler

$15 per appliance

Vent Fan (Single Duct)

$10 per appliance

Vent (Apart from Heating/Cooling)

$15 per appliance

Exhaust Hood with Duct

$15 per appliance

Gas Piping

$10

Unclassified Equipment

$15 per appliance

Wood Burning Stove, Fireplace, Or Fireplace Insert

$15 per appliance

Zero Clearance. Gas Logs

$15 per appliance

Fire Dampers

$15 each

Minimum Permit Fee

$60

 

TABLE 9-D
COMMERCIAL MECHANICAL PERMIT FEES
For multi-family dwelling, commercial, industrial or institutional installation, replacement or relocation of non-portable mechanical equipment or mechanical work.
Valuation includes the dollar value of all mechanical materials, equipment, labor overhead and profit.

VALUATION

MECHANICAL PERMIT FEE

 $1 to $1,000

 $60 minimum

$1,000 to $10,000

$60 for the first $1,000 plus $15 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $10,000

$10,001 to $100,000

$195 for the first $10,000 plus $10 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000

$100,001 and above

$1,095 for the first $100,000 plus $7 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, over $100,000

 

TABLE 9-E
OTHER MECHANICAL PERMIT-RELATED FEES
These fees are applicable to both Table 9-C and 9-D except where noted.

1. Inspections outside of normal business hours.

$60 per hour (minimum charge 2 hours)

2. Reinspection fees

$60 per hour (minimum charge 2 hours)

3. Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated.

$60 per hour (minimum charge 2 hours)

4. Plan review fee.

25% of Mechanical Permit fee (where required by mechanical code section 106.5.4)

5. Additional plan review required by changes, additions, or revisions to approved plans.

$60 per hour (minimum charge ½ hour)

 

TABLE 9-F
RESIDENTIAL PLUMBING PERMIT FEES
One and Two Family dwellings only.

1 Bathroom/1 Kitchen (includes first 100 feet of water/sewer lines, hose bibs, ice maker, underfloor low-point drains and rain-drain packages)

$289

2 Bathrooms/1 Kitchen

$334

3 Bathrooms/ 1 Kitchen

$379

Each Additional Bathroom (over 3)

$45

Each Additional Kitchen (over 1)

$60

Residential Fire Suppression System - (Fee Based on Square Footage of the Structure)

0 to 2,000 sq. ft. - $105

2,001 to 3,600 sq. ft. - $140

3,601 to 7,200 sq. ft. - $175

7,200 sq. ft. and greater - $210

FIXTURE

PERMIT FEE

Disposal

$15

Sink

$15

Lavatory

$15

Tub & Shower

$15

Shower (separate)

$15

Water Closet/Bidet/Urinal

$15

Sewer – 1st 100 Feet

$28

Sewer – Each Add. 100 Feet

$20

Storm Drain – 1st 100 Feet

$15

Storm Drain – Each Add. 100 Feet

$15

Hose Bib

$15

Septic Tank Abandonment

$15

Refrigerator Water Supply

$15

Hydronic Heating

$40

Dishwasher

$15

Drinking Fountain

$15

Washing Machine

$15

Water Heater

$40

Floor Drains

$15

Water – 1st 100 Feet

$28

Water – Each Add. 100 Feet

$20

Swimming Pool/Spa

$40

Catch Basin

$15

Sump Pump

$15

Special Waste Connection

$40

Gas/Vent

$15

Replace Polybutylene Pipe

$40

 Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the minimum inspection fee is $60.

  TABLE 9-G
COMMERCIAL PLUMBING PERMIT FEES
Commercial, Industrial and Dwellings other than one- and two- family dwellings.

FIXTURE

PERMIT FEE

Swimming Pool/Spa/Hot Tub

$40

Back Flow Device/Lawns

$40

Special Waste Connection

$40

Replace Polybutylene Pipe

$40

Hydronic Heating

$40

Sewer – 1st 100 Feet

$40

Sewer – Each Add. 100 Feet

$22

Storm Rain Drain – 1st 100 feet

$40

Storm Drain – Each Add. 100 Feet

$22

Water – 1st 100 Feet

$40

Water – Each Add. 100 Feet

$22

Plumbing – 1 to 3 Fixtures

$60

Plumbing – 4 to 10 Fixtures

$140

Plumbing – 11 Plus Fixtures

$140 base fee plus $15 for every fixture over ten

Plan Review

25% of the Plumbing Permit Fee

 Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the minimum inspection fee is $60.

Fixture Description:
For the purposes of this section, "fixtures" includes but are not limited to the following: Testable backflow prevention devices (other than atmospheric vacuum breakers), Area Drain, Bathtubs, Bidets, Catch Basin, Clothes Washers, Dental Units or Cuspidors, Drinking Fountains, Floor Drains, Hose Bibbs or Sill Cocks, Interceptors, Laundry Tubs, Receptors, Showers, Sinks, Trough Drains, Urinals, Water Closets, Water Heaters.

 

TABLE 9-H
RAINWATER HARVESTING SYSTEM PERMIT FEES OR
GRAY WATER REUSE SYSTEM PERMIT FEES

Value of Work

Permit Fee

$1.00 to $500

$60

$501 to $2,000

$60 for the first $500, plus $5 for each additional $100 or fraction thereof

$2,001 to $25,000

$135 for the first $2,000, plus $19 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof

$25,001 to $50,000

$572 for the first $25,000, plus $15 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof

$50,001 to $100,000

$905 for the first $50,000, plus $9 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof

$100,001 and up

$1,397 for the first $100,000, plus $8 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof

Reinspection fees

$60 per hour (minimum charge 2 hours)

Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated

$60 per hour (minimum charge 2 hours)

Plan Review

25% of the Permit Fee

 

 TABLE 9-I
MEDICAL GAS SYSTEM PERMIT FEES

Value of Work

Permit Fee

$1.00 to $500.00

$60.00

$501.00 to $2,000.00

$60.00 for the first $500.00, plus $5.00 for each additional $100.00 or fraction thereof

$2,001.00 to $25,000.00

$135.00 for the first $2,000.00, plus $18.00 for each additional $1000.00 or fraction thereof

$25,001.00 to $50,000.00

$550.00 for the first $25,000.00, plus $14.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof

$50,001.00 to $100,000.00

$900.00 for the first $50,000.00, plus $9.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof

$100,001.00 and up

$1,350.00 for the first $100,000.00, plus $8.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof

Reinspection fees

$60.00 per hour (minimum charge 2 hours)

Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated (minimum of one hour)

$60.00 per hour (minimum charge 2 hours)

Plumbing Plan Review

25% of the Plumbing Permit Fee

 

 TABLE 9-J
ELECTRICAL PERMIT FEES
For all residential (per dwelling unit), commercial, industrial and institutional buildings.

Services Included:

Cost

Number of Inspections per Permit Allowed

1000 sq. ft. or less

$125.00

4

Each additional 500 sq. ft. or portion thereof

$22.00

 

Limited Energy:

 

 

1 & 2 Family Residential

$28.00

 2

Multifamily Residential

$52.00

 2

 

 

 

Service or Feeders

 

 

Installation, Alterations or Relocation

 

 

200 amps or less

$72.00

2

201 amps to 400 amps

$85.00

2

401 amps to 600 amps

$150.00

2

601 amps to 1000 amps

$200.00

2

over 1000 amps or volts

$450.00

2

Reconnect only

$60.00

2

Temporary Service or Feeders

 

 

Installation, Alterations or Relocation

 

 

200 amps or less

$60.00

2

201 amps to 400 amps

$80.00

2

401 amps to 600 amps

$120.00

2

Over 600 amps or volts

$450.00

2

Branch Circuits

 

 

New, Alterations or Extension Per Panel

 

 

(a) The fee for branch circuits (with purchase of service or feeder)

 

 

Each branch circuit

$3.50

 2

(b) The fee for branch circuit (without purchase of service or feeder fee)

 

 

First branch circuit

$52.00

 2

Each additional branch circuit

$3.50

 2

Miscellaneous (Service or Feeder not included)

 

 

Each pump or irrigation circuit

$60.00

2

Each sign or outline lighting

$60.00

2

Signal circuit(s) or a limited energy panel, alteration or extension

 

$60.00 

 

2

Inspections outside normal business hours

$60.00 per hour
(minimum charge 2 hours)

 
Each additional inspection over the allowable in any of the above, per inspection

$60.00

 2

Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated

$60.00  
(minimum charge 2 hours)

 

Work started without permit

See Section 9.270(5)

 

Renewable Energy System

 

 

5 KVA or less

$100.00

2

5.01 KVA to 15 KVA

$100.00

2

15.01 KVA to 25 KVA

$200.00

2

25.01 KVA and above

$200 + 2.50 per KVA

 

Plan Review

25% of total permit fees

 

 
TABLE 9-K
MANUFACTURED DWELLING PERMIT FEES
For new or relocated manufactured homes and cabana.

Manufactured Dwelling Placement: (Includes review of the plot plan, installation inspection and final inspection, electrical feeder, water/sewer connection. This permit fee does not include retaining walls over four feet high or basement construction under a manufactured dwelling)

$303 per installation

Earthquake-Resistant Bracing System Installation (when not part of the original manufactured dwelling installation)

$110 per installation

Reinspection Fee

$60.00

Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated

$60.00 per hour (minimum of one hour)

All other structures not specified above.

See Table 9-A for permit fee.

(5)  Work started without permits is subject to an investigation fee for each permit type for which work was started.  The investigation fee shall be equal to the permit fee, but shall not be less than $200, nor more than $1,000. 


[Added, Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2011-63, Apr. 7, 2011; Amd. Ord. No. 2014-23, Feb. 6, 2014.]


9 Affordable Housing Construction Excise Tax (9.280 to 9.295)

9.280 Purpose

The purpose of this section is to establish a construction excise tax of one-third of one percent on the value of residential, commercial, and industrial improvements to provide funding for affordable housing in the City.
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018.]

9.281 Definitions

For purposes of Affordable Housing Construction Excise section, the terms defined below shall mean the following:
“Area Median Income” (AMI) means median family or household income by household size for Jackson County as defined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development as adjusted and published periodically.
“Affordable Housing” means a household’s ability to find housing within their financial means.  Household is divided into three categories: 1) Low-income households (households earning less than sixty (60) percent of Area Median Income),  2) Moderate-income households (households earning between sixty (60) and eighty (80) percent of Area Median Income), and 3) Middle-income households (households earning between eighty (80) and one hundred and twenty (120) percent of Area Median Income). 
“Commercial” means any structure designed or intended to be used, or actually used, for occupancy for purposes other than residential and includes structures otherwise categorized or described as industrial. 
“Construct” or “Construction” means erecting, constructing, building, assembling, enlarging, altering, repairing, improving, or converting any building or structure for which the issuance of a building permit is required pursuant to the provisions of Oregon law.
“Improvement” means a permanent addition to, or modification of, real property resulting in a new structure, additional square footage in an existing structure, or alteration of an existing structure that adds living space.
“Living Space” means any floor usable for living purposes, which includes but is not limited to working, sleeping, eating, cooking, recreating, or a combination thereof. 
“Net Revenue” means revenues remaining after the administrative fees are deducted from the total construction excise tax collected and payment of any refunds of such taxes.
“Residential” means any structure designed or intended to be used, or actually used, for occupancy for residential purposes including any residential structure, dwelling, or dwelling unit.
“Value of improvement” means the total value of the improvement as determined by the construction permit(s) or building permit(s), regardless of number of separate permits issued. The City Building Official shall calculate the total value in accordance with Oregon Administrative Rule 918-050-0100 Statewide Methodologies for Residential and Commercial Permits.
[Added Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]
 

9.282 Administration and Enforcement Authority

The City Manager or authorized designee is responsible for the administration of the Affordable Housing Construction Excise Tax as described in this Section.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]

9.283 Imposition of Tax

A.  Each person who obtains a permit to construct a residential, commercial, or industrial improvement in the City shall pay a construction excise tax in the amount of one-third of one percent of the value of the improvement. 
B.  The construction tax imposed on structures intended for commercial or industrial use may not exceed $50,000 per building permit or $50,000 per structure, whichever is less.    
C.  The construction excise tax shall be due and paid at the time of issuance of a building permit.
[Added Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]
 

9.284 Exemptions

A. The construction excise tax shall not be imposed on the following types of improvements:
1.  Any improvement funded by Affordable Housing Construction Excise Tax proceeds, or other dedicated affordable housing funding through the City’s Community Development Block Grant program. 
2.  Private school improvements.
3.  Public improvements as defined in ORS 279A.010.
4.  Residential housing that is guaranteed to be affordable, under guidelines established by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, to households that earn no more than 80 percent of the median household income for the area in which the construction tax is imposed, for a period of at least 60 years following the date of construction of the residential housing.
5.  Public or private hospital improvements.
6.  Improvements to religious facilities primarily used for worship or education associated with worship.
7.  Agricultural buildings, as defined in ORS 455.315 (2)(a).
8.  Long term care facilities, as defined in ORS 442.015, operated by a not-for-profit corporation.
9.  Residential care facilities, as defined in ORS 443.40, operated by a not-for-profit corporation.
10.  Continuing care retirement communities, as defined in ORS 101.020, operated by a not-for-profit corporation.
11.  Residential housing guaranteed to be affordable up to 120 percent of Area Median Income for a period of at least 30 years following the date of construction of the housing.  A person using this exemption and also awarded funds under Section 9.292(C)(1) would receive an amount less the exempted portion.
B.  The City may require any person seeking an exemption to demonstrate the improvements are eligible for an exemption and to establish all facts necessary to support granting of the exemption.
[Added Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]
 

9.285 Statement of the Full Value of Improvement

It is a violation of this section for any person to fail to state, or to understate, the full value of the improvements to be constructed.
[Added Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]

9.286 Failure to Pay

The City shall not issue a building permit for construction of improvements to any person who has failed to pay the applicable construction excise tax.
[Added Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]

9.287 Failure to Maintain Units as Affordable

A.  The exemption for affordable unit(s) provided in Sections 9.284(A)(4) and (A)(11) automatically terminates if the unit(s) cease to qualify as affordable at any time during the specified period of affordability.  For purposes of this section, affordability shall be calculated using the Area Median Income determination for the preceding calendar year. 
B.  The tax shall be immediately due and payable to the City as of the date the unit no longer qualifies as affordable, together with the penalty described in Section 9.288.  The amount of the construction excise tax shall be calculated using the percentage in effect at the time the unit(s) ceases to qualify.  
C.  The person responsible to pay shall be the owner of record of the unit(s) at the time the unit(s) ceases to qualify.  The seller and buyer, jointly and separately, shall be obligated to pay if the unit(s) ceases to qualify as the result of a sale; including a sale to a person occupying the unit whose income exceeds the Area Median Income determination for the prior year. 
[Added Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]
 

9.288 Penalty for Failure to Comply

A.  A penalty of five percent of the underpayment of construction excise tax shall apply to:
1.  Any person who removes a unit from the affordability exemption provided in Section 9.284(A)(4) and (A)(11).  The person shall pay a five percent penalty for each unit that is no longer exempt.  
2.  Any person who fails to state the full value of the improvement. 
B.  The penalty shall be due on the entire amount that the City Manager or authorized designee determines has not been paid.  The penalty shall be assessed to the 25th day of the month following the due date. 
[Added Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]
 

9.289 Enforcement by Civil Action

The construction excise tax, and any assessed penalties due and owing under this Section, constitutes a debt owing to the City by the person liable for the tax as set forth in Section 9.283.
[Added Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]

9.290 Refunds

A.  The City shall issue a refund to any person who has paid a construction excise tax if:
1.  The person establishes the tax was paid for improvements that were otherwise eligible for an exemption under Section 9.284 at the time the permit was issued;
2.  The person establishes that construction of the improvement was not commenced and the associated building permit has been cancelled by the City; or  
3.  The City Manager or authorized designee determines the amount of construction excise tax, penalty, or interest was erroneously collected or paid to the City.
[Added Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]
 

9.291 Appeals

A person who objects to a determination issued by the City applying the provisions of this section may appeal the determination to the City Council as provided in Section 1.025.
[Added Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]

9.292 Dedication of Revenue

A. The City may retain up to four percent of the tax collected as an administrative fee in order to recover costs for administering the program.
B.  The net revenue from the tax on residential improvements shall be allocated by the City as follows:
1.  Fifteen percent of net revenue shall be remitted to the Oregon Department of Housing and Community Services to fund home ownership programs. 
2.  Thirty-five percent of net revenue shall be used to fund programs and incentives of the City related to affordable housing as defined by the City for purposes of this section and ORS 320.192.  Affordable Housing for purposes of this section shall apply to households at or below eighty (80) percent AMI (Low-income and Moderate-income households).             
3.  Fifty percent of net revenue shall be used to fund incentives for the development and construction of affordable housing authorized by the City as provided for in state law.
C.  The net revenue from the tax on commercial improvements shall be allocated by the City as follows:
1.  One hundred percent shall be used to fund programs and incentives for the development and construction of housing that is affordable to households up to 120 percent of Area Median Income. 
[Added Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]
 

9.293 Review of Program

The City shall review the Affordable Housing Construction Excise Tax program every five (5) years to evaluate its impact on housing.  The Planning Department shall provide a report to the Council outlining the number of units created, revenue collected, and the types of projects created by the recipients of the funds. 
[Added Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]
 

9.294 Effective Date

Sections 9.280 through 9.295 shall be effective upon acknowledgement of the City of Medford’s current proposed Urban Growth Boundary amendment by the Department of Land Conservation and Development, the Land Conservation and Development Commission, or any government entity having jurisdiction over the City of Medford’s current proposed Urban Growth Boundary amendment, without condition, restriction, amendment or modification of any kind. 
[Added Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]
 

9.295 Expiration

The Affordable Housing Construction Excise Tax shall expire on December 31, 2028, unless renewed by the City Council. 
[Added Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]

9 Manufactured Dwelling Code (9.300)

9.300 Adoption of Oregon Manufactured Dwelling Installation Specialty Code, as Modified

(1) The Manufactured Dwelling Installation Specialty Code, 2010 edition, as modified and adopted by the Director of the State Department of Consumer and Business Services, is hereby adopted and incorporated as an ordinance of the City of Medford to be administered and enforced along with such further amendments as are contained herein, such code to be referred to as the Manufactured Dwelling Code.  At least one copy of said code is on file in the City of Medford Building Safety Department.

(2) Wherever used in the regulations herein incorporated, the terms "administrator" or "department" shall refer to the Building Safety Director of the City of Medford or his authorized designee.

(3) See Table 9-K.

(4)  Refer to Medford Municipal Code 10.885, 10.896, and 10.900; current adopted editions of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code; Zero Energy Ready Commercial Code; Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code; Oregon Residential Specialty Code; Oregon Electrical Specialty Code; Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code; Oregon Manufactured Dwelling Installation Specialty Code; and Oregon Manufactured Dwelling and Park Specialty Code.

[Amd. Ord. No. 2002-220, Dec. 5, 2002; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2008-244, Dec. 4, 2008; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2011-63, Apr. 7, 2011; Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]


9 Housing Code (9.350)

9.350 [Repealed, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]


9 Receivership (9.400 to 9.450)

9.400 Title, Purpose, and Scope; Findings.

This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Housing Receivership Ordinance of the City of Medford.”  The purpose of the ordinance is to establish authority and procedures for the use of the Oregon Housing Receivership Act (ORS 105.420 to 105.455), and shall apply to all residential property.  The remedies provided for in this ordinance shall be in addition to any other remedy set out in the Code.
In addition to the Oregon Legislature’s findings set out at ORS 105.420, the Council specifically finds that properties in violation of the Act create an undue risk of harm to the City’s public safety officers and firefighters responding to calls at these properties, as well as neighboring citizens.  The Council declares that the health, safety and welfare of citizens, public safety officers and firefighters are promoted by adopting and implementing the Housing Receivership Ordinance of the City of Medford.
[Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016; Added, Sec. 1, 2016-142, Dec. 1, 2016.]
 

9.405 Definitions

(1)  “Abatement” means the removal or correction of any condition at a property including demolition that violates a provision of a City building or housing code, as well as the making of other such improvements or corrections as are needed to effect the rehabilitation of the property or structure, but not including the closing or physical securing of the structure.
(2)  “Building or housing code” means any City law, ordinance or regulation concerning habitability or the construction, maintenance, operation, occupancy, use or appearance of any property.
(3)  “Interested party” means any person or entity that possesses any legal or equitable interest of record in the property, including but not limited to the holder of any lien or encumbrance of record on the property.
(4)  “Property” means any real property and all improvements thereon including edifices, structures, buildings, unit or part thereof used or intended to be used for residential purposes including single-family, duplex, multifamily, and mixed-use structures which have one or more residential units.
[Added Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2016-142, Dec. 1, 2016.]
 

9.410 Authority

(1)  Subject to Council approval, when the Manager finds that a property is in violation of a building or housing code, and in the exercise of reasonable discretion believes that violation is a threat to the public’s health, safety, or welfare, the Manager may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for the appointment of a receiver to perform an abatement.
(2)  In administering the provisions of this ordinance, the Manager’s authority shall include, but is not limited to:
(a)  The selection of properties, subject to Council approval;
(b)  The selection of appropriate receivers, subject to Council approval; and
(c)  The establishment of written rules and procedures as are deemed necessary for the       
       administration of this ordinance.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2016-142, Dec. 1, 2016.]
 

9.415 Selection of Properties

In selecting properties where the City may seek appointment of a receiver, the Manager shall consider those properties that have, at a minimum, the following characteristics:
(1)  A violation of a building or housing code that threatens the public health, safety, or welfare; and
(2)  The owner has not acted in a timely manner to correct the violations.
[Added Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2016-142, Dec. 1, 2016; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2017-19, March 2, 2017.]
 

9.420 Notice to Interested Parties and Application.

(1) At least 60 days prior to the filing of an application for appointment of a receiver, the Manager shall cause a notice to be sent by certified mail to all interested parties.
(2) The notice shall give the date upon which the City has the right to file with the court for the receiver, and in addition shall:
(a) State the address and legal description of the property;
(b) List the building or housing code violations which give rise to the proposed application; and
(c) Give the name, address, and telephone number of a person who can provide additional information concerning the violations and their remedy.
[Added Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2016-142, Dec. 1, 2016.]
 

9.425 Selection of Receivers

In selecting specific receivers, the Manager shall choose the Jackson County Housing Authority, a City agency or department designated by the City as being responsible for the rehabilitation of property, an urban renewal agency, or a private not-for-profit corporation, the primary purpose of which is the improvement of housing conditions within the City. In making the selection, the Manager shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(1) The receiver’s experience in rehabilitating and managing this type of property; and
(2) The receiver’s capacity to take on additional property management responsibilities.
[Added Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2016-142, Dec. 1, 2016.]
 

9.430 Powers of a Receiver

A receiver appointed by the court shall have the authority to take any of the actions provided for in ORS 105.435.
[Added Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2016-142, Dec. 1, 2016.]
 

9.435 Plan and Estimate

Within 30 days after appointment by the court, a receiver shall submit to the Manager a written plan for the abatement. The Manager shall approve the plan before the receiver commences work on the abatement.
[Added Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2016-142, Dec. 1, 2016.]
 

9.440 Record Keeping

The receiver shall keep a record of all moneys received and expended and all costs and obligations incurred in performing the abatement and managing the property. Records shall be kept in a form as shall be agreed upon by the receiver and the Manager, and copies shall be provided to the Manager upon request.
[Added Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2016-142, Dec. 1, 2016.]
 

9.445 Purchasing

Excepting Medford Code section 2.507, all abatement work done pursuant to this ordinance is exempt from the provisions of the City’s contracting and purchasing code.
[Added Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2016-142, Dec. 1, 2016.]
 

9.450 Lien Enforcement; City Agency or Department as Receiver; Foreclosure

In accordance with ORS 105.440(2), if the costs and obligations incurred due to the abatement have not been paid, the order of the court shall be filed with the county recorder within 60 days of its filing with the court and shall thereafter constitute a lien on the property.  In addition, unpaid liens shall be entered into the docket of City liens, and shall bear interest at the rate specified in section 3.470(2) of the Medford Code.  Thereafter, the City may cause the property to be sold as provided for by ORS 223.505 to 223.590, or any other method provided by law. 
[Added Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2016-142, Dec. 1, 2016.]
 
9 Flood Damaged Buildings Code [Repealed, Ord. No. 2008-159, Aug. 7, 2008.]

9.450 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-159, Aug. 7, 2008.]

 


9.452 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-159, Aug. 7, 2008.]

 


9.454 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-159, Aug. 7, 2008.]

 


9.456 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-159, Aug. 7, 2008.]

 


9.458 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-159, Aug. 7, 2008.]

 


9.460 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-159, Aug. 7, 2008.]

 


9.462 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-159, Aug. 7, 2008.]

 


9.464 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-159, Aug. 7, 2008.]

 


9.466 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-159, Aug. 7, 2008.]

 


9.468 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-159, Aug. 7, 2008.]

 


9.470 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-159, Aug. 7, 2008.]

 


9.472 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-159, Aug. 7, 2008.]

 


9.474 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-159, Aug. 7, 2008.]

 


9.476 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-159, Aug. 7, 2008.]

 


9.478 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-159, Aug. 7, 2008.]

 


9.480 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-159, Aug. 7, 2008.]

 


9.482 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-159, Aug. 7, 2008.]

 


9.484 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-159, Aug. 7, 2008.]

 


9.486 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-159, Aug. 7, 2008.]

 


9.487 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-159, Aug. 7, 2008.]

 


9.488 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-159, Aug. 7, 2008.]

 


9.490 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-159, Aug. 7, 2008.]

9 Demolition (9.500 to 9.504)

9.500 Definitions and Scope

Terms used in Sections 9.501 to 9.504, unless the context otherwise clearly requires, shall be defined as provided in the Oregon Structural Specialty Code. The building code at present requires a permit to demolish any building or structure within the City of Medford, and a permit fee is prescribed for the issuance of such a permit. Sections 9.501 to 9.504 further prescribe the demolition requirements and administrative procedures to be followed. The requirements of Sections 9.501 to 9.504 shall apply to the voluntary demolition of structures and to demolition which is required by or under any other code of the City of Medford.
[Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

9.501 Permit Required; Fee

No person shall demolish a structure, or permit one to be demolished on property under his control, unless a demolition permit for such demolition has been issued by the Building Safety Director, nor shall any person cause or permit such demolition contrary to the terms of the permit or to the terms of Sections 9.501 to 9.504. The fee for the demolition permit is as prescribed in Medford Municipal Code 9.270.
[Amd. Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

9.502 Application for Permit

Application for a demolition permit shall be made to the Building Safety Director. The application shall include the name and address of the applicant, the location of the structure to be demolished, the names of the owners of the premises, the places and manner of disposing of materials and debris from the demolition, and any other information that the Building Safety Director finds necessary in order to carry out the requirements of Sections 9.501 to 9.504.

9.503 Clean-up and Disposition of Debris; Time Limit

A demolition permit shall include the following requirements: that the structure be wholly reduced and site restored to natural grade leaving no voids, projecting elements, or hazardous conditions; that all debris shall be disposed of in a place and manner which complies with Section 9.504 and which creates no nuisance or hazard or other condition prohibited by ordinance or other law; that any sewer lines must be sealed off 5' from the property line, and any septic tank shall be decommissioned pursuant to and approved by DEQ. A DEQ certificate of compliance is required as a condition of final.
[Amd. Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

9.504 [Repealed, Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

9 Private Swimming Pools (9.510 to 9.511)

9.510 Public Policy

It is determined and declared that the maintenance of private swimming pools, fish ponds, and other artificial bodies of water without adequate safety and precautionary measures constitutes a severe hazard to the safety of the inhabitants of the city, particularly children.

9.511 Control of Artificial Bodies of Water

Note:  Commercial pools:  Reference Oregon Administrative Rules, Chapter 333, Division 60 concerning public swimming pools as promulgated by the Department of Human Services under the authority established in Oregon Revised Statute 448.

(1) Every person in possession of land within the city, either as owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant, or licensee, on which there is situated an excavated or portable swimming pool, fish pond or other artificial body of water which contains water 18 inches or more in depth at any point shall erect and maintain on the lot or premises upon which the pool or body of water is located an adequate fence or wall sufficient to make the pool or body of water inaccessible to small children.

(2) The fence or wall, including gates therein, shall be solid wall, picket, vertical board, or of chain link type construction and shall completely surround such pool or body of water. The fence height shall be not less than four feet above the underlying ground with openings, holes, or gaps therein no larger than four inches in any dimension except for doors or gates; provided, further, that a dwelling house or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure.

(3) All gates or doors opening through the enclosure, except the door of any dwelling occupied by human beings and forming any part of the enclosure required above, shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device designed to keep and capable of keeping the door or gate securely closed at all times when not in actual use. The self-latching device shall be placed not less than three feet above the underlying ground or otherwise made inaccessible from the outside by small children.

(4) If the exterior walls of a portable or raised swimming pool are vertical and extend at least 36 inches above the grade of the abutting ground at all points, no further fencing shall be required except such as will be necessary to enclose the ladder, steps, or other such access to the pool.

(5) Approved covers or alternate means of protection may be authorized by the Building Safety Director if they can be shown to provide protection equivalent to that described in this section.
[Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2014-147, Dec. 4, 2014; Amd. Sec. 16, 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

9 Temporary Structures (9.520)

9.520 Conditions for Temporary Structures

Refer to the current adopted Oregon Residential Specialty Code or Oregon Structural Specialty Code, whichever is applicable.
[Amd. Sec. 17, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

9 Moving of Buildings (9.530 to 9.533)

9.530 Permit for Moving Building

No person shall move a building on the streets or alleys of the city without first obtaining a permit from the Building Safety Director and the City Engineer or an authorized designee.
[Amd. Sec. 1 Ord. No. 2020-44; Apr. 2, 2020]

9.531 Bond Required

Before permission is granted under Section 9.530 the Building Safety Director may require the person to furnish a bond with one or more sureties to the effect that they will indemnify the city for 
repairs to the streets and alleys or other property of the city, or damage and expense to any person occupying the streets or alleys by virtue of a franchise or otherwise, which results from transportation of a building on the streets or alleys of the city. 
[Reinserted, Sec. 2, Ord. 2020-44, Apr. 2, 2020]

9.532 [Repealed, Sec. 19, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

.

9.533 Permit Requirements for Moved Buildings

(1) No person shall move any building to a lot unless the owner of the building first obtains all necessary permits and pays all required fees to move the building, construct a foundation and place the building on a foundation on that lot.

(2) Every building moved onto a lot shall be installed on a foundation within 30 days of the date of the move specified on the building permit.
[Added, Ord. No. 1999-168, Oct. 28, 1999; Amd. Sec. 20, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

9.540 [Repealed, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2009-120, June 4, 2009.]

9 Parking Lot Specifications (9.550)

9.550 Parking Lot Specifications

(1)        Drainage.  All parking lots shall be designed and constructed so that no surface run-off will drain across a sidewalk, bike path, driveway or walkway within a public right-of-way.  Surface run-off is permitted to drain into an adjacent alley, if the alley has an existing storm drain system capable of handling the additional run-off. All run-offs shall be approved by the City Engineer.
(2)        Base Material.  Decomposed granite or 1"-0 crushed rock of a gradation approved by the city shall be used as base material.  The base shall be compacted to a minimum of 95% of optimum density and shall exhibit a uniform grade in appearance.  Unstable subgrade (soft spots) shall be removed and replaced with sub-base shale.  Parking lot base material minimum thickness requirements are 4 inches of crushed rock or 6 inches of decomposed granite for asphalt surfaces and 2 inches of granite for concrete surfaces.
(3)        Asphalt Surface.  Asphalt surface lots shall be a 2 inch minimum thickness of level 2, ½” dense Asphalt Concrete Pavement (ACP) mixture. All bituminous and concrete surfaces in contact with the asphalt shall be sprayed with tack coat prior to asphalt placement. Asphalt shall be a temperature of between 250 and 300 degrees F at the time it is placed.  It shall be placed on dry prepared surfaces and when the air temperature in the shade is 35 degrees F or warmer. Placing during rain or other adverse weather conditions will not be permitted, except that material in transit at the time adverse conditions may occur may be placed provided it is of proper temperature, has been covered during transit, and is placed on a foundation free from pools or flow of water. The asphalt shall be rolled immediately after the asphalt has been placed using a steel wheeled or pneumatic tired roller capable of transmitting sufficient force necessary to compact the material to 90%of optimum density.  The finished surface shall be true to grade, free of irregularities and roller wheel marks.
(4)        Concrete Surface.  Concrete surface parking lots shall be a 6-inch minimum thickness of 3000-1-1/2 Portland Cement concrete.  No concrete shall be placed when the ambient temperature is below 35 degrees F.  Concrete subject to freezing temperatures during curing shall be adequately protected.  The concrete shall be compacted using screens or tampers.  The surface shall be finished as specified, with a uniform surface free from laitance, soupy mortar, marks or irregularities.  Joints will be placed as specified on plans.  When no specification is made, joints shall conform to Section 00756.48 of the Oregon Standard Specifications for Construction (OSSC).  Immediately upon final surface finishing, the entire exposed surface of the newly laid concrete shall be covered and cured using a membrane-forming compound, impervious sheeting, or saturated mats for at least 72 hours.   Alternates to the above specifications may be approved by the City Engineer who shall inform the Building Safety Director of his approval. 
 (5)       Permits.
            (a)        Building permits for the construction of parking lots are required.  Permit fees shall be             based on the total project valuation and Table 3-A of the Building Code.
            (b)        Any electrical work shall require a permit and be installed in accordance with the               
            Electrical Code.
            (c)        Any catch basins or piping shall require a permit and be installed in accordance with the             Plumbing Code.
[Reinserted, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2020-44, Apr. 2, 2020]

9 Fences and Walls (9.560 to 9.561)

9.560 Fences and Walls

 Pursuant to and in conformance with Medford Code Section 10.731-10.733, the following shall be prohibited:
(1) Electrified fencing, except as regulated by Section 9.561;
(2) Barbed wire, except at a level of 6 feet or more from the ground;
(3) Broken glass, barbs or similar hazardous material imbedded in the fence or wall.
All new commercial fences exceeding 7 feet in height; 8 feet in height for residential chainlink fencing; and 7 feet for other fencing types, including replacing existing fences, require a building permit with the fee based on the valuation and Medford Code Section 9.270, Table 9-A. 
[Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2011-63, Apr. 7, 2011; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2015-88, Sept. 3, 2015; Amd Sec. 22, Ord. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2020-82, Jul. 2, 2020.]
 

9.561 Electrified Fences

 It shall be unlawful for any person to install, maintain or operate an electrified fence in violation of this section. The construction and use of electrified fences shall be allowed in the city only as provided in this section, and section 10.731 through 10.735, subject to the following standards:
Definition:
Electrified Fence – Any fence, barrier or enclosure partially or totally enclosing a building, field or yard, carrying any electrical pulse or charge through any part, section or element thereof.  
(1) Permitted Electrified fences shall be permitted in the following zones: C-C, C-H, I-L, I-G, and I-H, or where needed to control livestock.
(2)        Prohibited.  Electrified fences are prohibited in the following locations:
            a.  Central Business overlay district;
            b.  Liberty Park Plan Area;    
            c.  Southeast (S-E) Plan Area;
            d. The Neighborhood Commercial (C-N) and Service-Commercial/Professional (C-
                 S/P) zoning districts;
            e.  All of the Single Family and Multi-Family zones (SFR-00 through SFR-10, MFR-             
                 15, MFR-20, and MFR-30); and
            f.  In the Public Parks (P-1) zoning district.
(3) Permits Required. Electrified fences shall only be installed under a permit issued by the Building Safety Department, and if an alarm is included, shall also have a Burglar Alarm permit issued under Medford Municipal Code 8.605 through 8.695. Prior to initially energizing an electrified fence, the property owner or owner’s agent shall contact the Fire Department to ensure fire officials inspect the premise for compliance and the location is added to the Fire Department’s electrified fence registration list.
(4)  Electrification. The electric charge produced by the fence upon contact shall be non-lethal, and shall not exceed the energizer characteristics set forth in the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) Standard No. 60335-2-76, 2018 edition.  All electrical components shall bear the label of a testing agency recognized by the State of Oregon Department of Consumer and Business Services, Building Codes Division. The electrified fence shall be installed and used in accordance with the Oregon Electrical Specialty Code and Oregon Structural Specialty Code, the listing, and the manufacturer’s installation instructions.
            (4.1)     The energizer for electrified fences shall be driven by a commercial storage                         battery or batteries, not to exceed 12 volts DC. The storage battery or batteries may be charged either by a solar panel, or a commercial trickle charger, or a combination of both. AC current shall not be used to energize any electrified fence.
 
 (5) Fence Details. Electrified fences shall be constructed in the following manner:
            (5.1)    Maximum Height. Electrified fences shall not exceed 10 feet in height.
            (5.2)     Perimeter Fence. No electrified fence shall be installed or used unless it is                           completely surrounded by a non-electrified perimeter fence in order to separate the electrified fence from the abutting property line and right-of-way. The non-electrified perimeter fence shall be installed under the regulations and height limitations in Medford Municipal Code 10.731 through 10.735. The minimum height for the non-electrified perimeter fence shall be six feet. The electrified and non- electrified perimeter fence shall be separated by no more than 12 inches.
            (5.3)     Setbacks. Electrified fences shall not be located in the front yard setback,                         required landscaping areas, or required bufferyard areas as set forth in Chapter 10.  No electrified fence shall be installed within 12 inches of a property line.
            (5.4)     Fence Standards in conjunction with a Bufferyard. When a bufferyard exists, the applicant shall provide photographs of the existing fence or wall and vegetation. When a bufferyard does not exist and is required under current code, the non-electrified fence or wall shall be of solid construction (e.g. wood, concrete, masonry block) and the minimum height shall be eight feet and can be                    located at the property line.
(6)  Warning Signs. Electrified fences shall be clearly identified with warning signs in English and in Spanish that read:  "Warning-Electric Fence" and include the international symbol for an electrical hazard at intervals not to exceed thirty feet.  The warning signs shall be mounted on both sides of the electrified fence.  The signs shall be reflective with a minimum two-inch letter height, minimum stroke of one-half inch and with a contrasting background.
(7) Emergency Access. Fire Department access shall be provided in accordance with the Fire Code and the Oregon Structural Specialty Code. When a vehicle gate opens automatically, it shall open using a sensing device approved by the Fire Department. The vehicle gate shall provide a means for the Fire Department to egress through the gate. Power to the electrified fence, excluding gate opening controls, shall be deactivated upon automatic Fire Department access through the gate. In addition, an approved Knox key box or approved equivalent shall be provided at an exterior location for any keyed locks or keyed gates for immediate emergency access necessary for life-saving or fire-fighting purposes. An approved method to manually disconnect electrical power to all portions of the fence and gates, such as a “Knox Remote Shunt Control Station”, shall be provided at an exterior location. The method and location of both the key box and the electrical disconnect shall be approved by the Medford Fire Code Official.
8) Hours of Operation. An electrified fence shall only be energized during the hours when the general public does not have legal access to the protected property, unless when used to control livestock.
(9) Surveillance.  Electrified fences shall be part of a functioning security system and monitored 24 hours a day.
 (10) Compliance. Failure to maintain an electrified fence in conformance with the standards set forth in this section shall result in the fence being declared a public nuisance subject to abatement under Medford Municipal Code 5.530.
[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2015-88, Sept. 3, 2015.; Amd. Sec. 2, 2020-82, Jul. 2, 2020.]
 

9.565  Wood Roof Covering Materials

The use of wood shake and wood shingle roof covering materials for new construction, re-roofing, and repairs are prohibited. This prohibition includes wood shake and wood shingle roof covering materials with fire retardant treatments of any kind. Roof covering shall not be applied over exiting wood shake or wood shingle roof coverings.
Exception: Roof repairs of less than 25% of the total roof area on existing structures, in any one year period, may be repaired with a minimum Class B fire-rated wood shake or wood shingle material treated by the full-cell vacuum-pressure.
[Added, Sec. 23, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

9 Street Addresses (9.570 to 9.572)

9.570 Street Number Required on Premises

The owner or tenant of every residence or place of business or other structure opening upon or having access to the streets of the City shall cause to be placed in a conspicuous place upon the main entrance or at the principal place of ingress to his premises a number, to be ascertained as provided in Sections 9.571 and 9.572.

[Reinserted, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2020-44, Apr, 2, 2020]


9.571 Assignment of Numbers by City Manager or his Designee

(1)        The City Manager shall prepare a map or maps of the city and indicate thereon the numbers used to designate the premises, as provided in Section 9.570.
(2)        In assigning the numbers the City Manager shall use Main Street and the main line of the Southern Pacific Railway as base lines for starting points for the numbering and shall allow 100 numbers to each block, and not less than one number to each 25 feet of street front.
(3)        For east-west streets east of the base line all numbers on the south side of said streets shall be even numbers, and all numbers on the north side of said street shall be odd numbers.  For east-west streets west of the base line all numbers on the south side of said streets shall be odd numbers, and all numbers on the north side of streets shall be even numbers.  For north-south streets north of the base line all numbers on the west side of said streets shall be odd numbers, and all numbers on the east side of said streets shall be even numbers.  For north-south streets south of the base line all numbers on the west side of said streets shall be even numbers, and all numbers on the east side of said streets shall be odd numbers.
(4)        A primary structure shall include but is not limited to residential building, mobile/manufactured home park, commercial building, industrial building, office building, public building, utility building or communications tower.
(5)        Flag lots and lots accessed off of a minimum access street, as defined in Chapter 10, Section 10.430 will be addressed off the main street on which it fronts.   
(6)        Mobile home parks and manufactured homes within the park shall be addressed off the public street it fronts, with each home having a space number.  The space numbering will adhere to the street addressing standard in the Code of the City of Medford Section 9.571.
(7)        The City Manager or his Designee reserves the right to require the readdressing of property that is affected by the creation or extension of a public right-of-way or the subdivision of land.
(8)  An application for a permit for a new structure shall be considered an application for an address assignment.   Address numbers assigned by the Building Safety Director or his Designee must be displayed prior to the first building inspection.
(9)   Any requested change of address after an assignment of said address is established shall constitute a fee of $100.
 
NON-COMPLIANCE
Failure to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance include, but are not limited to, by way of example:  a number out-of-sequence, odd or even number on wrong side of street, numbers improperly affixed, numbers illegible, numbers unclear, numbers obstructed or not visible, numbers not present, numbers of improper size, numbers not in contrast with immediate background.
[Reinserted, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2020-44, Apr. 2, 2020]
 

9.572 Installation of Numbers

Each property owner or tenant, as provided in Section 9.570, shall ascertain from the City Manager or his Designee the numbers so assigned to his premises, and shall cause those numbers to be affixed thereto.
(1) Numbers for apartments and similar complexes shall be displayed on each assigned structure.  Numbers and/or letters for individual apartments or units within these complexes shall be displayed on, above, or to the side of main doorway of each apartment or unit.
(2) Commercial and industrial buildings with multiple levels shall adhere to the following three digit suite numbering:  basements – 001, first floor – 100, second floor –200, third floor – 300 and etc.
(3) There shall be positioned at each entrance of multiple-family dwelling complex, commercial/industrial complex, mobile/manufactured home parks an illuminated diagrammatic representation of the complex which shows the location of the viewer and the address and unit designations within the complex.
[Reinserted, Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2020-44, Apr. 2, 2020]
 

9.575 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2010-33, Feb. 18, 2010.]

9 Seismic Design Requirements for Existing Buildings (9.600 to 9.655)

9.600 [Repealed, Sec. 27, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

.

9.602 [Repealed, Sec. 28, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

.

9.610 [Repealed, Sec. 29, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

.

9.615 [Repealed, Sec. 30, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

.

9.620 [Repealed, Sec. 31, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

.

9.625 [Repealed, Sec. 32, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

.

9.630 [Repealed, Sec. 33, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

.

9.635 [Repealed, Sec. 34, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

.

9.637 [Repealed, Sec. 35, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

.

9.640 [Repealed, Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2013-100, July 11, 2013.]

Repealed

9.645 [Repealed, Sec. 36, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

.

9.650 [Repealed, Sec. 37, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

.

9.655 [Repealed, Sec. 38, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

9 Penalties and Appeal Rights (9.660 to 9.662)

9.660 Violations; Penalties; Remedies

(1)  No person, firm, corporation or other entity however organized, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain a building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of this chapter.

(2)  Violations shall be subject to an administrative civil penalty not to exceed $5,000 or, in the case of a continuing violation as defined in subsection (3) of this section, not more than $1,000 for each day of the violation and shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in this code.

(3)  Each day that a violation of a provision of this chapter exists constitutes a separate violation.

(4)  The penalties and remedies provided in this section are not exclusive and are in addition to other penalties and remedies available to the City under the Code or other law.

[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2001-120, June 21, 2001; Replaced, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2010-33, Feb. 18, 2010; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2016-56 Dec. 1, 2016.]

9.661 Building Official; Authority to Impose Administrative Civil Penalty

(1)  Upon a determination by the building official that a person has violated a provision of this chapter or a rule adopted thereunder, the building official may impose upon the violator and/or any other responsible person an administrative civil penalty as provided by this section.  A “responsible person” includes the violator and /or the owner of a building or property.

(2)  Prior to imposing an administrative civil penalty under this section, the building official shall make a reasonable attempt to secure voluntary correction by issuing the responsible person a Notice of Civil Violation.  Upon receiving a Notice of Civil Violation, a responsible person shall have not less than five (5) days to correct the violation, unless the building official determines that a shorter time period is required due to an immediate threat to health, safety, environment or public welfare.

(3)  If a violation has not been remedied to the building official’s satisfaction after the time allowed for correction has expired, the building official may impose an administrative civil penalty by issuing a Notice of Civil Penalty on each responsible person to whom a Notice of Civil Violation was issued.

(4)  The Notice of Civil Penalty shall either be served by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested.  A Notice of Civil Penalty shall include:
 
(a)  Reference to the specific code provision or rule involved;
 
(b)  A short and plain statement of the matter(s) asserted or charged;
 
(c)  The specific monetary penalty imposed, supported by the factors set out in subsection six (6) of this section;
 
(d)  The date on which the Notice of Civil Violation was issued; or if the notice was not given pursuant to 9.661(5), a short and plain statement stating the basis for concluding the violation was knowing, intentional or repeated; and
 
(e)  A statement of the responsible person’s right to appeal the civil penalty to the Unified Appeal Board (“the Board”).

(5)  Notwithstanding subsection two (2) of this section, the building official may impose a civil penalty without issuing a Notice of Civil Violation where the building official determines that the violation was knowing or intentional or a repeat of a similar violation.

(6)  In imposing a monetary penalty authorized by this section, the building official shall determine the following factors:
 
(a)  The responsible person’s past attempts to remedy the violation;
 
(b)  The gravity of the violation; and
 
(c)  Any prior violations of this chapter.

[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2010-33, Feb. 18, 2010.]
 

9.662 Appeal

(1)  A person receiving a Notice of Civil Penalty may appeal to the Board.  Written Notice of Appeal along with the appeal fee must be filed with the City Recorder within ten (10) business days of receipt of the Notice of Civil Penalty.  An appeal not timely filed with an appeal fee shall not be considered, and the civil penalty imposed by the City shall become final.

(2)  The Notice of Appeal shall state all of the following:
            (a)  The name and address of the appellant;
            (b)  The specific code provision or rule being appealed;
            (c)  The reason the building official’s determination is incorrect; and
            (d)  The appellant’s desired outcome on appeal.

(3)  Unless the appellant and City mutually agree to a longer period, an appeal shall be heard by the Board within thirty (30) days after receipt of the Notice of Appeal.  At least ten (10) business days prior to the hearing, the Director of Building Safety shall mail notice of the time and location of the hearing to the appellant.

(4)  The Board shall hear and determine the appeal on the basis of the appellant’s testimony, written statements or other supporting evidence the Board deems appropriate.  The appellant may either appear personally or through legal counsel.  The rules of evidence shall not apply.  The appeal shall be limited to the issues specified in the Notice of Appeal.

(5)  The City may present evidence either by testimony or the written report of the building official that issued either the Notice of Civil Violation or Penalty.  The City Attorney may assist the building official at the hearing.

(6)  Upon review, the Board shall limit its review to determining whether there is substantial evidence to support the decision of the building official, or if errors in law were committed by the building official. Review shall in any event be limited to those issues set forth in the Notice of Appeal. The appellant is precluded from raising an issue on appeal to the Board if he or she could
have raised the issue to the building official but failed to do so. The Board shall issue a written decision within ten (10) business days of the hearing date.

[Added, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2010-33, Feb. 18, 2010.]

9 Flood Damage Prevention Regulations and Flood Insurance Rate Maps (9.701 through 9.707 effective May 3, 2011)

9.701 Flood Damage Prevention-Purpose

The purposes of Sections 9.701–9.707 are to:
(1) Protect human life, health and property;
(2) Minimize damage to  public  facilities  and  utilities, such as water purification and sewage treatment plants, water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, and streets and  bridges located in floodplains;
(3) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas;
(4) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects;
(5) Minimize the need for rescue, emergency services, and relief associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(6) Minimize prolonged business interruptions, unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service during times of flood;
(7) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an Area of Special   Flood   Hazard;
(8) Ensure that those who occupy the Areas of Special Flood Hazard assume responsibility for their actions, and;
(9) Manage the alteration of Areas of Special Flood Hazard, stream channels and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions.
[Reinstated, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2020-50, Apr. 16, 2020.]
 

9.702 Flood Damage Prevention Methods

To accomplish its purposes, Sections 9.701–9.707 include methods and provisions to:
(1) Require development that is vulnerable to floods, including structures and facilities necessary for the general health, safety and welfare of citizens, to be   protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction:
(2) Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion;
(3) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert flood waters or that may increase flood hazards to other lands;
(4) Preserve and restore natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which carry and store floodwaters, and;
(5) Coordinate with and supplement provisions of State of Oregon Specialty Codes enforced by the State of Oregon Building Codes Division.
[Reinstated, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2020-50, Apr. 16, 2020.]
 

9.703 Flood Damage Prevention-Definitions

When used in Sections 9.701–9.707, the terms below shall have the meanings herein ascribed. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in Sections 9.701–9.707 shall be interpreted according to the meaning they have in common usage. 
 
Appeal. A request for review of the Floodplain Administrator’s interpretation of provisions of Sections 9.701–9.707. 
 
Basement. Any area of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.
 
Certification, No-Rise. A certification by a registered professional civil engineer that demonstrates, through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that an encroachment will not result in any    increase in flood levels affecting adjoining property during the occurrence of the Base Flood discharge. 
 
Construction, New. A structure for which the “Start of Construction” commenced after May 3, 2011 and includes subsequent substantial improvements to the structure.
 
Construction, Start of. This includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,   piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not the alteration  affects the external dimensions of a building.
 
Crawlspace, Below-Grade. An enclosed area below the Base Flood Elevation in which the interior grade is not more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade, and the height, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation, does not exceed four feet at any point.
 
Damage, Substantial. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of its market value before the damage occurred.
 
Datum. The vertical datum is a base measurement point (or set of points) from which all elevations are determined. Historically, that common set of points was the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NAVD29). The vertical datum now used by the federal government as a basis for measuring heights is the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88).
 
Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the Area of Special Flood Hazard. Work exempt from  Oregon Residential Specialty Code, SectionR105.2 requires a Floodplain Development Permit unless specifically exempted by definition in Sections 9.701–9.707. Development does not include signs, markers, aids, etc. placed by a public    agency to serve the public.
 
Dwelling, Manufactured or Manufactured Home. A structure, transportable in one or more Sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "Manufactured Dwelling” does not include a “Recreational Vehicle.”
 
Elevation, Water Surface. The height, in relation to a specific datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas.
 
Encroachment. The advancement or infringement of uses, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures, stream habitat restoration, or other development into a  Floodway, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
 
Building, Elevated. A non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, post, piers, pilings, or columns.
 
Facility, Critical. See “Facility, Essential”.
 
Facility, Essential or Critical:
   a. Hospitals and other medical facilities having surgery and emergency treatment areas;
   b. Fire and police stations;
   c. Tanks or other structures containing, housing or supporting water or fire-suppression materials or equipment required for the protection of essential or hazardous facilities or special occupancy structures;
   d. Emergency vehicle shelters and garages;
   e. Structures and equipment in emergency-preparedness centers;
   f. Standby power generating equipment for essential facilities; and,
   g. Structures and equipment in government communication centers and other facilities required    for emergency response.
 
Flood or Flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from (1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or (2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
 
Flood, Base. The flood having a 1.0% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
 
Flood Elevation, Base (BFE). The water surface elevation during the base flood in relation to a specified datum. The Base Flood Elevation is depicted on the Flood   Insurance Rate Maps to the nearest foot and in the Flood Insurance Study to the  nearest 0.1 foot. Same as “Design Flood Elevation”.
 
Flood Hazard, Area of Special. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year (the area in which a base flood occurs). Zones designating Areas of Special Flood Hazard on Flood Insurance Rate Maps always include the letters A or V. Also known as the Special Flood Hazard Area.
 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the Areas of Special Flood Hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community.
 
Flood Insurance Rate Map, Digital (DFIRM). A map that depicts flood risk and zones, and flood risk information. The DFIRM presents the flood risk information in a format suitable for electronic mapping applications. 
 
Flood Insurance Study (FIS). The official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles, Regulatory Floodway boundaries and water surface elevations of the Base Flood.
 
Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and those portions of the    floodplain adjoining the channel required to discharge the Base Flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. For the City of Medford, Bear Creek is the only watercourse with a Regulatory Floodway defined herein. 
 
Floor, Lowest. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a structure’s lowest floor, provided that the enclosed area is built and maintained in accordance with the applicable design requirements of the Specialty Codes and Sections 9.701–9.707. The lowest floor of a manufactured dwelling is the bottom of the longitudinal chassis frame beam in A zones.
 
Grade, Highest Adjacent. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. Refer to the Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) for more information.
 
Improvement, Substantial. Reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the Market Value of the structure before the “Start of Construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “Substantial Damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed.
 
 The Market Value of the structure is:
   a.  the real market value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or
   b.  in the case of damage, the real market value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.
 
The term “Substantial Improvement” does not include either:
   a. a project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,             sanitary, or safety code specifications, which have been identified by the local code enforcement             official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or,
   b. alteration of a Historic Structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a Historic Structure.
 
Letter of Map Change (LOMC). An official Federal Emergency Management Agency determination, by letter, to amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps and  Flood Insurance Studies. LOMCs are issued in the following categories:
 
Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA). A revision based on technical data showing that a property was inadvertently included in a designated Special Flood Hazard Area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a specific property is not located in a Special Flood Hazard Area;
 
Letter of Map Revision (LOMR).  A revision based on technical data showing, due to manmade alterations, changes to flood zones, flood elevations, or floodplain and Regulatory Floodway delineations. One common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a  determination that a structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the Base Flood Elevation and is excluded from the Special Flood Hazard Area;
 
Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR). A formal review and comment by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum National Flood Insurance Program floodplain management criteria. A CLOMR does not amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps, or Flood Insurance Studies. 
 
Mean Sea Level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 or other datum, to which Base Flood Elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
 
Specialty Codes. The combined specialty codes adopted under ORS 446.062, 446.185, 447.020(2), 455.020(2), 455.496, 455.610, 455.680, 460.085, 460.360, 479.730(1) or 480.545, but does not include regulations adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to ORS Chapter 476 or ORS 479.015 to 479.200 and 479.210 to 479.220. The combined specialty codes are often referred to as building codes.
 
Structure. A walled and roofed building, a manufactured dwelling, a modular or   temporary building, or a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
 
Structure, Accessory. Same as definition of “Building, accessory” under Section10.012.
 
Structure, Historic. A structure that is:
   a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S.             Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
   b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the             historical significance of a registered historic district or to a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
   c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states    with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or,
   d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
               i. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or;
               ii. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
 
Use, Water-Dependent. A facility that cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a dam or irrigation canal. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
 
Variance. A grant of relief from a requirement of Sections 9.701–9.706 by permitting construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by said Sections. 
 
 Vehicle, Recreational. A vehicle that is:  
   a. Built on a single chassis;
   b.400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
   c. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light duty truck, and;
   d. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for             recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
 
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the floodplain management regulations of Sections 9.701–9.707. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence  of compliance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
 
Watercourse.  A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically.
[Reinstated, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2020-50, Apr. 16, 2020.]
 

9.704 Flood Damage Prevention-General Provisions

A.  Applicability.
Sections 9.701–9.707 shall apply to all Areas of Special Flood Hazard within the   jurisdiction of the City of Medford. Nothing in Sections 9.701–9.707 is intended to allow uses or structures that are otherwise prohibited by the Land Development Code or Specialty Codes.
 
B.  Basis for Area of Special Flood Hazard.
The Area of Special Flood Hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the City of Medford dated May 3, 2011, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) or Digital Flood Insurance Rate Maps (DFIRM), are adopted by reference and declared a part of Sections 9.701–9.707. The FIS and the FIRM are on file at the offices of the City of   Medford, 200 South Ivy Street.
 
C.  Coordination with Specialty Codes Adopted by the State of Oregon Building Codes Division. Pursuant to the requirement established in ORS 455 that the City administers and   enforces the State of Oregon Specialty Codes, the City of Medford does hereby   acknowledge that the Specialty Codes contain certain provisions that apply to the design and construction of buildings and structures located in Areas of Special Flood Hazard. Therefore, Sections 9.701–9.707 is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Specialty Codes.
 
 
D.  Requirement for a Floodplain Development Permit. A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required prior to initiating development activities in any Areas of Special Flood Hazard established in Section 9.704(B).
 
E. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of Sections 9.701–9.707, all provisions shall be:
            (1) Considered as minimum requirements; and, 
            (2)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state                     
            statutes, including state Specialty Codes. 
 
F.  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by Sections 9.701–9.707 is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This Section does not imply   that land outside Areas of Special Flood Hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Section shall not create liability on the part of the City of Medford or any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on  Sections 9.701–9.707 or an administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
[Reinstated, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2020-50, Apr. 16, 2020.]
 

9.705 Flood Damage Prevention Regulations Administration

A.   Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
The Building Official is hereby appointed as the Floodplain Administrator who is responsible for administering and implementing the provisions of Sections 9.701–9.707. 
B.   Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
Duties of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1) Review all proposed development to determine whether it will be located in Areas of Special             Flood Hazard or other flood-prone areas; 
(2) Review applications for new development or modifications of any existing development in             Areas of Special Flood Hazard for compliance with the requirements of Sections 9.701–9.707; 
(3) Review proposed development to ensure that necessary permits have been received from             governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or state law. Copies of such             permits shall be maintained on file; 
 (4) Review all development permit applications to determine if proposed development is located in the Regulatory Floodway, and if so, ensure that the encroachment standards of SubSection  9.706.B, Development in Regulatory Floodways, are met. 
(5) When Base Flood Elevation data have not been established in SubSection 9.704.B, Basis  for Area of Special Flood Hazard, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any Base Flood Elevation and Floodway data available  from a Federal, state   or other authoritative source in order to administer the provisions of Sections 9.701–9.707; 
 (6) When Base Flood Elevations are not available from an authoritative source, the Floodplain Administrator shall require Base Flood Elevations to be developed in accordance   with Paragraph 9.706(A)(2); 
(7) When a determination is needed of the exact location of boundaries of the Areas of Special Flood Hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a  mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the Floodplain Administrator shall make a determination. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the determination per Section 10.051; 
(8) Issue Floodplain Development Permits when the provisions of Sections 9.701– 9.707 have been met, or deny the same in the event of noncompliance; 
(9) Ensure that applications for building permits comply with the requirements of   Sections             9.701–9.707;
(10) Obtain, verify and record the actual elevation in relation to the vertical datum  used on the             effective Flood Insurance Rate Map, or, in relation to the highest adjacent grade where no Base             Flood Elevation is available, of the lowest floor level, including basement, of all new construction or substantially improved buildings and structures, including manufactured  dwellings; 
(11) Obtain, verify and record the actual elevation of finished construction, in relation to the             vertical datum used on the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map, or highest adjacent grade where no Base Flood Elevation is available, to which any new or substantially improved non- residential buildings or structures have been flood proofed. When flood proofing is utilized for a structure, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain certification of elevation to which the structure was flood proofed from a registered professional engineer or land surveyor; 
(12) Ensure that all records and certifications pertaining to the provisions of Sections 9.701–9.707 are permanently maintained in the City of Medford Building Safety Department and  available for public inspection; 
 (13) Make periodic inspections of Areas of Special Flood Hazard to establish that development             activities are being performed in compliance with Sections 9.701–9.707, and to verify that             existing buildings and structures maintain compliance with Sections 9.701–9.707; 
 (14) Inspect areas where buildings and structures in Areas of Special Flood Hazard have been             damaged, regardless of the cause of damage, and notify owners that permits may be required prior to repair, rehabilitation, demolition, relocation, or reconstruction of the building or structure; and, 
(15) Make substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations for all structures             located in Areas of Special Flood Hazard.
C.   Floodplain Development—Permit Procedures.
Application for a Floodplain Development Permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator or designee on forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator or designee prior to starting development activities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1) Application Stage.
               a. Plans drawn to scale, with elevations of the project area, and the nature,                                     location, and dimensions of existing and proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities;
               b. Delineation of Areas of Special Flood Hazard, Regulatory Floodway  boundaries including Base Flood Elevations, or flood depth in AO zones, where available;
               c. For all proposed structures, elevation of the lowest enclosed area in relation to the highest adjacent grade and the Base Flood Elevation (or flood depth in  AO zones), including crawlspace or basement, elevation of the top of the proposed garage slab, if any, and elevation of the next highest floor.
               d. Locations and sizes of all flood openings, if required, in any proposed building;
               e. Elevation to which a non-residential structure will be flood-proofed;
               f. Certification from a registered professional engineer that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and Specialty Codes;
               g. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or  relocated as a result of a proposed development;
               h. Proof that application has been made for necessary permits from other governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or state law. 
(2) Construction Stage.
               a. Copies of all necessary permits from other governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or state law shall be provided prior to  start of construction.
               b. Development activities shall not begin without an approved Floodplain Development Permit;
               c. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the Floodplain  Development permit holder shall provide to the Floodplain Administrator an as-built certification of the floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood-proofing is placed and prior to further vertical construction; and,
               d. Any deficiencies identified by the Floodplain Administrator shall corrected by the Floodplain Development Permit holder immediately and prior to work proceeding. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections shall be cause for the Floodplain Administrator to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(3) Certificate of Occupancy.
               a. In addition to the requirements of the Specialty Codes pertaining to Certificate of Occupancy, and prior to the final inspection, the owner or authorized agent shall submit the following documentation for finished construction that has been signed and sealed by a registered surveyor or engineer:
                           i. For elevated buildings and structures in Areas of Special Flood  Hazard (all A zones), the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement or, where no Base Flood Elevation is available, the height above highest adjacent grade of the lowest floor; and,
                           ii. For non-residential buildings and structures that have been flood  proofed, the elevation to which the building or structure was flood proofed.
               b. Failure to submit certification or failure to correct violations shall be cause for the Floodplain Administrator to withhold a Certificate of Occupancy until such deficiencies are corrected. 
(4) Expiration of Floodplain Development Permit. A Floodplain Development Permit shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than 180 days each shall be requested in writing.
D.   Watercourse Alterations. 
(1) Development shall not diminish the flood-carrying capacity of a watercourse. If any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development, the applicant must submit certification by a registered professional engineer that the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished. 
(2) The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining all necessary permits from governmental             agencies from which approval is required by Federal or state law, including, but not limited to,             Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (33 USC 1334); the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 USC 1531–1544); and State of Oregon Department of State Lands regulations. 
(3) If the altered or relocated watercourse is part of an Area of Special Flood Hazard, the applicant shall notify other affected jurisdictions and Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development (the NFIP Coordinating Agency for Oregon) prior to any alteration or relocation of the watercourse. Evidence of notification must be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator and to the Federal Emergency Management Agency as set forth in Section 9.705(E) below. 
(4) The applicant shall be responsible for ensuring necessary maintenance for the altered or             relocated portion of the watercourse is provided so that the flood-carrying capacity will not be             diminished. 
(5) The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical data in Section 9.705(E)  below, when an alteration of a watercourse results in the expansion, relocation or elimination of the Special Flood Hazard Area. 
E.    Requirement to Submit New Technical Data. 
(1) Within six months of project completion, an applicant who obtains an approved Conditional             Letter of Map Revision from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), or whose             development alters a watercourse that is part of an Area of Special Flood Hazard, or modifies             floodplain boundaries or Base Flood Elevations, shall obtain from FEMA a Letter of Map Revision reflecting the as-built changes to the Flood Insurance Rate Map. 
(2) It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data prepared in a format required for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision and to submit such data to FEMA on the appropriate application forms. Submittal and processing fees for these map revisions shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(3) Applicants shall be responsible for all costs associated with obtaining a Conditional Letter of Map Amendment or Letter of Map Revision from FEMA. 
(4) When the applicant has demonstrated that the project will or has met all applicable       requirements of this Section, the Floodplain Administrator may sign the Community       Acknowledgement Form, which is part of the Conditional Letter of Map Amendment or Letter of Map Revision application.
F.   Non-Conversion of Enclosed Areas Below the Lowest Floor.
To ensure that enclosed areas below the lowest floor continue to be used solely for parking vehicles, limited storage, or access to the building, and not be finished for use as human habitation, the Floodplain Administrator shall: 
(1) Determine which applicants for new construction and/or substantial improvements have fully             enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are five feet or higher; and 
(2) Require those applicants to enter into a “Non-Conversion Deed Declaration for Construction Within Flood Hazard Areas” or equivalent, with the City of Medford. The deed declaration shall be recorded with Jackson County. The deed declaration shall be in a form acceptable to the Floodplain Administrator and City Attorney.
[Reinstated, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2020-50, Apr. 16, 2020.]
 

9.706  Flood Damage Prevention Regulations-Flood Hazard Reduction Provisions

 A.   Site Improvements and Subdivisions.
All plans and permits for new site improvements, subdivisions, and manufactured home parks shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and ensure that building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes such things as historical data, high water marks, and photographs of past flooding.
   (1) Building lots shall have adequate buildable area outside of Floodways.
   (2) Where Base Flood Elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another authorized source, it shall be generated for land division proposals and other proposed developments.
   (3) New site improvements, subdivisions, and manufactured home parks shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electric and water systems, located and constructed to minimize or eliminate damage and infiltration of floodwaters. Replacement public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electric and water systems, likewise, shall be sited and designed to minimize or eliminate damage and infiltration of floodwaters.
   (4) New and replacement onsite waste disposal systems and sanitary sewerage systems shall be located and constructed to avoid functional impairment, or discharges from them, during flooding.
   (5) Subdivisions and manufactured home parks shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. In AO and AH zones, drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from all proposed and existing structures.
B. Development in Regulatory Floodway
   (1) Encroachments are prohibited in the Regulatory Floodway unless a registered   professional civil engineer provides a No-Rise Certification.
   (2) Any fill permitted to be placed in the Regulatory Floodway shall be designed to be stable under conditions of flooding, including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and flood-related erosion and scour.
   (3) Before the City will permit an encroachment in the Regulatory Floodway that will cause any increase in the base flood elevation, applicants shall obtain a Conditional Letter of Map Revision from the Federal Emergency Management Agency, unless the development causes a temporary encroachment and the conditions in (4), below, are satisfied.
   (4) Temporary encroachments in the Regulatory Floodway for the purposes of capital improvement projects (including bridges) require a Floodplain Development Permit. A conditional or final Letter of Map Revision shall not be required. Up to a one-foot rise in the base flood elevation shall be allowed due to temporary encroachments associated with capital improvement projects, when:
               a. The project is limited as to duration, with the days and dates that the structure or other 
   development will be in the Regulatory Floodway specified in the Floodplain Development Permit;
               b. Accessory structures (i.e. construction trailers) are restricted from the Regulatory          Floodway;
               c. The project limits placement of equipment and material in the Regulatory                                  Floodway to that which is absolutely necessary for the purposes of the project;
               d. The project includes a flood warning system sufficient to allow equipment to be evacuated from the Regulatory Floodway and placed outside the Area of Special Flood Hazard in the event of imminent flood;  
               e. The project applicant identifies any insurable structures affected by temporary changes to the Area of Special Flood Hazard or Base Flood Elevation and notifies owners of any increased risk of flooding; and,
               f. The project applicant is provided with written notification that they may be liable for any flood damages resulting from the temporary encroachment.
C.    Zones with Base Flood Elevations but No Regulatory Floodway.
   (1) In areas within Zone AE on the community’s FIRM where no Regulatory Floodway has been designated, the floodway is the channel of the stream. Encroachments shall be prohibited in the channel or floodway unless all the provisions of 9.706.B are satisfied.
   (2) In Areas of Special Flood Hazard, encroachments shall be prohibited unless it is             demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water-surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
   (3) Applicants of proposed projects that increase the Base Flood Elevation more than one foot shall obtain from FEMA a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) before the project may be permitted. As soon as possible, but no later than six months after project completion, an application for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) shall be submitted by the applicant to FEMA. The applicant is responsible for paying any costs associated with the CLOMR and LOMR process.
     D.   Areas of Special Flood Hazard without Base Flood Elevations.
   (1) When Areas of Special Flood Hazard have been provided, but Base Flood Elevation or floodway data have not been identified by FEMA in a Flood Insurance Study and/or Flood Insurance Rate Maps, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and utilize scientific or historic Base Flood Elevation and Regulatory Floodway data available from a Federal, state, or other source, in order to administer these regulations. If Base Flood Elevations are not available, SubSection (3) below shall apply.
   (2) Where the Floodplain Administrator has obtained Base Flood Elevation data,   Section 9.706(C) and 9.706(E) through (K) shall apply. 
   (3) In Areas of Special Flood Hazard without Base Flood Elevation data no encroachments shall be located in an Area of Special Flood Hazard within an area equal to the width of the stream or 50 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the ordinary high water mark of the stream, unless a Base Flood Elevation is developed by a licensed professional engineer.
E.    Building Design and Construction
Buildings and structures, including manufactured dwellings, within the scope of the Building Codes, including repair of substantial damage and substantial improvement of such existing buildings and structures, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood-resistant construction provisions of these codes.
F.    Below-Grade Crawlspaces.
Below-grade crawlspaces are allowed subject to the following standards as illustrated in FEMA Technical Bulletin 11-01, “Crawlspace Construction for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas”:
   (1) The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Hydrostatic loads and the effects of buoyancy can usually be addressed through the required openings stated in SubSection (2) below. Because of hydrodynamic loads, crawlspace construction is not allowed in areas with flood velocities greater than five feet per second unless the design is reviewed by a qualified design professional, such as a registered architect or professional engineer. Other types of foundations are recommended for these areas.
   (2) The crawlspace is an enclosed area below the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) and, as such, must have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. The bottom of each flood vent opening can be no more than one foot above the lowest adjacent exterior grade.
   (3) Portions of the building below the BFE must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. This includes not only the foundation walls of the    crawlspace used to elevate the building, but also any joists, insulation, or other materials that extend below the BFE. The recommended construction practice is to elevate the bottom of joists and all insulation above BFE.
   (4) Any building utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above BFE or designed so that floodwaters cannot enter or accumulate within the system    components during flood conditions. Ductwork, in particular, must either be placed above the BFE or sealed from floodwaters.
   (5) The interior grade of a crawlspace below the BFE must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade.
   (6) The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall must not exceed four feet     at any point. The height limitation is the maximum allowable unsupported wall height according to the engineering analyses and building code requirements for flood hazard areas.
   (7) There must be an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace. The enclosed area should be drained within a reasonable time after a flood event. The type of drainage system will vary because of the site gradient and other drainage characteristics, such as soil types. Possible options include natural drainage through porous, well-drained soils and drainage systems such as perforated pipes, drainage tiles, or gravel/crushed stone drainage by gravity or mechanical means.
   (8) The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed five feet per second for any crawlspace. For velocities in excess of five feet per second, other foundation types should be used.
G.   Recreational Vehicles.
In all Areas of Special Flood Hazard, Recreational Vehicles that are an allowed use or structure under the land development code must:
   (1) Be placed on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or,
   (2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached structures or addition.
H.   Essential Facilities.
Construction of new essential facilities shall be located outside the limits of the Area of Special Flood Hazard, except that construction of new essential facilities shall be   permissible within the Area of Special Flood Hazard if no feasible alternative site is available. Flood proofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances or priority organic pollutants as defined by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the Base Flood Elevation shall be provided to all essential facilities to the maximum extent possible.
I. Tanks.
New and replacement tanks in an Area of Special Flood Hazard shall either be elevated above the Base Flood Elevation on a supporting structure designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the base flood, or be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty, during conditions of the Design Flood.
 
New and replacement tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be placed a minimum of two feet above Base Flood Elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tank during conditions of the Design Flood.
  J.   Fences and Walls
 New and replacement fencing in an Area of Special Flood Hazard shall be designed to collapse under  conditions of the Base Flood or to allow the passage of water by having flaps or openings in the areas at or below the Base Flood Elevation sufficient to allow flood water and associated debris to pass freely. K.   Other Development, including Accessory Structures, in High Hazard Areas.
All development in high hazard areas (all A zones) for which provisions are not specified in Sections 9.701–9.707 or building codes, shall:
   (1) Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
   (2) Be designed so as not to impede flow of floodwaters under Base Flood conditions;
   (3) If located in a Regulatory Floodway, meet the limitations of Section 9.706.B;
   (4) Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood;
   (5) Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials;
   (6) Have electric service and or mechanical equipment elevated above the Base Flood Elevation (or depth number in AO zones), except for minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements;
   (7) Relief from elevation or dry flood-proofing standards may be granted for new and replacement, or substantially improved accessory structures containing no more than 200 square feet; larger than200 square feet, building codes apply. Such a structure must meet (1) through (6) of this SubSection, and, in addition, shall meet the following standards:
               a. It shall not be used for human habitation and may be used solely for parking                              of vehicles or storage of items having low damage potential when submerged;
               b. Toxic material, oil or gasoline, or any priority persistent pollutant identified                                by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality shall not be stored below Base Flood Elevation, or where no Base Flood Elevation is available, lower than three feet above grade, unless confined in a tank installed in compliance with this Section;
               c. It shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for complying with this requirement must be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect, or:
                           i. Provide a minimum of two openings with a total net area of not less                                                than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject           
                           to flooding;
                           ii. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above the higher of the
                          exterior or interior grade or floor immediately below the                                                        
                          opening; and, 
                          iii. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other                                                  coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both
                          directions without manual intervention.
[Reinstated, Sec. 6, Ord. No.2020-50, Apr. 16, 2020]

 

9.707 Flood Damage Prevention Variance

Variances from the provisions of Sections 9.701–9.706 may be permitted when there are    practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships created in carrying out the provisions. The basis for a variance shall be the physical circumstances or characteristics of a lot; a variance shall not be based on the inhabitants or owners of the property, their economic or financial circumstances, or the condition or situation of structures on the property. The burden is on the applicant to show that the variance is warranted and meets the approval criteria set out herein.
 
The provisions of this Section are not the same as, nor to be confused with, provisions for Exceptions in the Land Development Code.
 
A variance may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Statewide Inventory of Historic Properties without regard to the procedures set forth in this Section.
A.    Variance—Procedure.
   (1) An application for a variance from the Flood Damage Prevention regulations must be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator on the form provided by the City and shall include, at a minimum, the same information required for a Floodplain Development Permit, and an explanation of the basis for the request for a variance.
   (2) Variance requests will be heard by the Planning Commission and be processed in the manner of a Class-C application, using the Class-C procedural requirements in Chapter 10, Article II of the Municipal Code. City will use the same referral agency notification list as is used for Exceptions (Section 10.146).
   (3) Upon consideration of the approval criteria in SubSection B, below, and the purposes of this Section, and finding that the approval criteria can be met, the City approving authority may approve the request and attach such conditions to the granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the purposes of these regulations.
   (4) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a permanent record of all variances and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
B.    Variance—Approval Criteria.
   (1) A variance shall not be issued within a Floodway if any increase in flood levels during the Base Flood discharge would result.    
   (2) A variance shall only be issued upon the:
               a. Determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the                     
               flood hazard, to afford relief;
               b. Showing of good and sufficient cause;
               c. Determination that failure to grant a variance from these regulations would                                    result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and,
               d. Determination that the granting of a variance would not result in increased                                         flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public                                        
              expense; or create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or                                
              conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   (3) In approving a variance, the City approving authority shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other Sections of this Code, and the:
               a. Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
               b. Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
               c. Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and                              
               the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
               d. Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
               e. Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
               f. Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding
              or  erosion damage;
               g. Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
               h. The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and                                          
               floodplain management program for that area;
               i. Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency                            
               vehicles;
               j. Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of                                
               the floodwaters, expected at the site; and,
               k. Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions,                             
               including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as                                         
               sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
   (4) A variance may be issued for a water-dependent use provided that:
               a. the criteria of subsections (1) through (3) of this Section are met; and,
               b. the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages 
               during the Base Flood and that create no additional threats to public safety.
C.    Variance—Decision.
The decision to either grant or deny a variance shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons for such approval or denial. If the variance is granted, the property owner shall be put on notice, along with the written decision, that the permitted building will have its lowest floor below the Base Flood Elevation and that the cost of flood   insurance likely will be commensurate with the increased flood damage risk.
[Reinstated, Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2020-50, Apr. 16, 2020].


9 Stormwater Erosion Control (9.800)

9.800 Stormwater Erosion Control

A.        Purpose.
As required by the City’s National Pollutant Elimination System (NPDES) Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4), the City does hereby proclaim an ordinance to address Stormwater Erosion Control.
B.        Applicability.
A City of Medford Erosion Control Permit is required for all construction projects that result in land disturbance of 7000 square feet or more. For construction projects that disturb one or more acres (or that disturb less than one acre, if part of a “common plan of development or sale” disturbing one or more acres) a NPDES 1200C permit from the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) will also be required.
C.        Standards.
Erosion control plans shall be submitted for review with plans for building permits.
The City of Medford Public Works Engineering Division will review the erosion control plans and issue the Erosion Control Permit with the building permit or grading permit for the project.
Erosion control plans must:
1.         Use the current City of Medford Erosion Control Plan Template
2.         Be approved prior to the beginning of land disturbance activities
3.         Be maintained and updated as site conditions change
4.         Be kept on site and made available for review by the City and DEQ
 
Erosion control measures as shown on the approved plans shall be in place prior to any earthwork being performed and shall be maintained for the duration of the project.
[Reinserted, Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2020-44, Apr. 2, 2020]

9 Tanks (9.810)

9.810 Tanks

Tanks located outside of a building or structure that contain hazardous materials as defined by the current adopted Oregon Structural Specialty Code and in proximity to buildings and structures regulated by such code as to create a hazardous condition to occupants of a building shall be regulated by the City of Medford Building Department.
To determine such hazardous conditions, Chapter 4 of the current adopted Oregon Structural Specialty Code and referenced standards, as well as applicable sections of the current state adopted fire code, shall be used for determining adequate separation type and quantities of hazardous materials contained in tanks for the purpose of maintaining safety to the occupants of a given building or structure.
Other tanks located outside that if structural failure resulted could impose a detrimental load on a building or structure shall also be regulated by the City of Medford Building Department.
The scope of regulation for such tanks shall be limited to structural support of tanks. When determined that hazardous conditions are present, structural support of such tanks shall accommodate all applicable loads as prescribed in Chapter 16 of the current adopted Oregon Structural Specialty Code and referenced standards.
Requirements scoped in the current adopted specialty codes, such as for tanks containing heating oil, shall be regulated by the applicable adopted codes.
This ordinance does not preclude the requirements of other departments such as Planning, Fire and DEQ.
[Added, Sec. 47, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

9 Cell Towers (9.820)

9.820 Cell Towers

 Cellular phone, radio, television, and other telecommunication and broadcast towers shall be regulated in accordance with this ordinance.
Such towers and support structures that are existing and not attached to or supported by a regulated building shall not be regulated.
All new towers and support structures are regulated by the current adopted Oregon Structural Specialty Code and referenced design standards to address all imposed structural loads.
Existing cell towers supported by a building or structure with proposed added or shifted loads that cause an increase in gravity loading by more than 5% shall be analyzed by an Oregon licensed design professional to address the proposed loading. The existing structure and its addition, acting together as a single structure, shall be shown to meet the requirements of Chapter 16 of the current adopted Oregon Structural Specialty Code and referenced standards. Any existing lateral load-carrying structural element whose demand-capacity ratio, with the addition considered, is not more than 10% greater than its demand-capacity ratio with the addition ignored, shall be permitted to remain unaltered.
Existing support structures and equipment that are relocated to another area of the regulated building shall be regulated as a new tower or support structure in accordance with the current adopted Oregon Structural Specialty Code.
[Added, Sec. 48, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

9 Flag Poles (9.830)

9.830 Flag Poles

Flag poles extending to a height of more than 30’ above the supporting grade shall be designed in accordance with the current adopted Oregon Structural Specialty Code.

Flag poles attached to or supported by a regulated building or structure shall be designed for attachments to the building in accordance with the current adopted structural specialty code. The building, whether new or existing, shall be analyzed and designed to accommodate all imposed loads in accordance with the applicable current adopted specialty codes.

This ordinance does not preclude the requirements of other departments such as Planning.
[Added, Sec. 49, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

9 Signs (9.840)

9.840 Signs

Signs not located in a right-of-way shall be regulated in accordance with this ordinance.

Free standing signs not exceeding 20’ in height above the supporting grade shall not be regulated unless the failure of the proposed sign structure could impose a threat to a regulated building or building ingress or egress path.

Signs attached to or supported by a building or structure regulated by the current adopted Oregon Structural Specialty code shall be regulated to ensure that support of and attachment to the building is in accordance with the current adopted Oregon Structural Specialty Code.

This ordinance does not preclude the requirements of other departments such as Planning and ODOT.
[Added, Sec. 50, Ord. No. 2019-133, Dec. 19, 2019.]

9 Property Maintenance Code (9.900 to 9.914)

9.900 Adoption of the International Property Maintenance Code

This article shall be known and may be cited as the Property Maintenance Code of Medford, hereinafter referred to as the “IPMC”, one copy of which is on file in the City of Medford Police Department, Code Enforcement Division.
[Added Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016]
 

9.901 Additions to the International Property Maintenance Code

(1)         The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, published and copyrighted by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted in its entirety, except as added, repealed or amended below, as an ordinance of the City of Medford, to be administered and enforced along with such further amendments contained herein.
 
(2)        When the phrase “the code official shall” is used in the IPMC with respect to enforcement, it refers to the Manager’s discretionary option, rather than a mandatory obligation, to choose the course of action that would be appropriate when a violation of the code is found. The phrase “code official shall” does not impose on the city a mandatory duty to implement particular enforcement procedures.
 
(3)       The following sections are ADDED to the IPMC:
304.13.3  Window Sill Height. Windows in sleeping rooms that are provided to meet emergency escape or rescue requirements shall meet the requirements of the Oregon Residential Specialty Code, Section 310.1.
Exception: Window sill heights constructed in accordance with code requirements in place for sleeping rooms at the time of construction.
 
304.13.4  Ability to Open. Every window required for ventilation or emergency escape shall be capable of being easily opened and held open by window hardware and shall meet the requirements of the Oregon Residential Specialty Code, Section 310.1.4.
 
304.13.5  Minimum Dimensions. Windows in sleeping rooms that are required to meet emergency escape or rescue requirements shall meet the requirements of the Oregon Residential
 
Specialty Code, Section 310.1.1.
Exception: Window dimensions constructed in accordance with code requirements in place for sleeping room at the time of construction. [Added]
 
705.1    Carbon Monoxide Detectors. Carbon monoxide alarms shall be installed, maintained and repaired in residential units in accordance with the Oregon Residential Specialty Code, Section 315.
 
(4) The following sections of the IPMC are REPEALED in their entirety:
102.6               Historic Buildings.
103.3               Deputies.
103.5               Fees
106                  Violations
111                  Means of Appeal
304.14             InsectScreens.
 
(5) The following sections of the IPMC are AMENDED to read as follows:
 
101.1 Title.  These regulations shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code of the City of Medford, hereinafter referred to as the "IPMC." [Amended]
 
102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, changes of occupancy and all other work required under the IPMC shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Oregon Specialty Codes. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of Chapter 9 of the Medford Municipal Code. [Amended]
 
SECTION 103 RESPONSIBILITIES FOR PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTION [Amended]
 
103.1 General. Property maintenance inspection is hereby the responsibility of the Medford Police Department. [Amended]
 
103.4 Liability. The provisions and protections of the Oregon Tort Claims Act, ORS 30.265 et. seq. shall apply to all city officials, agents and employees charged with the enforcement of the IPMC. The IPMC shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any non-city agent or employee, including but not limited to any owner, owner’s agent, builder, contractor, agent or employee of any builder or contractor, or any person owning, operating or controlling any building, structure or premises, for any damages to persons or property caused by defects or violations of this code, nor shall the code enforcement agency or the city be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspections authorized by this code or any permits or certificates issued under this code. [Amended]

110.1 General. The code official shall order the owner of any premises upon which is located any structure, which in the code official's judgment after review is so deteriorated or dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary, or to board up and hold for future repair or to demolish and remove at the owner’s option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of more than six months, the code official shall order the owner to demolish and remove such structure, or board up until future repair. Boarding the building up for future repair shall not extend beyond six months, unless approved by the building official. [Amended]
 
111.1 Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the Unified Board of Appeals, pursuant to Medford Municipal Code 9.662. [Amended]
 
112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be considered to be committing a violation and will be subject to a notice of civil penalty as prescribed in Medford Municipal Code, Chapter 9.660 (2). [Amended]
 
201.3 Terms Defined in Other Codes. Where terms are not defined in the IPMC and are defined in the Oregon Specialty Codes and Chapter 9 of the Medford Municipal Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes. [Amended]
 
SECTION 202. GENERAL DEFINITIONS
Where terms are not defined in the IPMC or other code section and are defined in the Oregon Specialty Codes, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. Whenever the words “premises,” “building” or other similar words are stated in the IPMC, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof.” Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of the IPMC, have the following meanings:
 
ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE.  A condition that can attract children and be detrimental to the health or safety of children whether in a building, on the premises of a building or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes, but is not limited to: abandoned buildings, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, abandoned freezers or refrigerators with self-latching doors, motor vehicles, structurally unsound fences or structures, lumber, trash, fences, debris, or water feature that may prove hazardous for inquisitive minors.
 
BOARDED BUILDING.  An unoccupied or derelict building that has been secured against entry by material such as plywood, boards or other similar material placed over openings that are designed for and/or are required for windows and doors, and which is visible off the premises and is not both lawful and customary to install on an occupied structure.
 
BUILDING. Any structure occupied or intended for any occupancy.
 
DERELICT STRUCTURE. Any structure that meets any one of the following:
(1)  unoccupied and unsecured,
(2) partially constructed without an active building permit,
(3) maintained in a condition that is an imminent threat to public health and safety.
 

DETERIORATION. A lowering in quality of the condition or appearance of a building, structure or parts thereof characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting, or any other evidence of physical decay, neglect, excessive use, or lack of maintenance.

MANAGER. The City Manager or appointed representative(s) who is responsible for supervising, administering and enforcing all aspects of this code.

OWNER. 
The holder of fee title to the property, except the seller on a land sale contract that has not been foreclosed;
A person who is the purchaser of the property on a land sale contract and who has a current right to possession of the property;
A person who is obligated on a mortgage loan or trust deed loan secured by the property and has a current right to possession of the property;
A person who has foreclosed any land sale contract, mortgage, trust deed or lien applicable to the property and has purchased the property at the foreclosure sale; and
Any successor in interest to any of the persons described in subsections (2) through (4) who has a current right to possession of the property.
PARTIALLY CONSTRUCTED. An occupied or vacant structure, or portion thereof, that has been left in a state of partial construction for more than six months or after the expiration of any building permit, or that has not had a required permit inspection within any six-month period.
 
RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEM. Systems which produce energy from sources that do not use up finite natural resources. Examples include, but are not limited to, solar, wind, biomass, geothermal, and micro-hydro systems.
 
UNOCCUPIED. Vacant or not being used for a lawful occupancy. [Amended]
 
302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in accordance with Medford Municipal Code 7.410, 7.420, 7.430 and 7.440. [Amended]
 
Motor Vehicles. Except as provided for in other provisions of the IPMC, no inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled pursuant to Medford Municipal Code 5.505 (2). [Amended]
  
302.8 Defacement of Property. The owner or occupant of the property, or person in charge of property, shall comply with the requirements of Medford Municipal Code 5.519. [Amended]
 
304.3 Premises identification. Each structure to which a street number has been assigned shall have such number displayed in a position easily observed and readable from the public right-of-way as required by the Oregon Fire Code, and maintained. [Amended]
 
304.13.1 Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes. Glazing with holes, cracks, or that is partially or wholly missing shall be replaced within thirty (30) calendar days of the incident that caused the defect. [Amended]
 
401.3 Alternative devices. In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed in Sections 402 and 403 of this code, artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with the Oregon Specialty Codes shall be permitted. [Amended]
 
403.4 Process ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system that is in compliance with the Oregon Specialty Codes shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space.
Exception: Range hoods constructed in accordance with code requirements in place at the time of construction. [Amended]
 
505.1 General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the provisions of the Oregon Specialty Codes. [Amended]
 
505.4 Water heating facilities.  Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a temperature of not less than 120°F (49°C). A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom (or in a closet serving that room), or any other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided (exception only applies to "other occupied room".) An approved combination temperature and pressure- relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters. [Amended]
 
602.2 Residential Occupancies.  Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room year-round temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section. Portable space heating devices shall not be used to meet the dwelling heat requirements of this code. No inverted or open flame fuel-burning heater shall be permitted. All heating devices or appliances shall be of an approved type. [Amended]
 
602.3 Heat Supply. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a minimum room temperature of 68°F (20°C) at a point 3 feet (914 mm) above the floor and 2 feet (610 mm) from exterior walls in all habitable rooms at the design temperature. [Amended]
 
602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces.  Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat to maintain a year-round temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) during the period the spaces are occupied. [Amended]
 
603.1 Mechanical appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function. Mechanical ventilation systems for range hoods and bathrooms shall be maintained in sound working order meeting manufacturer specifications for operation and function. [Amended]
 
604.2 Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with the Oregon Specialty Codes. Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase electrical service having a rating of not less than 60 amperes. [Amended]
 
606.1 General. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained in compliance with the Oregon Elevator Specialty Code. The most current certificate of inspection shall be on display at all times within the elevator or attached to the escalator or dumbwaiter, be available for public inspection in the office of the building operator or be posted in a publicly conspicuous location approved by the code official. The inspection and tests shall be performed at not less than the periodic intervals listed in the Oregon Elevator Specialty Code, except where otherwise specified by the authority having jurisdiction. [Amended]
 
702.1 General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the Oregon Specialty Codes. [Amended]
 
702.2 Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the Oregon Specialty Codes. [Amended]
 
702.3 Locked Doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms to that permitted by the Oregon Specialty Codes. [Amended]
 
704.1  General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the Oregon Specialty Codes. [Amended]
 
704.2  Smoke Alarms. Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in Groups  R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated in Group R, regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations:
1.  On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms.
2. In each room used for sleeping purposes.
3. In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level. Single or multiple–station smoke alarms shall be installed in other groups in accordance with the Oregon Specialty Codes. [Amended]
[Added Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]
 

9.902 Responsibility

Unless otherwise provided for, the Manager shall be responsible for the ultimate enforcement of all of the provisions of the IPMC. The Manager may appoint such enforcement officers, technical assistants, inspectors and other employees as may be necessary for the administration of the IPMC. For the purpose of the IPMC, any person so appointed will be deemed a “code official” as defined in the IPMC. The Manager is authorized to designate an employee who shall exercise all the powers of the Manager during the temporary absence or disability of the Manager.
Where work is required to be done to correct violations under the IPMC any and all permits required for such work by the Building Code shall be obtained. All final inspections shall be approved for the associated permits prior to the violations being considered resolved.
[Added Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]
 

9.903  Modifications

In the event of extreme hardships involved in carrying out provisions of the IPMC relating to external conditions and derelict structures, the Manager shall have the right to vary or modify the provisions of the IPMC upon application of an owner, provided that the spirit and intent of the law is observed and that the public health and safety is assured.
[Added Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]
 

9.904 Emergency Repair

The use of tarps or similar material for the purpose of an emergency repair, or temporarily in place of a customary building component such as a roof, siding or a door, shall not exceed 90 days in any consecutive 12 month period; provided, however, that this subsection is subject to, and does not supersede, the requirements of the Building Code and Fire Code. The use of tarps or similar material in place of a customary building component is not permitted under the Building Code.
[Added Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]
 

9.905 Weather Proofing and Screens

Where windows and doors have been sealed by plastic or other materials for weather proofing, said materials shall be maintained in a workmanlike manner. Window and door screens, while not required by the IPMC, shall be maintained in a sound working condition.
[Added Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]
 

9.906 Derelict Structures Prohibited

Derelict structures are prohibited.
[Added Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]

9.907 Closing and Securing of Derelict Structures.

The Manager may order appropriate measures to render a derelict structure secure from entry. The securing of the structure shall be by methods calculated to render entry very difficult, including, but not limited to, the use of lag screws in the boarding of entry points, instead of nailing.  In order to perform the function or duty authorized or required under this section, city representatives and their agents shall have the right at reasonable times to enter upon the property and render a derelict structure secure from entry. If consent to inspect or secure the property is refused, the City shall apply for an inspection warrant. The costs incurred by the city in boarding or securing a derelict structure may be assessed to the property owner and collected as costs of abatement under Medford Municipal Code 5.520.
[Added Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]

9.908 Derelict Structure Registration

(1)  The Manager shall maintain a list of derelict structures.
(2)  The owner of a derelict structure shall register the structure with the Manager within 10 calendar days of the Manager’s written direction to register.  Registration shall be completed on forms provided by the Manager, and shall include:
The Manager shall maintain a list of derelict structures.
The owner of a derelict structure shall register the structure with the Manager within 10 calendar days of the Manager's written direction to register.  Registration shall be completed on forms provided by the Manager, and shall include:
(a) the location of the property;
(b) the ownership of the property, including address, phone number, and email address;
(c) the expected period of its vacancy;
(d) a schedule for inspection and maintenance of the property during the period of vacancy;
(e)  the agent responsible for inspection and maintenance, including address, phone number, and email address;
(f)  a plan for re-occupancy and use of the structure, or its demolition; and
(g) a provision whereby the owner of the structure shall indemnify, defend and hold the city harmless from any and all claims asserted against the city by third parties stemming from injuries to persons or to property as a result of the condition or accessibility of the structure.
(3)  The registration and plan are subject to review and approval by the Manager.
(4)  Any change in the information provided pursuant to this subsection shall be given to the Manager within 30 calendar days of the change. When the owner believes the structure is no longer derelict the owner shall contact the Manager and request an inspection to determine that the structure is no longer derelict.
[Added Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]

9.909 Temporary Waivers of Enforcement Action

(1)  The Manager may issue a temporary waiver of enforcement action,  which  will  give  a period of time that the Manager determines is reasonable, but no longer than six months, to correct the violations found. The length of time given will depend on several factors, such as the extent and cost of the repairs, seriousness of the conditions, financial capacity of the owner, and the time of year. During the waiver period, the affected residential rental unit(s) may not be occupied.
(2)  The Manager may revoke the waiver if any of the conditions that allowed the owner to qualify for a waiver change. Because the waiver is granted to a specific property owner, the waiver automatically terminates upon change in ownership. The Manager may, assist the owner in obtaining information regarding financial or other assistance to make the necessary repairs.
[Added Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]
 

9.910 Hardship Waivers of Enforcement Action

(1)  The Manager may issue a hardship waiver of enforcement action only if the owner currently Legally resides on the property. A hardship waiver may be issued only in those instances when the owner is found by the Manager to be over 65 years of age, disabled, or classified as “very low income” under the US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) standards. Hardship waivers shall not exceed three years. The income level of the owner will be reevaluated before the end of the three year waiver period. Application for a hardship waiver must be filed with the Manager in writing. The Manager may require the owner to supply all information necessary to demonstrate the owner’s eligibility for the waiver. The owner must submit a separate application for waiver for each notice of complaint and violation.
(2)  The Manager may revoke the waiver if any of the conditions that allowed the owner to qualify for a waiver change. Because the waiver is granted to a specific property owner, the waiver automatically terminates upon change in ownership or tenure of the property.
(3)  The owner may reapply for new hardship waivers to become effective at the expiration of the term of any hardship waiver previously granted.
(4)  The  Manager  may  assist  the  owner  in obtaining  information  concerning  financial  or other assistance to make the necessary repairs.
[Added Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]
 

9.911 Penalty and Appeal Rights

Violation of any section of the IPMC/Oregon Specialty codes shall be subject to the violation, penalties and remedies of Medford Municipal Code Section 9.660 to 9.662.
[Added Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]
 

9.912 Liens and Assessments

Abatement costs, late payment charges, reinspection fees, or other fees or charges imposed under the IPMC, shall be paid within 30 calendar days of imposition of the fees. The City Council may order that the said charge be imposed as a special assessment against the real property involved. If the Council orders that the charge be assessed against the property, it shall impose the assessment by ordinance, cause the same to be entered in the docket of City Liens, and thereafter the said assessment shall constitute a lien against said property, enforceable in the same manner as liens for street improvements and shall bear interest at the rate specified in section 3.470(2) of the Medford Code, beginning 15 days after the entry of the lien in the lien docket.
[Added Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]
 

9.913 Application of Other Codes

Nothing in the IPMC shall be construed to relieve a person from complying with any federal, state or local law, including any other provisions of the Oregon Specialty Codes, or the requirement to obtain all necessary permits and approvals.
[Added Sec. 17, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]
 

9.914 Coordination of Enforcement

The Manager shall make reasonable effort to arrange for the coordination of enforcement efforts and any necessary inspections in an effort to minimize conflicts between the activities of affected city departments.
[Added Sec. 18, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]

10 Land Development Code

7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 1/28
10 Article 1-General Provisions (10.000 to 10.093)
10.000 Title
"This chapter shall be known and referred to in its entirety as the "Land Development Code for the
City of Medford".
10.005 Purpose
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of all
residents of the City of Medford through the regulation and management of the use and
development of land within the city. It is the specific intent of this chapter to:
(1) Implement and supplement the Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Comply with all applicable Oregon Revised Statutes as pertains to the development and use of
land.
(3) Manage the growth and physical development of the city consistent with its ability to provide
adequate and cost effective public services.
(4) Designate, regulate and restrict the development, location and use of land and buildings for
commercial, industrial, residential and other uses.
(5) Provide standards for the development of residential lands as necessary to assure that all people
may have access to decent, sound and sanitary housing.
(6) Protect residents of the city from identifiable adverse impacts resulting from development, insofar
as it is practical to do so.
(7) Establish street standards that will effectively serve all areas and residential neighborhoods of
the City and that will minimize congestion, safety hazards, and other adverse traffic impacts.
10.007 Structure of this Chapter
This chapter is in six parts. The provisions of Article I shall apply to the general provisions,
administration and enforcement of the entire chapter. The provisions of Article II shall apply to the
specific procedural and administrative requirements for a development permit. The provisions of
Article III shall establish standards for the regulation of development by zoning districts. The
provisions of Article IV shall apply to the establishment and application of development standards for
public improvements. The provisions of Article V shall apply to the establishment and development
standards for site improvements, and the provisions of Article VI shall apply to the establishment and
provisions for the regulation of signs.
10.008 Scope and Compliance
Land may be used, developed by division or improvement, and a structure may be constructed,
reconstructed, or materially altered as to use or appearance only as this chapter permits. Each
development proposal shall comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter. The requirements
of this chapter shall apply to the applicant for a development permit and to the applicant's
successors in interest in the development of any portion thereof as set forth in this chapter.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 2/28
10.009 Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan and Law
Except where specific reference is made to the Comprehensive Plan, this chapter shall be deemed
to contain all criteria and requirements necessary for compliance with the Comprehensive Plan.
10.010 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions and rules of construction set forth shall prevail, except
when the context clearly requires otherwise:
(1) Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses and derivative forms.
(2) Words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular.
(3) The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the feminine gender shall include the
masculine.
(4) The word "shall" is mandatory.
(5) The word "may" is permissive.
(6) The word "person" includes individuals, firms, corporations, associations, trusts, local agency,
city, county, state or federal government or any district or division thereof.
(7) The word "City" shall mean the City of Medford.
(8) The word "Council" shall mean the City Council of the City of Medford.
(9) The words "Planning Commission" shall mean the Planning Commission of the City of Medford.
(10) Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the
context with which they are used in this chapter. Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, 11th
edition, shall be considered as providing ordinarily accepted meanings.
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2012-32, March 1, 2012.]
10.012 Definitions, Specific
When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings as herein ascribed:
Abutting. Having a common border with, or being separated from such common border by, an alley,
easement, or right-of-way.
Access. A means of pedestrian or vehicular ingress and egress to a property or use as required by
this chapter.
Accessory dwelling unit (ADU). A detached or attached dwelling unit that is additional and auxiliary
to a single-family dwelling, and is on the same tax lot.
Accessway. An interconnecting paved right-of-way that provides pedestrian and/or bicycle passage
through blocks from street to street.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 3/28
Addition. Addition is an extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or structure.
Adjacent. To be near or close to, including abutting and adjoining.
Administrative mapping category. A designation for tracking and mapping parcels that have unique
circumstances or conditions associated with them, and is not a zoning district. (See Sections 10.409
through 10.413.)
Agriculture. The use of land for farming, pasturage, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and the
necessary accessory uses for preparing and storing agricultural products; provided, however, that
the operation of any such accessory use shall coincide with normal agricultural activities; and,
provided further, that the above uses shall not include the operation of a dairy, hog farm, feed lot or
other commercial feeding of animals. Agriculture is classified as either intensive or passive per
Section 10.804(1).
Agricultural Building. A structure associated with agriculture and used in the agricultural operations
for the storage, maintenance or repair of machinery and equipment required of the operations; or for
the raising and harvesting of crops; or in the feeding, breeding, management, or the production of,
livestock, poultry, furbearing animals or honeybees; or any other agricultural or horticultural use or
animal husbandry; or any combination thereof, including the preparation and storage of products
raised on such farm land for human or animal use and disposal by marketing or otherwise, except
for the operation of a dairy, hog farm, feed lot, or other commercial feeding of animals.
Agricultural Building does not include: (a) a dwelling; (b) a structure in which 10 or more persons are
present at any one time unless for growing plants; (c) a structure regulated by the state fire marshal
pursuant to ORS Chapter 476; (d) a structure used by the public; (e) a structure located in a
floodplain requiring flood insurance per Sections 4001 to 4127, title 42, United States Code (the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968); (f) a structure for on-site product sales as defined herein; or
(g) a small winery as defined herein.
Alter or alteration. Any change, addition or modification in construction or occupancy.
Animal hospital. A place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are
cared for during the time of such treatment. Includes use as a kennel if such use is limited to shorttime
boarding incidental to the hospital use.
Appeal. A means of obtaining review of a decision, determination, order, or failure to act pursuant to
the terms of this chapter as expressly authorized by the provisions of Article II, Section 10.140.
Approving Authority. The designated official or official body charged with the duty of investigating
and reporting on the design, improvement and use of proposed developments of real property, the
imposing of requirements or conditions thereon and the authority to approve, conditionally approve
or disapprove development permits and land use reviews as per this chapter.
Area, Gross. The total area of all lots within a project`s boundaries. If the project is adjacent to an
existing public street, then the boundaries of the project shall be extended to the center line of the
right-of-way, and that area within the right-of-way included in the gross area calculation. (See Street
Right of Way image at bottom of page)
Area, Natural Unbuildable. Those natural areas unsuitable for building [i.e., wetlands, slopes over 30
percent, and creeks (from top of bank to top of bank)]. Does not include man-made non-buildable
areas such as setbacks.
Area, Non-development. Includes reserve acreage, natural unbuildable areas, and oversize lots
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 4/28
allowed in Section 10.702(3)(a).
Assessor. The county assessor of Jackson County.
Attic. That part of a building which is immediately below, and wholly or partly within, the roof framing.
Average daily traffic (ADT). The total volume passing a point or segment of a street, in both
directions, for one day.
Basement. Any floor level below the first story in a building, except that a floor level in a building
having only one floor level shall be classified as a basement unless such floor level qualifies as a
first story. (See definition "Story, first")
Bed and Breakfast. A single-family dwelling, or part thereof, other than a motel, hotel or multiple
family dwelling, where traveler's accommodations and breakfast are provided for a fee on a daily or
weekly room rental basis, not to exceed fourteen (14) consecutive days.
Bedroom. A room marketed, designed, or otherwise likely to function primarily for sleeping.
Beekeeping Terms.
Bee. Any stage of the common domestic honey bee, Apis mellifera.
Beekeeper. A person who raises honeybees; apiculturist.
Beekeeping. The rearing and breeding of honeybees; apiculture.
Colony. A hive and related equipment and appurtenances including bees, comb, honey,
pollen, and brood.
Hive. A shelter constructed for housing a colony of honey bees.
Swarm. A group of bees when migrating with a queen to establish a new colony.
Bicycle facilities. Improvements which provide for the needs of bicyclists including bicycle paths,
lanes, routes and bicycle parking facilities.
Bicycle parking facilities. Space and improvements dedicated exclusively for use of securing
bicycles including, but not limited to, marked spaces, structures including lockers, racks and
enclosures, and areas providing maneuvering space for access to parking spaces and
improvements.
Boarding or lodging house. A residence containing not more than five guest rooms where rent is
paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. If a residence is not owner occupied, no more than two
guest rooms shall be offered for rent. If a residence is owner occupied, no more than five guest
rooms shall be offered for rent. "Rent" shall be defined in accordance with ORS 90.100(33). This
definition is meant to be consistent with Oregon Structural Specialty Code Section 310.2.
Boundary line. A line bounding all contiguous lands held in common ownership. The term "boundary
line" shall be synonymous with property line.
Brewery. An establishment in which the primary business function is the production of beer for offsite
sale and distribution. The use requires a brewery-public house license issued by the State of
Oregon (ORS 471.200).
Bufferyard. A unit of land, together with a specified type and amount of planting thereon, and any
structures which may be required to mitigate adverse impacts between adjacent land uses.
Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 5/28
Building, accessory. A building which: (1) is subordinate to a principal structure or a principal use; (2)
is subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal structure or use served; (3) is located on
the same lot as the principal structure or use served except as otherwise expressly authorized by
provisions of this code; and (4) is customarily incidental to the principal structure or use. Any portion
of a principal structure devoted or intended to be devoted to an accessory use is not an accessory
structure.
Building front. That exterior wall of a building which faces the front lot line of the lot on which it is
located.
Building line. A line on a lot, generally parallel to a lot line or street right-of-way line, located a
sufficient distance therefrom to provide the minimum yards required by this code. The building line
delimits the area in which buildings are permitted, subject to all applicable provisions of this code.
Building, principal. A building in which is conducted, or in which is intended to be conducted, the
main or principal use of the lot on which it is located.
Business complex. A group of four or more commercial establishments having common parking
facilities.
Candlepower. The amount of light that will illuminate a surface one (1) foot distant from a light
source to an intensity of one (1) footcandle. Maximum (peak) candlepower is the largest amount of
candlepower emitted by any lamp, light source, or luminaire.
Carport. A permanent roofed structure having no enclosed uses overhead that is a portion of a
principal residential building or is an accessory building. A carport is designed to shelter one or
more motor vehicles, is open at the vehicular entry, and is entirely open on two or more sides.
Cellar. The space wholly or partly below street level, with more than one-half of its height (measured
from floor to ceiling) below street level.
Child day care. The care, supervision, and guidance, on a regular basis, of a child, unaccompanied
by a parent, guardian, or custodian, provided during part of the 24 hours of the day, in a place other
than the child¡¯s home, with or without compensation.
Child day care center. A child day care facility that is certified to care for 13 or more children; or, if
certified to care for fewer than 13 children, is not a child day care home as defined herein. It may
include a nursery school, preschool, kindergarten, child play school, before or after school care, or a
child development center; but not any facility providing care that is primarily educational, unless
provided to a preschool child for more than four hours a day; nor any facility providing supervised
training in a specific subject, such as dancing, drama, music or religion; nor an incident of group
athletic or social activities sponsored by or under the supervision of an organized club or hobby
group; nor any facility operated by a school district, political subdivision of the state, or a
governmental agency.
Child day care home. A child day care facility located in a building constructed as a single-family
dwelling that is certified to care for no more than 16 children at any one given time, and where care
is provided by a family day care provider in the provider¡¯s home in the family living quarters. This
definition is meant to be consistent with ORS 657A.440.
Community services facilities. Facilities providing public or private community services, such as
meeting halls, telecommuting centers, playgrounds, golf courses, indoor recycling collection
facilities, tennis or swimming clubs, adult day care, private or public recreational facilities, or similar
uses.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 6/28
Comprehensive Plan. The City of Medford Comprehensive Plan along with all accompanying maps,
tables, and plan elements as adopted by the council, and all amendments thereto.
Concealed Wireless Communications Facility. A wireless communication facility which is
architecturally integrated with existing buildings, structures, and landscaping, including height, color,
style, massing, placement, design, and shape, and which incorporates stealth capabilities so that it
does not stand out as a wireless communications facility when viewed with the naked eye.
Condominium unit. A part of the property consisting of a building or one or more rooms occupying
one or more floors of a building or a part or parts thereof, intended for any type of independent
ownership, the boundaries of which are described pursuant to ORS 94.029(1,c) and with direct exit
to a public street or to a common area or areas leading to a public street.
Congregate living facility. Any institution, residential facility for elderly and disabled persons, or other
place which undertakes to provide housing, meals and the availability of other supportive services.
Construction, new. Means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of this ordinance.
Construction, start of. Means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (other than
a mobile home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the state of
excavation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading,
and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms.
Contiguous. See "Abutting".
Continuing care retirement community. A retirement community that furnishes housing and other
hospitality services, including nursing, assistance with daily living, or other health-related services,
for a period greater than one year, whether provided in the retirement community, or in another
setting designated by the residency agreement.
Court. A space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade level on a lot and
bounded on three (3) or more sides by walls of a building.
Coverage. The portion of a parcel or lot`s land area covered by structures.
Craft Alcohol Production Terms. The following definitions apply to the craft alcohol industry, which
includes the uses of brewery-public house, microdistillery and small winery.
Alcoholic spirits. An alcoholic beverage, which is produced through the distillation of a mixture,
that is produced from alcoholic fermentation. Some common examples include: brandy, gin,
rum, tequila, vodka, or whiskey.
Brewery- Public House. An establishment where beer is brewed and served on site. The use
requires a brewery-public house license issued by the State of Oregon (ORS 471.200).
Craft Alcohol Production. This shall include the uses as defined by the definitions: brewerypublic
house, microdistillery and small winery.
Microdistillery. An establishment where the primary business functions are the on-site sales of
alcoholic spirits produced on site. The use requires a distillery license issued by the State of
Oregon (ORS 471.230).
Small Winery. A facility that produces wine, with a maximum annual production of 50,000
gallons, including but not limited to areas used for production, shipping and distribution,
wholesale and retail sales, tasting, crushing, fermenting, blending, aging, storage, bottling,
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 7/28
administrative functions and warehousing. The use requires a winery license issued by the
State of Oregon (ORS 471.223).
Cul-de-sac. A dead-end street with a circular area, or turning bulb at the end. A cul-de-sac is
permitted subject to Section 10.450.
Daycare, Canine. A facility that looks after other people's dogs for individual periods of less than
twenty-four hours each. Facility activities may include feeding, cleaning, training, play, and
exercise. Activities do not include lodging, animal sales, breeding services or veterinary care.
Dedication. The transfer of property interests from private to public ownership for a public purpose.
The transfer may be of fee simple interest or of a less than fee interest, including an easement.
Design. The term "design" may include: (1) Street alignment, grade and width. (2) Drainage and
sanitary facilities and utilities, including the alignment and grade thereof. (3) The location and size of
all easements and rights-of-way. (4) Lot size and configuration. (5) Traffic access. (6) Grading. (7)
Land dedication for park or recreational purposes. (8) Such other specific requirements necessary to
assure that a development proposal will conform to the intent of this chapter and the city's
comprehensive plan. (9) Landscaping.
Density, gross. The quotient of the total number of dwelling units divided by the gross site area.
Commonly expressed as dwelling units per acre.
Detention. The temporary storage of stormwater runoff from development, which is normally
released at a slower rate than it is collected.
Developer. A person, firm, corporation, partnership, syndicate, local agency, city, county, state or
federal government or any district of or division thereof, who or which causes the development of
real property and is the owner of record or owner under contract to purchase or lease for purposes
of development, the real property to be developed or improved.
Development. The improvement of a parcel of land; including partitioning or subdividing of any
improved or unimproved real property, for any purpose, and by any person, association, or other
entity.
Development permit. The written acknowledgment by the city that a specific development proposal
has complied with all required land use reviews determined necessary for development.
Distillery. An establishment in which the primary business function is the production of alcoholic
spirits for off-site sale and distribution. The use requires a distillery license issued by the State of
Oregon (ORS 471.230).
Drainage. The removal of surface water or ground water from land by drains, grading, or other
means. Drainage includes the control of runoff to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and
after development and includes the means necessary for the prevention or alleviation of flooding.
Duplex dwellings. Two (2) attached dwelling units that form one (1) structure, either on an individual
tax lot or with each unit on a separate tax lot.
Dwelling. Any building or portion thereof which contains not more than one dwelling unit.
Dwelling unit. Any building or portion thereof which contains living facilities, including provisions for
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation for not more than one family. A dwelling unit may be further
described as either attached or detached, and single-family or multiple-family.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 8/28
Dwelling, attached. A dwelling unit which is one of two (2) or more adjoining dwelling units, each of
which is separated from the others by one (1) or more unpierced walls or floor from ground to roof.
Dwelling, detached. A single dwelling unit having no roof, wall, or floor in common with any other
dwelling unit.
Easement. Authorization by a property owner to another person to use any designated part of his
property for a specific use.
Easement, Minimum Access. See Section 10.430A(1), Minimum Access Easement. Also refer to
Table IV-1, Medford Street Cross-Sections Dimensions.
Emergency Shelter. Any facility, the primary purpose of which is to provide permanent facilities that
are used as a temporary or transitional shelter for the homeless in general or for specific populations
of the homeless. See SIC Classification 832.
Erosion. The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice, and/or gravity.
Event of public interest. A carnival, circus, rodeo, animal show and/or rides, and other occasional
amusement, sporting event, or show held in a parking lot, stadium, athletic field, arena, auditorium,
or similar permanently established place of assembly.
Excavate. To remove from existing grade any sand, rock, gravel, or other like material.
Exceptions. Permission to depart from the literal requirements of this code granted pursuant to
Article II, Section 10.186.
Exterior storage. Outdoor storage of fuel, raw materials, products, and equipment. In the case of
lumberyards, exterior storage includes all impervious materials stored outdoors. In the case of truck
terminals, exterior storage includes all trucks, truck beds, and truck trailers stored outdoors.
Farm. Land used for agriculture, as defined herein.
Fence. A vertical structure providing separation between yard spaces.
Filling. The depositing of land, whether submerged or not, of sand, gravel, earth, or other materials
of any composition.
Fish-bearing stream - A stream inhabited at any time of the year by anadromous or game fish
species, or fish that are listed as threatened or endangered species under the federal or state
Endangered Species Acts.
Floor area. The sum of the gross floor area for each of a building's stories measured from the
exterior limits of the faces of the structure. The floor area of a building includes basement floor area
and includes attic floor area only if the attic floor area meets the Uniform Building Code standards for
habitable floor area. It does not include courts, unenclosed porches, and vent shafts.
Floor area ratio. An intensity measure expressed as the ratio derived by dividing the total floor area
of a building by the lot area.
Footcandle. A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of which are one (1) foot from a
uniform point source of one (1) candle.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 9/28
Footprint. The total flat surface area a building covers on land, excluding unenclosed areas and
items not considered structures.
Garage. A building, or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for the parking and storage of
motor vehicles.
Garage sale. Garage sale or yard sale. A retail sale operation of limited duration, conducted on the
premises of a dwelling by the residents to dispose of their surplus clothing and household items
(See Section 10.832 Garage Sales and Yard Sales).
Glare. The brightness of a light source which causes eye discomfort.
Grade (adjacent ground elevation). The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the
ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line or, when the
property line is more than 5 feet from the building, between the building and a line 5 feet from the
building.
Gross Habitable Floor Area. The cumulative floor area of a space for living purposes including,
working, sleeping, eating, cooking, or recreation, or a combination thereof.
Ground floor wall area. The area of the facade between two feet and eight feet above the adjacent
exterior grade or public sidewalk, whichever is higher.
Guest is any person renting or occupying a room for sleeping purposes.
Guest house. An accessory building designed, constructed and used to provide temporary sleeping
accommodations for guests, or for members of the same family as that occupying the main
structure. A guest house contains no kitchen or kitchen facilities.
Guest room is any room or rooms used or intended to be used by a guest for sleeping purposes.
Every 100 square feet of superficial floor area in a dormitory shall be considered to be a guest room.
Highway. A transportation facility intended for interregional vehicular transportation, usually under
the state jurisdiction (See Section 10.428, Higher-Order Street Classification System).
Homeless. Individual(s) or families who are experiencing one or more of the following living
conditions:
(1) Living in a place not meant for human habitation;
(2) Living in an emergency shelter or in transitional housing;
(3) At risk of imminently (within 14 days or less) losing their primary nighttime residence,
which may include hotels/motels or sleeping in a residence as a temporary guest, and lack the
resources or support networks to remain in housing;
(4) Unstably housed and likely to remain unstably housed;
(5) Attempting to flee domestic violence, have no other residence, and lack the resources or
support networks to obtain permanent housing; or
(6) At risk to exposure of extreme weather conditions.
Homeless Shelter. See Emergency Shelter or SIC Classification 832.
Home occupation. A vocational or commercial use conducted entirely within a building, which use is
clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and which complies
with the provisions of this code.
Hospital. An establishment with an organized medical staff, with permanent facilities that include
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 10/28
inpatient beds, and with medical services, including physician services and continuous nursing
services, to provide diagnosis and medical or surgical treatment primarily for, but not limited to,
acutely ill patients and accident victims, or to provide treatment for the mentally ill, or to provide
treatment in special inpatient care facilities such as rehabilitation centers, college infirmaries,
chiropractic facilities, facilities for the treatment of alcoholism or drug abuse, freestanding hospice
facilities, infirmaries for the homeless, or other inpatient care facilities meeting the requirements of
ORS 441.065.
Hotel. Any building containing six (6) or more guest rooms intended or designed to be rented for
temporary occupation by guests for the purpose of sleeping. Includes customary hotel services such
as linen, maid service, and the use and upkeep of furniture.
Household. All persons who occupy an individual dwelling unit as separate living quarters. Separate
living quarters are those in which the occupants live and eat separately from any other persons in
the building and which have direct access from the outside of the building or through a common
entry. The occupants may be a single family, one person living alone, two or more families living
together, or any other group of related or unrelated persons who share living arrangements.
Impervious surface. Impervious surfaces are those surface areas, which either prevent or retard
saturation of water into the land surface, and/or cause water to run off the land surface in greater
quantities or at an increased rate of flow from that present under conditions pre-existent to
development. Common impervious surfaces include but are not limited to rooftops, concrete or
asphalt streets, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots or storage areas and
graveled, oiled, macadam or other surfaces which similarly impact the natural saturation or runoff
patterns which existed prior to development.
Impervious surface, on lot. The total amount of impervious surface which is present on a lot.
Impervious surface ratio. A measure of the intensity of land use which is determined by dividing the
total area of all impervious surfaces on a site by the site area.
Improvement. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real property including but not
limited to buildings or other structures, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
Improvement, substantial, means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either: (1) before the
improvement or repair is started; or, (2) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored,
before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, "substantial improvement" is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
Institutional uses. Public and quasi-public uses such as government offices, fire stations, convention
or community centers, auditoriums, post offices, public and private schools and colleges (not
including business or commercial schools), libraries, museums, utilities, park-n-ride lots, churches,
religious or charitable institutions, facilities for organizations and clubs, and cemeteries,
mausoleums, columbariums, and crematories.
Junk, salvage or wrecking yard. A place where waste, discharged or salvaged materials are bought,
sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including auto wrecking yards, house
wrecking yards, used lumber yards, and places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking and
structural steel materials and equipment; but not including such places where such uses are
conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building; and not including pawn shops and
establishments for the sale, purchase, or storage of used furniture and household equipment, used
cars in operative condition, or salvaged materials incidental to manufacturing operations.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 11/28
Jurisdictional delineation - A delineation, approved by the Oregon Department of State Lands, and
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers if required, of the wetland boundary.
Kennel. A facility: (1) In which dogs are given training for which a fee is charged; or (2) Operated,
not for profit, and intended to provide temporary care for lost, strayed or abandoned animals; or (3)
In which dogs, which are not licensed under ORS 609.100 (1) are kept, when such dogs are kept for
breeding or for sale; or (4) Which is a business conducted for the purpose of selling and/or boarding
dogs or cats.
Land Development Committee. A land use development review and advisory committee comprised
of representatives from all referral agencies as identified in Article II, Section 10.112.
Land division. The act of dividing land into two (2) or more parcels or lots when such area exists as a
unit, or contiguous units of land held under single ownership.
Lawfully established unit of land. A lot or parcel created pursuant to ORS 92.010 to 92.192 or
another unit of land created in compliance with all applicable planning, zoning,and subdivision or
partition ordinances and regulations or by deed or land sales contract, if there were no applicable
planning, zoning, subdivision, or partition ordinances or regulations. Lawfully established unit of
land does not mean a unit of land created solely to establish a separate tax account.
Legal Description. The identification of real property by metes and bounds or lot and block
description.
Level of service (LOS). A qualitative measure describing operational conditions within a traffic
stream; generally described in terms of such factors as speed and travel time, freedom to maneuver,
traffic interruptions, comfort and convenience, delay, and safety.
Livestock. Livestock shall mean any of the following animals: horse, cow, sheep, goat, swine, rabbit,
donkey, and mule.
Local agricultural area. The area within 125 miles of the Medford Urban Growth Boundary.
Local Wetlands Inventory (LWI) - Report entitled A Local Wetlands Inventory and Oregon
Freshwater Assessment Method Analysis, City of Medford, October 1995" and any subsequent
revisions.
Locally significant wetland - Wetland sites that provide functions or exhibit characteristics that are
pertinent to community planning decisions made at the local level. Locally significant wetlands are
as determined by OAR 141-86-350. The Medford Comprehensive Plan specifies the optional
wetlands, if any, determined to be locally significant.
Long term care facility. A permanent facility with inpatient beds that provides medical services and/or
treatment for two or more unrelated patients; includes skilled nursing facilities, which primarily
provide skilled nursing care and related services for patients who require medical or nursing care, or
rehabilitation services for injured, disabled or sick persons; and intermediate care facilities, which
provide, on a regular basis, health-related care and services to individuals who do not require the
degree of care and treatment that a hospital or skilled nursing facility is designed to provide, but
who, because of their mental or physical condition, require care and services above the level of
room and board; adult foster care homes with residents over 60 years of age; and residential care
facilities (having more than 15 residents).
Lot. A unit of land created by the division of real property (Same as Parcel).
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 12/28
Lot area. The area contained within the property lines of a lot.
Lot, corner. A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection.
Lot depth. The horizontal distance between the front and rear property lines of a lot measured along
a line midway between the side property lines.
Lot, flag. A lot or parcel that has access to a street, by means of a narrow strip of the same lot
(called the "flag pole"). Flag lots are permitted subject to Section 10.450.
Lot frontage. The width of the street lot line. When a lot has more than one street lot line, each street
lot line shall meet the minimum lot frontage requirements of this code.
Lot/Parcel Consolidation. (See Property Line Adjustment)
Lot line. (See Property Line).
Lot line, rear. That lot line which is most nearly parallel to and most distant from the front lot line. In
the case of lots with frontage on more than one road or street, the rear lot line shall be opposite the
lot line along which the lot takes access to the road or street.
Lot line, side. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
Lot line, street. In the case of a lot abutting a street, the lot line separating such lot from such street.
Lot, through. A lot, which has a street, abutting both the front and rear yards.
Lot width. The perpendicular bisect of the lot depth measurement.
Luminaire. A complete lighting unit consisting of a light source and all necessary mechanical,
electrical, and decorative parts.
Maintain. To cause or allow to continue in existence; to preserve and care for a structure,
improvement, condition, or area to such an extent that it remains attractive, safe, and installed, [or]
constructed, or [as] required.
Manufactured dwelling. A structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has
sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used
for residential purposes and that was constructed in accordance with federal manufactured housing
construction and safety standards and regulations in effect at the time of construction; which arrives
at a site complete and ready for occupancy so that it may be used with or without a permanent
foundation.
Manufactured dwelling park. Any place created in 2000 or later where four or more manufactured
dwellings are located within 500 feet of one another on a lot, tract or parcel of land under the same
ownership, the primary purpose of which is to rent space for a charge for use of facilities.
Manufactured Housing on individual parcels, as described in Section 10.900, is not a manufactured
dwelling park.
Marijuana. The plant Cannabis, family Cannabaceae, or any part or seed of the plant. The term does
not include industrial hemp.
Marijuana item. The term includes marijuana, cannabinoid products, cannabinoid concentrates, and
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 13/28
cannabinoid extracts.
Marijuana-related businesses. The various types of marijuana-related businesses are organized into
the following categories:
Production. Planting, cultivating, growing, or harvesting marijuana; or drying marijuana leaves
or flowers.
Processing. The processing, compounding, or conversion of marijuana into cannabinoid
products, cannabinoid concentrates, or cannabinoid extracts.
Wholesale. A wholesale operation that purchases marijuana items in this state for resale to a
person other than consumer.
Laboratory. A state-licensed laboratory that tests marijuana items as required by state law.
Dispensary. A medical marijuana dispensary registered under ORS 475.314.
Retail. A business that sells marijuana items to a consumer in this state.
Ministerial Decisions. Decisions by the Planning Director that involve review based on clear and
objective standards. Such decisions do not involve public notice of a hearing prior to the decision
and, unless otherwise provided, do not allow for local appeal of the decision.
Mini-warehouse. A building or group of buildings in a controlled access compound that contains
various sizes of individual, compartmentalized, and controlled-access stalls or lockers for the dead
storage of a customer's goods or wares. No sales, service, or repair activities other than the rental of
dead storage units are permitted on the premises.
Mixed-use building. Contains one or more residential dwelling units and a commercial, institutional,
or industrial uses(s) in the same building. The non-residential use must occupy at least 80 percent
of the building's ground floor area.
Mobile home. A structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping,
cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for
residential purposes and that was constructed between January 1, 1962, and June 15, 1976, and
met the construction requirements of Oregon mobile home law in effect at the time of construction.
Mobile home park. Any place created prior to 2000 where four or more manufactured dwellings are
located within 500 feet of one another on a lot, tract or parcel of land under the same ownership, the
primary purpose of which is to rent space for a charge for use of facilities. Manufactured Housing on
individual parcels, as described in Section 10.900, is not a mobile home park.
Mobile home or manufactured dwelling space. A plot of ground within a mobile home park or
manufactured dwelling park designed for the accommodation of one manufactured dwelling.
Motel. See Hotel.
Multiple-family, multiplex, or apartment dwelling. Attached dwelling units in one or more structures,
but having at least three or more dwelling units per structure.
Neighborhood activity centers. A use or combination of uses which is a common destination or focal
point for community activities, including primary and secondary schools, neighborhood parks and
playgrounds and shopping centers.
Nonconformity. See "Use, nonconforming"; and "Structure, nonconforming".
Occupational Health Facility. A facility for health practitioners providing primarily work-required
physicals and therapy for work-related injuries.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 14/28
On-Site Farm Product Sales. The on-site promotion, marketing and retail sales of crops, farm
products or livestock grown on the farm on which the product sales are taking place, or other farms
in the local agricultural area, as defined herein.
Oregon Freshwater Wetland Assessment Methodology (OFWAM) - A wetland function and quality
assessment methodology developed by the Oregon Department of State Lands.
Owner. With respect to real property, the person in whom legal title is vested or the person who is
the purchaser under a recorded land sale contract.
Overlay district or zone. A special zone or designation that is applied ¡®over,¡¯ or in addition to a
base zone. Overlays impose additional or different land development regulations or procedures to
certain parcels or areas of the City. They generally coincide with a special area plan or implement a
specific Comprehensive Plan policy. (See Sections 10.345 through 10.407)
Pad Lot Development. A non-residential development created by a land division that provides tax
lots within a common area where the lot-lines of such tax lots are located near common or exterior
building walls.
Parcel. A unit of land held in common ownership that is created by the partitioning of land. The term
parcel is synonymous with lot.
Parking area, public. An open area, other than a street or other public way, used to park automobiles
and available to the public whether for a fee, free, or as an accommodation for clients or customers.
Parking space. A permanently surfaced and marked area for the parking of a motor vehicle,
excluding the area necessary for access.
Partition. The act of dividing an area of land into two or three parcels within a calendar year when
such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under single ownership.
Partition does not include divisions of land resulting from lien foreclosures, divisions of land resulting
from foreclosure of recorded contracts for the sale of real property, and divisions of land resulting
from the creation of cemetery lots; and does not include any adjustment of a lot line by the relocation
of a common boundary where an additional parcel is not created and where the existing parcel
reduced in size by the adjustment is not reduced below the minimum lot size established by this
code for the district within which it is located. Partition does not include the sale of a lot in a recorded
subdivision, even though the lot may have been acquired prior to the sale with other contiguous lots
or property by a single owner.
Partition, major. A partition which includes the creation of a street.
Partition, minor. A partition that does not create a street.
Pass-by trip. A trip made as an intermediate stop on the way from an origin to a primary trip
destination without route diversion.
Peak Period. The traffic volume for a given time period which represents the most critical period of
operations and has the highest capacity requirements.
Pedestrian scale lighting. Light standards or placements no greater than 14 feet in height located
along pedestrian walkways.
Pedestrian-scale street lighting. Pedestrian-scale lighting located adjacent to the pedestrian walkway
portion of public or private streets.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 15/28
Pedestrian walkways. Improvements which provide for pedestrian traffic including sidewalks and
crosswalks, and which may include other improvements such as lighting and benches which make it
safe and convenient to walk.
Pipeline Traffic. The background traffic from approved developments that may not have been built
yet but will affect traffic in a specific area. This information is provided by the Public Works
Department in the Scoping Letter.
Planned Unit Development (PUD). A planned unit development (PUD) is any development approved
by the City under Sections 10.190 through 10.198 or under earlier PUD ordinances of the City.
Planter Strip. A strip of land within the public right-of-way between the curb and edge of sidewalk
designated for the purpose of street trees and vegetative landscaping.
Plat. A final map or replat containing all the descriptions, locations, specifications, dedications,
provisions and information concerning a land division.
Portable Storage Containers. A portable, weather-resistant receptacle designed for storage or
shipment, utilized or intended to be utilized for the storage of household goods, wares, building
materials, merchandise, and similar items. ¡°Portable Storage Containers¡± shall include all
shipping containers, cargo containers, tractor trailers (with or without wheels), and other like items
not intended to be placed on a permanent foundation.
Primary building entrance. A building entrance that remains unlocked during regular business hours
(for non-residential buildings), allows pedestrians to both enter and exit the building, is visible from
the street sidewalk, complies with maximum setback standards when applicable, and is connected
to the sidewalk with a pedestrian walkway that meets City standards.
Private improvement. Any improvement on private property necessary to bring said property into
compliance with an approved plan, including, but not limited to: landscaping, irrigation, parking,
bicycle and pedestrian facilities, signage, lighting, concrete curbs, buffer requirements, trash
enclosures, and heating, ventilation, air conditioning concealments.
Property line. The division line between two units of land.
Property line adjustment. The relocation or elimination of a common property line between abutting
properties that does not create an additional lot or parcel. The merging of tax lots to establish a
single tax account does not eliminate property lines.
Public improvement. Any improvement, facility, or service, together with customary appurtenances
thereto, necessary to provide for public needs, including, but not limited to: curbs, gutters, sidewalks
and other vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian circulation systems, storm sewers, flood control
improvements, water quality, water supply and distribution facilities, sanitary sewage disposal and
treatment, public utility services, fire protection, street trees, and parks.
Public Park. An area or facility publicly owned which provides recreational opportunities for the
general public. This includes future parkland as well as existing trails and paths, community,
neighborhood, special use, and linear parks.
Public plazas. Areas adjoining a sidewalk or walkway that provide places for pedestrians to sit,
stand, or rest. Plazas are located at transit stops, building entrances, or intersections, and connect
directly to adjacent sidewalks, walkways, transit stops, building entrances, and intersections. They
are usually paved with concrete, pavers, bricks, or similar materials, and include seating, pedestrian
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 16/28
scale lighting, and similar pedestrian improvements. Low walls or planters and landscaping are
provided to create a semi-enclosed space and to buffer and separate the plaza from any adjoining
parking lots and vehicle maneuvering areas.
Push Cart. Non-motorized vehicle (human powered) constructed so that it is not capable of being
towed directly by a motor vehicle.
Readily Visible Wireless Communications Facility. An object, which stands out of the landscape as a
wireless communications facility when viewed with the naked eye.
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle with or without motive power, which is designed for human
occupancy and to be used temporarily for recreational, seasonal or emergency purposes, and has a
gross floor area not exceeding 400 square feet in the set-up mode.
Reserve acreage. That portion of the lot which is not intended to be part of the development and can
be separately developed at a later time.
Residential care, training and treatment. The following definitions are derived from ORS 443.400
and apply to "residential facilities" and "residential homes," which are defined below.
(1) Residential care. Services such as supervision; protection; assistance while bathing,
dressing, grooming or eating; management of money; transportation; recreation; and the
providing of room and board.
(2) Residential training. The systematic, planned maintenance, development or enhancement
of self-care skills, social skills or independent living skills, or the planned sequence of
systematic interactions, activities or structured learning situations designed to meet each
resident's specified needs in the areas of physical, social, emotional and intellectual growth.
(3) Residential treatment. A planned, individualized program of medical, psychological or
rehabilitative procedures, experiences and activities designed to relieve or minimize mental,
emotional, physical or other symptoms or social, educational or vocational disabilities resulting
from or related to the mental or emotional disturbance, physical disability or alcohol or drug
problem.
Residential facility:
(1) A licensed residential care, training, or treatment facility that provides, in one or more
buildings on contiguous properties, residential care alone, or in conjunction with treatment or
training, or a combination thereof, for six to fifteen individuals who need not be related. Staff
persons required to meet licensing requirements shall not be counted in the number of facility
residents.
(2) A residential facility does not include residential schools, state or local correctional facilities
(other than local facilities for persons enrolled in work release programs), juvenile training
schools, youth care centers operated by a county juvenile department, juvenile detention
facilities, nursing homes, hospitals, any place primarily engaged in recreational activities, foster
homes, any place providing care and treatment on less than a 24-hour basis, or child-caring
agencies.
Residential home. A licensed residential training or treatment home, or adult foster home licensed
under ORS 443.705-825, that provides residential care alone, or in conjunction with treatment or
training, or a combination thereof, for five or fewer individuals who need not be related. Staff
persons required to meet licensing requirements shall not be counted in the number of facility
residents.
Riparian area. The area adjacent to a stream consisting of the area of transition from the aquatic
ecosystem to a terrestrial ecosystem.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 17/28
Riparian corridor. The area within the boundary established by 10.923 "Riparian Corridors,
Location," including the waterway and the setback area on both sides of the waterway.
Riparian vegetation. Native ground cover, shrubs, trees, and other vegetation predominately
influenced by their association with water.
Roof-Mounted Wireless Communications Facility. A wireless communication facility placed on a
rooftop through gravity mounts or other surface attachments and integrated into the natural rooftop
profile of the building.
Sale. Every disposition or transfer of land in a subdivision or partition or an interest or estate therein.
Scoping Letter. A letter provided by the Public Works Department that describes the methodology,
limits of the traffic impact analysis, and any approved deviations. The letter is provided to the agent,
applicant, and engineer after a meeting with the Public Works Department to discuss the
requirements of 10.460 and 10.461.
Sedimentation. The deposition of soil that has been transported from its site of origin by water, ice,
wind, gravity, or other natural means as a result of erosion.
Shopping center. A group of five or more commercial establishments having common parking
facilities.
Sign. See Article VI-Signage, Section 10.1010 for sign definitions.
Single-family detached dwelling. Detached dwelling units that do not have roofs, walls, or floors in
common with any other dwelling units, and are located on individual tax lots.
Site plan. A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, all of the
uses as required by in the land use review applications.
Sleeping unit. A room, space, or structure intended for occupancy in which people sleep that can
also include permanent provisions for living, eating, and either sanitation or kitchen facilities but not
both.
Small Food Vendor. Any site-built or prefabricated structure that is used for the purpose of preparing,
processing or converting food for immediate consumption as a drive-in, drive-through, curb or walkup
service that is a maximum of 128 square feet and is located on one site or tax lot for any period
of 24 hours or more.
Small Winery. See craft alcohol production terms.
Stealth Capabilities. The use of techniques to disguise or minimize the visual impact of a Wireless
Communication Support Structure or Wireless Communication Systems Antenna, such as located in
conjunction with a church steeple, cupola, stadium lighting, made to look like a tree or flag pole, or
located within or adjacent to a grove of trees, (provided the Wireless Communication Support
Structure is colored to blend with the trees).
Stormwater. That portion of precipitation that does not percolate into the ground or evaporate, but
flows via overland flow, interflow, pipes and other features of a stormwater drainage system into a
defined surface water body, or a constructed storm drain facility.
Stormwater Detention Facility. An above or below ground facility, such as a pond or tank, that
temporarily stores stormwater runoff and subsequently releases it at a slower rate than it is collected
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 18/28
by the drainage facility system. There is little or no infiltration of stored stormwater.
Stormwater Facility. Constructed or natural features which function together as a system to collect,
convey, channel, hold, inhibit, retain, detain, divert, treat or filter stormwater.
Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper
surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building
included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished
floor level directly above a usable or unused under-floor space is more than 6 feet above grade as
defined herein for more than 50 percent of the total perimeter or is more than 12 feet above grade as
defined herein at any point, such usable or unused under-floor space shall be considered as a story.
(see Story image at bottom of page)
Story, first. The lowest story in a building which qualifies as a story, as defined herein, except that a
floor level in a building having only one floor level shall be classified as a first story, provided such
floor level is not more than 4 feet below grade, as defined herein, for more than 50 percent of the
total perimeter, or not more than 8 feet below grade, as defined herein, at any point.
Street. Any right-of-way for motor vehicle travel, including public and private rights-of-way which can
include bicycle lanes, sidewalks, or adjacent multi-use paths. Alleys and minimum access
easements, as defined herein, are not considered streets.
Street, improved. A street having an improved paved section including curb and gutter. Improved
streets may be considered legacy streets (see legacy street definition.
Street, legacy. A street that is improved, but may be missing bike facilities, right-of-way, sidewalks,
planter strips, turn lanes or other facilities identified in the applicable cross-section identified in
Article IV, or an unimproved street or alley that is predominantly surrounded by developed properties
that constrain the right-of-way.
Street, private. A street providing access to more than one lot. It is a separate tax lot that is owned
and maintained by private parties. Private streets are only allowed in Planned Unit Developments
(PUDs) (See Section 10.192(B)(6)).
Street tree. Any tree located within the right-of-way or within 10 feet of the right-of-way if there is no planter
strip or tree well, of any street dedicated for public use, including private streets.
Structural alteration. Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, beams, or
girders, or any change in the dimension or configuration of the roof or exterior walls.
Structure. A sign, edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of
parts joined together in some definite manner which is intended to support or shelter any use or occupancy.
Structure, nonconforming. Any building or structure, legally established prior to the effective date of this code
or subsequent amendments thereto, which does not fully comply with the standards of this code.
Subdivision. The act of subdividing land or an area or tract of land divided into four or more lots when such an
area or tract of land exists as a unit, or contiguous units of land under a single ownership at the beginning of
the calendar year. "Subdivision" shall also include a unit ownership project, as defined in ORS 91.505;
however, any conveyance of land to a governmental agency, public entity or utility shall not be considered a
division of land for the purpose of computing the number of lots.
Temporary food vendor. Any kiosk, shed, shelter, trailer, vehicle, wagon, or other similar device which is used
for the purpose of preparing, processing, or converting food for immediate consumption as a drive-in, curb, or
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 19/28
walk-up service that remains in or on any one site or lot for less than 24 hours on any calendar day. Temporary
shall mean that all equipment must be removed from the site at the end of the vendor's business day.
Temporary mobile medical services vendor. Any kiosk, shed, shelter, trailer, vehicle, wagon, or other similar
movable structure which is used for the purpose of providing medical services to humans and/or animals as a
walk-up service that is conducted completely within the structure, and that remains in or on any one site or lot
for no more than 48 continuous hours without being removed completely from the site before returning.
Temporary shall mean that all equipment must be removed from the site after no more than 48 continuous
hours.
Temporary mobile nonprofit vendor. Any kiosk, shed, shelter, trailer, vehicle, wagon, or other similar movable
structure, which is used by a registered nonprofit organization for the purpose of providing a walk-up service
that is conducted completely within the structure, and that remains in or on any one site or lot for no more than
48 continuous hours without being removed completely from the site before returning. Temporary shall mean
that all equipment must be removed from the site after no more than 48 continuous hours.
Temporary Shelter. A temporary use within a building meant to provide relief from extreme weather and
substandard living conditions for individuals or families who are homeless.
Top-of-bank - The two-year recurrence interval flood elevation.
Townhouse/rowhouse dwelling. Attached dwelling units in one or more structures, but having at least three or
more dwelling units per structure. A townhouse dwelling can be distinguished from an apartment or multiplex
dwelling because each townhouse dwelling occupies an individual tax lot, consists of interior space from
ground to roof, and has direct access to individual private outdoor space.
Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA). A study of the impacts a proposed use will have on the surrounding
transportation system.
Trailer. Non-motorized vehicle intended for and constructed to be towed directly by a motor vehicle.
Trailer, residential. A structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking
and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes and
that was constructed before January 1, 1962.
Transit facilities. Improvements and facilities at selected points along transit routes for passenger pickup, drop
off and waiting. Facilities and improvements may include pullouts, shelters, benches, directional signs,
lighting and other improvements to provide security, protection from the weather and access to nearby
services.
Transit route. An existing or planned route for public intra-city or intra-urban transit service in the local or
regional transportation plan or the plan of the relevant transit service provider. Does not include temporary
routes or routes which are planned to be replaced or relocated in the relevant plans.
Transit stop, planned. A location designated for use as a transit stop in a local or regional transportation plan or
a plan adopted by the relevant transit service provider.
Transitional housing. A programmatic housing development that is run by a qualified organization to
transition individuals from homelessness to permanent housing in a time period of 24 months or less. Clients
of transitional housing must be homeless and shall agree to adhere to the standards for residency.
Tree topping or severe pruning. The severing of the trunk, or the cutting back of the trunk or a limb to a stub
larger than three inches in diameter, or the cutting back of the tree's crown to such a degree as to remove the
normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 20/28
Trip or trip end. A single or one-directional vehicle movement with either the origin or destination (exiting or
entering) inside the study area.
Urban Reserve. Lands outside the urban growth boundary that will provide for future expansion over a long
period. See General Land Use Plan map and the Regional Plan Element of the Comprehensive Plan.
Urbanization Plan. An adopted land use and circulation plan showing compliance with the Regional Plan
Element for each established planning unit identified in the Comprehensive Plan. An urbanization plan is a
"Special Area Plan" as defined in the General Land Use Plan Element, a "conversion plan" as termed in the
Urban Growth Management Agreement, and a neighborhood circulation plan as used in this chapter.
Urbanization plans are required prior to or in conjunction with annexation requests for all areas adopted as part
of the 2016 Urban Growth Boundary expansion or future Urban Growth Boundary expansions.
Use. The purpose or activity for which land or any building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for
which it is occupied or maintained.
Use, accessory. An accessory use is one which: (1) is subordinate to and serves a principal structure or a
principal use; (2) is subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal structure or use served; (3) is
located on the same lot as the principal structure or use served except as otherwise expressly authorized by
provisions of this code; (4) is customarily incidental to the principal structure or use.
Use, nonconforming. An activity, development or condition which was legally established prior to the effective
date of this code or subsequent amendments to this code and which would not be permitted by or is not in full
compliance with the present regulations of this code, including any lot where area or dimensions are
nonconforming.
Use, principal. The specific primary purpose for which land is used.
Use, temporary. A temporary use is one established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue
such use upon the expiration of such time. Such uses do not involve the construction or alteration of any
permanent structure.
Value or valuation. The estimated cost to replace the structure in kind, based on current replacement costs.
Variance. See "Exceptions".
Vehicle trip. A single or one directional vehicle movement with either the origin or destination inside the study
area.
Walls shall be defined as follows: Exterior wall is any wall or element of a wall, or any member or group of
members, which defines the exterior boundaries or courts of a building and which has a slope of 60 degrees or
greater with the horizontal plane. Parapet wall is that part of any wall entirely above the roof line. Retaining
wall is a wall designed to resist the lateral displacement of soil or other materials.
Wetland - An area inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and which, under normal circumstances, does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted
for life in saturated soil conditions.
Wireless Communication Facility. An unstaffed facility that transmits and/or receives signals or waves
radiated or captured by a Wireless Communication Systems Antenna. The site may include, but is not limited
to: Wireless Communication Systems Antennas or other transmission and reception devices; a support
structure; equipment building, cabinet or other enclosed structure containing electronic equipment; cables,
wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, vaults, parking area, and/or other accessory development. This definition
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 21/28
includes roof-mounted appurtenances.
Wireless Communication Facility Accessory Equipment. All appurtenances defined in wireless
communication facilities, with the exception of the support structure and Wireless Communication Systems
Antennas.
Wireless Communication Facility Collocation. The use of a single wireless communication facility by more
than one wireless communications provider.
Wireless Communication Provider. A person or company in the business of designing, installing, marketing
and maintaining wireless communication systems and services including cellular telephones, personal
communications services (PCS), enhanced/specialized mobile telephones, and commercial paging services,
and any other technology which provides similar services.
Wireless Communication Support Structure. A structure, tower, pole, or mast erected for the purpose of
supporting Wireless Communication Systems Antennas and connecting appurtenances operated by a wireless
communication provider. For the purpose of these regulations, such a support structure includes, but is not
limited to:
1. Guyed tower: A tower, which is supported by the use of cables (guy wires), which are
permanently anchored.
2. Lattice tower: A tower characterized by an open framework of lateral cross members that
stabilize the tower.
3. Monopole: A single upright pole, engineered to be self-supporting and not requiring guy
wires or lateral cross-supports.
4. Other alternative support structures as may be used for Wireless Communication Systems
Antennas.
Wireless Communication Systems. The sending and receiving of radio frequency transmissions and
the connection or relaying of these signals to land lines and other sending and receiving stations,
including, but not limited to cellular telephones, personal communications services (PCS),
enhanced/specialized mobile telephones, and commercial paging services, and any other
technology which provides similar services.
Wireless Communication Systems Antenna. The device used to capture an incoming, or transmit an
outgoing radio-frequency signal from wireless communication systems. Wireless Communication
Systems Antennas include, but are not limited to, the following types:
1. Directional or Parabolic Antenna (panel or disk) - receives and transmits signals in a
directional pattern.
2. Omni-direction (whip) antenna - receives and transmits signals in a 360-degree pattern.
3. Microwave antennas - receives and transmits to link two telecommunication facilities
together by line of sight.
Yard. An open, unoccupied space, other than a court, unobstructed from the ground to the sky,
between a lot line and building line.
Yard, front. A yard extending the full width of the front of a lot between the front (street) right-of-way
line and the front building line.
Yard, rear. A yard extending the full width of the lot in the area between the rear lot line and the rear
building line.
Yard, side. A yard extending the full length of the lot in the area between a side lot line and a side
building line. (see Yard image at bottom of page)
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 22/28
Zero lot-line dwelling units. Detached single-family dwelling units on individual lots, with the dwelling
structure having no setback along one or more property lines; sometimes called a patio home.
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5820, March 19, 1987; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5873, May 21, 1987; Amd.
Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6131, June 2, 1988; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6231, Nov. 3, 1988; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord.
No. 7167, Apr. 16, 1992; Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7168, Jul. 16, 1992; Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7511,
Nov. 4, 1993; Added, Sec. 27, Ord. No. 7629, May 5, 1994; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7768, Nov. 17,
1994; Amd. Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996; Amd. Sec 1, Ord. No. 8285, Feb. 6, 1997;
Amd. Sec. 16, Ord. No. 8393, June 19, 1997; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 1998-75, Apr. 16, 1998; Amd.
Sec. 1, Ord. No. 1998-146, June 18, 1998; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2000-88, May 4, 2000; Amd. Sec.
1, Ord. No. 2000-20, June 1, 2000; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2001-155, Aug. 16, 2001; Amd. Sec. 1,
Ord. No. 2001-166, Sept. 6, 2001; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2001-205, Oct. 18, 2001; Amd. Sec. 1,
Ord. No. 2002-94, June 20, 2002; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2002-146, Aug. 15, 2002; Amd. Sec. 8,
Ord. No. 2004-259, Dec. 16, 2004; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2006-279, Dec. 7, 2006; Amd. Sec. 1,
Ord. No. 2007-100, May 17, 2007; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2008-04, Jan. 3, 2008; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord.
No. 2008-227, Nov. 6, 2008; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2009-207, Sept. 17, 2009; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No.
2009-240, Nov. 5, 2009; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2010-83, Apr. 15, 2010; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2010-
161, July 1, 2010; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2010-202, Sept. 2, 2010; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2011-32,
Mar. 3, 2011; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2011-64, Apr. 7, 2011; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2011-196, Oct. 6,
2011; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2011-237, Dec. 1, 2011; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2012-32, March 1,
2012; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2012-58, May 3, 2012; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2012-59, May 3, 2012;
Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2012-128, Aug. 16, 2012; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2012-137, Sept. 6, 2012;
Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2013-31, Feb. 21, 2013; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2013-82, June 6, 2013; Amd.
Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2013-84, June 6, 2013; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2013-81, June 20, 2013; Amd. Sec.
1, Ord. No. 2014-63, May 15, 2014; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2014-65, May 15, 2014; Amd. Sec. 1,
Ord. No. 2014-104, Aug. 21, 2014; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2015-37, May 7, 2015; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord.
No. 2015-75, July 2, 2015; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2015-104, October 15, 2015; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord.
No. 2015-123, December 17, 2015; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2016-151, Dec. 15, 2016; Amd Sec. 1.
Ord. No. 2018-52, June 7, 2018 (effective July 9, 2018); Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21,
2018 (effective July 23, 2018); Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-113. Sept. 20, 2018; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord.
No. 2018-130, Nov. 15, 2018; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-132, Dec. 20, 2018; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord.
No. 2019-35, May 16, 2019.]
IMAGES FOR THIS CODE
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 23/28
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 24/28
(Click on an image to see a larger version)
10.021 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.031 [Repealed Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.032 Nonconformities
Except as otherwise provided in this section, any lot, use, sign, or structure lawfully existing on the
effective date of this chapter or subsequent amendments thereto which does not comply with the
standards of this chapter shall be defined as legal nonconforming and may be continued so long as
it remains otherwise lawful. If the taking by eminent domain action of a portion of a lot reduces the
lot dimensions or area below minimums prescribed in this chapter, the lot shall then be considered to
be a legal nonconforming lot. All nonconformities shall be encouraged to convert to conformity
wherever possible and shall be further subject to the requirements of Section 10.033, Continuation
of Nonconforming Development, through 10.037, Completion of Nonconforming Development.
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7593, March 17, 1994.]
10.033 Continuation of Nonconforming Development
Except as otherwise provided in Sections 10.034, Criteria for Nonconformity Expansion or Change
through 10.037, Completion of Nonconforming Development, a legal nonconforming structure or use
may continue but shall only be changed, while continuing to be nonconforming, as authorized by this
chapter.
(1) A structure that is legal nonconforming because of a failure to comply with a requirement of
Articles IV, V, or VI may be altered or reconstructed if the Planning Director finds that the alteration
or reconstruction will not result in an aggravation of the nonconformity. A structure that is legal
nonconforming because of a public facility deficiency may only be further developed upon meeting
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 25/28
the other requirements of this chapter and after provisions have been made to correct the public
facility deficiency or to assure that the applicant will meet the pro rata share of the responsibility for
correcting the deficiency when the correction takes place.
(2) A structure in any commercial zone that was originally built as a single family home may be
converted to a permitted commercial use and then converted back to its original residential use
subject to the requirements of the Building Code.
(3) A single-family residential structure that is legal nonconforming because of a failure to comply
with the permitted or conditional uses in Article III may be reconstructed, as it was, if destroyed as in
10.036(2). The new structure may be altered from the original floor plan or design if the Planning
Director finds that the alteration will not result in an aggravation of a nonconformity and is otherwise
consistent with items 4 through 6 that follow.
(4) Subject to approval by the approving authority (Planning Commission) as a conditional use, a
legal nonconforming use may be expanded or changed to serve another use, with the exception that
the maximum amount of special relief that can be given is as follows:
(a) The floor area of a building shall not be increased by more than 20 percent.
(b) The land area covered by structures shall not be increased by more than 10 percent.
(5) The entire contiguous ownership of land shall be considered as a single parcel for determination
of nonconformity as a consideration for approval of any further development or change in use. A
record of separate lot or parcel boundaries shall be disregarded.
(6) A lot of record, or a parcel of land for which a deed or other instrument dividing the land was
recorded with Jackson County prior to May 5, 1980, which has an area or dimension less than
required by this code, shall be considered legal nonconforming and may be developed and occupied
by a permitted use subject to compliance with the minimum standards of this code.
(7) The taking by eminent domain action of a portion of an existing legal nonconforming lot shall not
affect the legal right of the owner to use the remainder of such lot in any manner that would have
been legal prior to the taking.
(8) If, by the taking by eminent domain action of a portion of a lot, which includes a legal nonconforming
sign(s), said sign(s) may be moved to another location on the remaining portion of the
lot, as permitted by the Planning Director (or designee), with the signs retaining their legal nonconforming
status. Such relocated sign shall otherwise be in conformance with all standards of the
Land Development Code.
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 5820, March 19, 1987; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 7593, March 17, 1994; Amd.
Ord. No. 2004-119, June 3, 2004; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2005-275, Dec. 1, 2005; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord
No. 2018-133, Dec. 6, 2018.]
10.034 Criteria for Nonconformity Expansion or Change
A nonconforming structure or use described in Section 10.032, Nonconformities, may be expanded
or changed to serve another use, as per Section 10.033, Continuation of Nonconforming
Development. The expansion or change shall be found to comply with the following criteria:
(1) The lot or parcel of record was legally created.
(2) The standards that would be applied to new development.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 26/28
(3) The height, setback and similar site oriented standards that new development in the zoning
district is required to observe.
(4) The proposal development and its use will not increase or aggravate existing adverse impacts, if
any, presently resulting from said development on the surrounding area when the following are
complied with:
(a) The character and history of the use is consistent with the general development character
of the surrounding area.
(b) The degree of noise, vibration, dust, odor, fumes, glare or smoke detectable at the property
line will not be increased.
(c) The numbers and kinds of vehicular trips to the site will not exceed the maximums typical
for the zoning district within which the project is located.
(d) The amount and nature of outside storage, loading, and parking will not be increased or
altered so as to cause further impacts.
(e) The visual appearance of the development will compliment the adjacent architecture and
site planning.
(f) The hours of operation will not be altered or increased.
(g) Other factors which tend to reduce conflicts or incompatibility with the character or needs of
the area.
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2005-275, Dec. 1, 2005.]
10.035 Nonconformity Burden of Proof
The owner, not the city, has the burden of proving that any nonconforming lot, use, sign or structure
was lawfully established as provided in Section 10.032, Nonconformities.
10.036 Termination of a Nonconforming Development
A nonconforming development or use shall terminate under the following conditions:
(1) When the use has been discontinued for a period of twelve (12) months.
(2) When a structure, other than a single-family residence, which is nonconforming has been
destroyed to an extent 80 percent of its true cash value as indicated by the records of the county
assessor.
(3) When it is a sign and the sign has been abandoned, as defined in Section 10.1010, for six (6)
months. No extension is available.
[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2005-275, Dec. 1, 2005; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2011-237, Dec. 1, 2011.]
10.037 Completion of a Nonconforming Development
A development that is lawfully under construction on the date this chapter is adopted may be
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 27/28
completed even though not in compliance with this chapter. The development is then nonconforming
and may be used for the purpose for which it was designed, arranged and intended.
10.051 [Repealed Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.052 [Repealed Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.053 [Repealed Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.056 [Repealed Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.061 Duty to Enforce
The approving authority or City Council, on appeal, shall refuse approval of any development permit
application not in conformity herewith, and subject to the provisions of state law. All officials,
departments, officers, and employees of the city vested with the authority to issue permits or
certificates shall not issue any such permits or certificates which conflict with any provisions of this
chapter, or which purport to authorize or permit the development of any land where compliance with
all applicable provisions of this chapter have not been met. Any such permit or authorization which
may be issued in conflict herewith shall be void and of no force or effect. (Effective Dec. 1, 2013.)
Other than as above set forth, the Planning Director or his designee shall be the official responsible
for the enforcement of this chapter.
[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2013-131, Sept. 5, 2013.]
10.062 Penalties and Enforcement
Violation of a provision of this Chapter 10 constitutes a violation. Every day in which a violation is
caused or permitted to exist constitutes a separate violation.
Any building or structure erected or constructed in violation of the provisions of this chapter, whether
or not done pursuant to a permit, is declared a public nuisance and may be abated as provided in
Sections 5.520 - 5.535 of the Medford Code.
The city may enjoin any violation of the provisions of this chapter through a civil suit.
[Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2000-55, April 6, 2000.]
10.070 Fees
A schedule of permit and service fees not more than the actual or average cost of providing the
service shall be established by ordinance and periodically amended by ordinance of the City
Council, kept on file in the Planning and Engineering Departments and the City Recorder's office.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 28/28
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6131, June 2, 1988; Amd. Ord No. 7243, Nov. 5, 1992; Subsection (2) Amd.
Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7276, Dec. 17, 1992. Fees effective Jan. 1, 1993; Amd. Ord. No. 7307, Feb. 4,
1993; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8120, June 20, 1996; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2003-164, Aug. 7, 2003,
effective Aug. 7, 2003.]
10.080 [Repealed, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2010-160, July 1, 2010.]
[Effective Sept. 1, 2010.]
10.085 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2010-160, July 1, 2010.]
[Effective Sept. 1, 2010.]
10.092 Inconsistent Ordinances Repealed
Ordinance number 9526, Code Sections 10-005 through 10-415 and 10-814 through 10-954 and
Ordinance number 4041 are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this chapter.
[Sections 9-600 through 9-667 were repealed by Ord. No. 5820 on Mar. 19, 1987.]
10.093 Effective Date
This chapter shall take effect and be in full force and effect upon its passage and adoption by the
City Council and subsequent filing with the recording officer of the County of Jackson. Any land
development application filed and accepted by the City prior to the effective date of this chapter shall
not be subject to this chapter but shall be subject to the ordinances and code provisions repealed by
Section 10.092, Inconsistent Ordinances Repealed.
[NOTE: The effective date of this chapter was 12-24-86, the date Ord. No. 5785 was filed with the
County Clerk.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 1/83
10 Article 2-Procedural Requirements (10.100 to 10.297)
10.100 Purpose of Article II
It is the purpose of this article to establish land use review procedures, designate and define the
responsibilities of the approving authorities and to set forth the procedural requirements and
substantive criteria and standards for each land use review necessary to obtain a development
permit.
[Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.101 [Repealed Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.102 Land Use Reviews
(A) A land use review is a specific planning and development process conducted in order to
determine whether proposed land uses comply with the policies, standards and criteria of the
Comprehensive Plan and this chapter. A land use application shall be provided for each land use
review when applicable.
(B) Each type of land use review has a designated procedural type and each procedural type has
specific due process and administrative requirements that shall be followed.
(C) A land use review is complete once a land use decision, as outlined in Section 10.104 has been
made by the designated approval authority.
[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5820, March 19, 1987; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7659, June 2, 1994; Amd. Sec.
3, Ord. No. 2007-100, May 17, 2007; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2008-236, Nov. 20, 2008; Amd. Sec. 3,
Ord. No. 2010-160, July 1, 2010 – effective Sept. 1, 2010; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2010-202, Sept. 2,
2010; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2012-32, March 1, 2012; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2018-52, June 7, 2018,
(effective July 9, 2018); Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.104 Land Use Decision
(A) A land use decision consists of the Final Order signed by the approving authority based upon
the criteria and standards considered relevant to the decision, as well as the facts contained within
the record. The decision shall address such relevant criteria, standards and facts relied upon in
rendering the decision. A written record of the decision shall be provided to the applicant, any
person with standing (if applicable), and kept on file in the Planning Department.
(B) When the proposed land use application is inconsistent with the Comprehensive Plan or this
chapter the application is either denied or specific requirements called “conditions” are included with
the land use decision which when implemented will bring it into conformance.
(C) Upon receipt of an approved land use decision or upon satisfactory completion of any
condition(s) of an approved land use decision that are required prior to building permits, a
development permit shall be issued by the Planning Director. Upon issuance of a development
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 2/83
permit, the applicant may obtain building permits.
(D) 120 Day Rule.
For all Type II and III land use reviews as outlined in Table 10.108-1 below, the city shall arrive at a
final decision, including resolution of all appeals, within 120 days from the date the application is
deemed complete, unless the applicant requests an extension in writing. The total of all extensions
shall not exceed 245 days.
(E) Land Use Approval Required.
No person shall subdivide or partition, nor shall any person create any street or road for the purpose
of subdividing or partitioning an area or tract of land, or to dispose of, transfer or sell any lot or parcel
of land if same constitutes or is part of a process of subdivision or partitioning as herein defined, or
to record a final plat thereof without first complying with all of the applicable provisions of this
chapter. A building permit shall not be issued for the construction, reconstruction or the alteration,
use or occupancy of a structure for which a development permit is required and has not been issued
pursuant to this Section unless exempted as per Section 10.200(C) or Subsection (F) below.
F. Exemptions from Land Use Review.
(1) An exemption from land use review does not exempt the use or development from
compliance with the applicable standards of this chapter, including but not limited to access,
parking, riparian protection, and landscaping.
(2) The following uses or developments do not require land use review.
(a) An emergency measure resulting from fire, an act of God, or a public enemy or other
calamity, which is necessary to protect and save property and lives.
(b) The reconstruction of a legal main structure or legal accessory structure which has
been destroyed by fire, an act of God, or a public enemy or other calamity, and
restoration is started within one year from such destruction and is diligently pursued to
completion.
(c) Temporary uses as identified in Section 10.840, Temporary Uses and Structures.
(d) The erection, construction, alteration, maintenance or termination of a public utility
service facility, such as a public safety communication tower.
[Added Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018, (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.106 Procedural Types
For purposes of administering the provisions of this chapter, and other ordinances and policies of the
City pertaining to land use and development, there are hereby established four types of procedures
for processing land use review applications. Two factors vary for each procedural type. First, the
degree of discretionary judgment involved in rendering a decision. The greater the degree of
discretionary judgment, the more rigorous they are procedurally. Second, the extent of public
participation which varies based upon the degree of impact(s) caused by the proposed use and
development of land. The greater degree of impacts, the more the public is notified and invited to
participate.
(A) Type I Ministerial Procedures.
(1) Non-discretionary administrative decisions shall be made by applying clear and objective
approval criteria and standards.
(2) Decisions shall be made by the Planning Director or designee.
(3) No public notice, public comment period, or public hearing shall be required.
(4) Requested action shall be initiated by the applicant.
(5) Decisions are final, and except for Final Planned Unit Development (PUD) Plan and Minor
Historic Review decisions, are not appealable. Final PUD Plan decisions are appealed to the
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 3/83
Table 10.108-1. Land Use Review Procedures
Planning Commission per Section 10.140(F)(3). Minor Historic Review decisions are appealed
to the Landmark and Historic Preservation Commission per Section 10.140(F)(4).
(B) Type II Administrative Procedures.
(1) Administrative decisions shall be made by applying clear, objective approval criteria and
standards while using limited discretion to determine impact(s) on adjacent properties and the
surrounding vicinity, public infrastructure and services, and the health, welfare, and safety of
the community at-large.
(2) Decisions shall be made by the Planning Director or designee.
(3) Public notice and a public comment period are required according to Section 10.124 of this
Chapter, but a public hearing shall not be required.
(4) Requested action shall be initiated by the applicant.
(5) Appeals of Type II decisions are heard by the Planning Commission at a public hearing per
Section 10.140(G).
(C) Type III Quasi-judicial Procedures.
(1) Quasi-judicial decisions require the application of clear, objective approval criteria and
standards, and a degree of discretion to determine compliance with approval criteria and the
impact(s) of development on adjacent properties and the surrounding vicinity, public
infrastructure and services, and the health, welfare, and safety of the community at-large. If
necessary to mitigate such impacts, conditions may be imposed to bring the proposed land
use into compliance and/or to mitigate impacts.
(2) Decisions are made by the designated approving authority.
(3) Public notice, a public comment period, and a public hearing are required according to
Section 10.124 of this Chapter.
(4) Requested action may be initiated by City Council, the Planning Commission or an
applicant.
(5) Appeals of Type III decisions are heard by the City Council per Section 10.140(H).
(D) Type IV Legislative Procedures.
(1) Legislative decisions that involve the greatest degree of discretion as they establish by law
the general policies and regulations for future land use decisions and have either widespread
and significant impact beyond the immediate area or change the character of the land use, or
affect large areas or many different ownerships.
(2) The Planning Commission shall review Type IV land use permit applications and forward a
recommendation to City Council to approve, approve with modifications, approve with
conditions, deny, or to adopt an alternative. City Council shall consider and address the
recommendation, but shall not be bound by it. The City Council is the approving authority and,
if it so determines that a Type IV land use permit application has satisfied the standards and
criteria for approval, shall approve Type IV land use applications by ordinance.
(3) Public notice(s), public comment period(s) and public hearing(s) are required according to
Section 10.124 of this Chapter
(4) Requested action may be initiated by City Council and Planning Commission (except
annexations). Minor amendments or Urbanization Plans may be initiated by an applicant(s).
(5) Appeals of Type IV decisions are made to the Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA) per
Section 10.140(I).
[Added Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2018-64, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018); Amd.
Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2018-130, Nov. 15, 2018]
10.108 Land Use Review Procedure Types
Table 10.108-1 identifies the procedural type, applicable standards, and approving authority for each
type of land use review as well as whether the 120-day rule in Section 10.104(D) is applicable. Each
procedural type is subject to specific due process and administrative requirements of this chapter.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 4/83
Land Use Review Type
Procedural
Type
Applicable Standards Approving
Authority
Subject to 120 Day
Rule (ORS 227.178)?
Table 10.108-1. Land Use Review Procedures
Land Use Review Type
Procedural
Type
Applicable Standards Approving
Authority
Subject to 120 Day
Rule (ORS 227.178)?
Annexation IV Urbanization, 10.216 City Council No
Appeal of Final PUD Plan Decision I 10.140(F)(3) Planning
Commission No
Appeal of Minor Historic Review
Decision I 10.140(F)(4) LHPC No
Appeal of Type II Decision III 10.140(G) Planning
Commission Yes
Appeal of Type III Decision IV 10.140(H) City Council Yes
Appeal of Type IV Decision IV 10.140(I) LUBA No
Comprehensive Plan Amendment, Major IV Review &
Amendment, 10.220 City Council No
Comprehensive Plan Amendment, Minor IV Review &
Amendment, 10.222 City Council No
Conditional Use Permit III 10.184 Planning
Commission Yes
De Minimis Revision(s) to an Approved
PUD Plan I 10.198 Planning
Director No
Exception III 10.186 PC/LHPC/SPAC Yes
Final PUD Plan I 10.196 Planning
Director No
Final Plat, Subdivision or Partition I 10.160 Planning
Director No
General Land Use Map Amendment,
Major IV GLUP, Review &
Amendment, 10.220 City Council No
General Land Use Map Amendment,
Minor IV GLUP, Review &
Amendment, 10.222 City Council
No
Historic III 10.188 LHPC Yes
Land Development Code Amendment IV 10.218 City Council No
Minor Historic Review I 10.148 Planning
Director No
Major Modification to a Site Plan &
Architectural Review Approval III 10.200(H)(1) SPAC Yes
Table 10.108-1. Land Use Review Procedures-- continued
Land Use Review Type
Procedural
Type
Applicable Standards Approving
Authority
Subject to 120
Day Rule (ORS
227.178)?
Minor Modification to a Site Plan &
Architectural Review Approval I 10.200(H)(2) Planning Director No
Major Modification to an Approved
Conditional Use Permit III 10.184(D)(1) Planning
Commission Yes
Minor Modification to an Approved
Conditional Use Permit I 10.184(E)(2) Planning Director No
Nonconformities I 10.032 – 10.036 Planning Director No
Portable Storage Container II 10.840(D)(6) Planning Director Yes
Park Development Review III 10.185 Planning
Commission Yes
Pre-Application I 10.156 Not Applicable No
Preliminary PUD Plan III 10.190 – 10.198 Planning Yes
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 5/83
Commission
Property Line Adjustment I 10.158 Planning Director No
PUD Plan Revision(s) III 10.198 Planning
Commission Yes
PUD Plan Termination III 10.198 Planning
Commission Yes
Riparian Corridors, Reduction or
Deviation I 10.927 Planning Director No
Sign Permit I 10.1000 – 10.1810 Planning Director No
Site Plan and Architectural Review III 10.200 SPAC Yes
Tentative Plat, Partition II 10.170 Planning Director Yes
Tentative Plat, Subdivision III 10.202 Planning
Commission Yes
Transportation and Facility
Development IV 10.226 City Council No
Urban Growth Boundary
Amendment, Major IV Urbanization, 10.220 City Council No
Urban Growth Boundary
Amendment, Minor IV Urbanization, 10.222 City Council No
Urbanization Plan IV 10.200(B)(4) City Council No
Vacation of Public Right-of-Way IV 10.226 City Council No
Wireless Communication
Facilities in Public Right-of-
Way
I 10.824(G) Planning
Director Yes
Zone Change, Major IV Review &
Amendment, 10.220 City Council No
Zone Change, Minor III 10.204 Planning
Commission Yes
[Added Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018); Amd Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-86,
July 19, 2018; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-106, Sept. 6, 2018; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2018-130, Nov. 15,
2018; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2018-133, Dec. 6, 2018.]
10.110 Designation and Duties of Approving Authorities
(A) Approving Authorities. This article designates the authority to act on land use reviews as follows:
1. The City Council
2. The Planning Commission
3. The Site Plan and Architectural Commission
4. The Landmarks and Historic Preservation Commission
5. The Planning Director
(B) Duties of the Approving Authorities. Under the provisions in Section 10.110, there is hereby
designated to the approving authorities the power to:
(1) Approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove applications for land use review(s);
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 6/83
(2) Determine compliance or lack of compliance with the approval criteria listed under each
application type.
(C) City Council Authority. The City Council is hereby designated as the approving authority for all
the following land use reviews:
Land Use Review
Annexation
Appeals (See Section 10.140)
Comprehensive Plan Amendment (Major or Minor)
General Land Use Plan Map Amendment (Major or Minor)
Land Development Code Amendment
Transportation Facility Development
Urban Growth Boundary Amendment (Major or Minor)
Urbanization Plan
Vacation of Public Right-of-Way
Zoning Map Amendment (Major)
(D) Planning Commission Authority.
(1) The Planning Commission shall have all powers set forth in ORS 227.090 (Powers and
Duties of Commission) except as otherwise provided by ordinance of the City Council.
(2) The Planning Commission is hereby designated as the approving authority for the following
land use reviews:
Land Use Review
Appeals (See Section 10.140)
Conditional Use Permit
Exception
Park Development Review
Preliminary Planned Unit Development (PUD) Plan
Subdivision Tentative Plat
Zone Change (Minor)
(E) Planning Commission, Other Duties
It shall further be the responsibility of the Planning Commission to:
(1) Study and report on all proposed code amendments referred to it by the City Council.
When reviewing any such proposed amendments, the Planning Commission shall submit its
recommendation and findings to the City Council.
(2) Review this chapter and report on same to the City Council at least once every five years
commencing on the date of enactment of this chapter. Specifically the Planning Commission
shall:
(a) Analyze the extent to which development has occurred in the city as compared to the
projected growth per the Comprehensive Plan.
(b) Recommend any changes in the mapping of zoning districts as determined
necessary to accommodate the expected 20-year growth as determined by the
Comprehensive Plan.
(3) Serve as the Committee for Citizen Involvement (CCI) per the Comprehensive Plan.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 7/83
(F) Planning Commission, Membership.
(1) Number Appointed. The Planning Commission shall consist of nine voting members
appointed by the Mayor and City Council.
(2) Length of Term. All terms shall be for a period of four years beginning on February 1 of
each year with not more than three terms expiring in the same year.
(3) Position Appointments.
The Planning Commission members shall at a minimum comply with the requirements of
Oregon Revised Statutes (ORS) 227.030 (Membership) as provided below or as amended:
(a) No more than two members of a city planning commission may be city officers, who
shall serve as ex officio nonvoting members.
(b) No more than two voting members of the commission may engage principally in the
buying, selling, or developing of real estate for profit as individuals, or be members of any
partnership, or officers or employees of any corporation, that engages principally in the
buying, selling or developing of real estate for profit.
(c) No more than two members shall be engaged in the same kind of occupation,
business, trade or profession.
(4) Selection Criteria. All members of the Commission shall either be residents of the City of
Medford or Medford Urban Growth Boundary. No more than two members of the Commission
shall be appointed who reside outside the Medford city limits. A Commissioner who ceases to
meet the residency requirement during their term of office shall forfeit the office and a new
member shall be appointed to serve the unexpired portion of the term.
(5) Removal Terms. A member may be removed by the Mayor and City Council, after a
hearing, for misconduct or nonperformance of duty.
(6) Vacancy Replacement. A Commissioner who ceases to meet the residency requirement
during their term of office shall forfeit the office and a new member shall be appointed to serve
the unexpired portion of the term. Any vacancy shall be filled by the Mayor and City Council for
the unexpired term of the predecessor in the office.
(7) Quorum. A quorum of the Planning Commission shall consist of a majority of the current
membership of the Commission.
(G) Planning Commission Meeting Procedures.
Except as otherwise provided by law or this Code, the Planning Commission shall conduct its
meetings in accordance with Robert’s Rules of Order, Newly Revised, unless other rules are
adopted by the Commission.
(H) Site Plan and Architectural Commission Authority.
The Site Plan and Architectural Commission is hereby designated as the approving authority for the
following land use reviews:
Land Use Review
Exception
Major Modification of Site Plan and Architectural Review Approval
Site Plan and Architectural Review
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 8/83
(I) Site Plan and Architectural Commission, Other Duties. The Site Plan and Architectural
Commission shall have the power to adopt design guidelines. Such guidelines may be general or
specific in nature and shall be in the form of suggested approaches intended to aid applicants in
preparation, presentation and implementation of development proposals in compliance with the City
of Medford Comprehensive Plan and implementing ordinances. Guidelines shall be advisory and
shall not limit applicants to a single approach.
(J) Site Plan and Architectural Commission, Membership.
(1) Number Appointed. The Site Plan and Architectural Commission shall consist of nine
voting members appointed by the Mayor and City Council.
(2) Length of Term. Site Plan and Architectural Commissioner terms shall be for a period of
four years, with the exception of the member of the Planning Commission, whose initial term
shall be for a period of two (2) years. Subsequent Planning Commissioner terms shall be for
one year if reappointed. Said terms shall begin on February 1 of each year with not more than
two terms expiring in the same year, exclusive of the Planning Commissioner.
(3) Position Appointments.
(a) One member shall be a Planning Commissioner nominated by the Planning
Commission chairperson.
(b) One member shall be a licensed architect.
(c) One member shall be a licensed professional engineer.
(d) One member shall be a licensed landscaping professional.
(e) One member shall be a licensed contractor.
When selecting persons to fill the remaining four positions, preference should be given to
applicants who have training or experience closely related to the licensed positions. At
the Mayor and City Council’s discretion, an appointment to any of the four
professional/licensed positions may be an individual who, in lieu of having a valid license
in the profession, possesses a comparable combination of skill, education, training and
experience related to the respective professional licensing category.
(4) Selection Criteria. All members of the Commission shall either be residents of the City of
Medford or Medford Urban Growth Boundary. No more than two members of the Commission
shall be appointed who reside outside the Medford city limits. A Commissioner who ceases to
meet the residency requirement during their term of office shall forfeit the office and a new
member shall be appointed to serve the unexpired portion of the term.
(5) Removal Terms. A member may be removed by the Mayor and City Council, after a
hearing, for misconduct or nonperformance of duty.
(6) Vacancy Replacement.
A Commissioner who ceases to meet the residency requirement during their term of office shall
forfeit the office and a new member shall be appointed to serve the unexpired portion of the
term. Any vacancy shall be filled by the Mayor and City Council for the unexpired term of the
member being replaced.
(7) Quorum. A quorum of the Site Plan and Architectural Commission shall consist of five or
more members a majority of the current membership of the Commission.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 9/83
(K) Procedure of the Site Plan and Architectural Commission Meeting Procedures. Except as
otherwise provided by law or this Code, the Site Plan and Architectural Commission shall conduct its
meetings in accordance with Robert’s Rules of Order, Newly Revised, unless other rules are
adopted by the Commission.
(L) The Landmarks and Historic Preservation Commission Authority. The Landmarks and Historic
Preservation Commission is hereby designated as the approving authority for the following land use
reviews:
Land Use Review
Appeals (See Section 10.140)
Exceptions
Historic Review
(M) The Landmarks and Historic Preservation Commission, Other Duties
(1) To study proposed Comprehensive Plan and Land Development Code amendments
relating to historic preservation, and submit recommendations regarding such proposals to the
Planning Commission and City Council.
(2) To institute and support programs and projects that further the historic preservation policies
of the City of Medford.
(3) To adopt approval criteria for Minor Historic Review of alterations of roofing materials,
exterior colors, or sign face design for an existing sign within Historic Preservation Overlay
Districts. Such criteria shall be consistent with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the
Treatment of Historic Places as applicable.
(4) To adopt design guidelines for new construction and exterior alterations within an Historic
Preservation Overlay. Such guidelines may be general or specific in nature and shall be in the
form of approaches intended to aid applicants in preparation, presentation, and implementation
of development proposals that comply with the Medford Comprehensive Plan and
implementing ordinances. Guidelines shall be advisory and shall not limit applicants to a
single approach.
(5) To adopt approval criteria and/or design guidelines for signage within the Historic
Preservation Overlay. Such criteria or design guidelines may authorize signs that differ from
the standards of Article VI when necessary to meet historic compatibility and preservation
goals.
(N) Historic Review.
For the purposes of this section, the definitions, rules, and procedures of Sections 10.401 through
10.408 shall apply. Historic Review shall include:
(1) Historic Preservation Overlay Changes. Review and investigation of any historic resource
in the City of Medford that may have historic significance; initiation of proceedings to change
the extent of the Historic Preservation Overlay; decisions on applications to change to the
extent of the Historic Preservation Overlay; and preparation of findings substantiating or
refuting the historic significance of the resource.
(2) Exterior Alteration and/or New Construction Review. Consideration of proposed exterior
alteration and/or new construction within a Historic Preservation Overlay.
(3) Demolition and/or Relocation Review. Consideration of proposed demolition or relocation
within a Historic Preservation Overlay, and authorization of either delayed or immediate
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 10/83
issuance of a demolition or relocation permit.
(O) Landmarks and Historic Preservation Commission, Membership.
(1) Number Appointed. The Landmarks and Historic Preservation Commission shall be made
up of five voting members appointed by the Mayor and City Council.
(2) Length of Term. All regular terms of members of the Landmarks and Historic Preservation
Commission shall be for a period of four years, and shall begin on February 1, with not more
than three terms expiring in the same year.
(3) Position Appointments. All members of the Landmarks and Historic Preservation
Commission shall have demonstrated positive interest, competence, or knowledge of historic
preservation. The Planning Director or designee shall serve as an ex-officio member of the
Landmarks and Historic Preservation Commission.
(4) Selection Criteria. All members of the Commission shall either be residents of the City of
Medford or Medford Urban Growth Boundary. No more than two members of the Commission
shall be appointed who reside outside the Medford city limits.
(5) Removal Criteria. A member of the Landmarks and Historic Preservation Commission may
be removed by the Mayor and City Council, after a hearing, for misconduct or nonperformance
of duty. Replacements shall be appointed by the Mayor and City Council for the remainder of
the unexpired term. A Commissioner who ceases to meet the residency requirement during
their term of office shall forfeit the office and a new member shall be appointed to serve the
unexpired portion of the term.
(6) Quorum. A quorum of the Landmarks and Historic Preservation Commission shall consist
of a majority of the currently appointed members.
(P) Landmarks and Historic Preservation Commission, Meeting Procedures.
(1) Except as otherwise provided by law or this Code, the Landmarks and Historic
Preservation Commission shall conduct its meetings in accordance with Robert’s Rules of
Order, Newly Revised, unless other rules are adopted by the Commission.
(2) The Landmarks and Historic Preservation Commission shall meet as necessary to act on
Historic Reviews in a timely manner.
(3) There shall be at least one meeting of the Landmarks and Historic Preservation
Commission held each year, during the month of March.
(Q) Planning Director Authority. The Planning Director is hereby designated as the approving
authority for Type I and II land use reviews as well as issuance of the Development Permit. This
includes the following land use reviews:
Land Use Review
De Minimis Revision(s) to Approved PUD Plan
Final PUD Plan
Final Plat, Partition/Subdivision
Minor Historic Review
Minor Modification to Conditional Use Permit
Minor Modification to a Park Development Review
Minor Modification to Site Plan and Architectural Review
Nonconformities
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 11/83
Pre-Application
Property Line Adjustment
Riparian Corridor Reduction or Deviation
Sign Permit
Tentative Plat, Partition
Wireless Communication Facilities in Public Right-of-Way
(R) Planning Director, Other Duties. The Planning Director shall also be responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6265, Dec. 15, 1988; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-236, Nov. 20, 2008; Amd.
Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018, (effective July 23, 2018); Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2018-86,
July 19, 2018; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2018-100, Sept. 6, 2018; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2018-130,
Nov. 15, 2018.]
10.111 [Repealed Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2018-86, July 19, 2018]
10.112 Referral Agencies
(A) It is the responsibility of a referral agency to provide timely review and comment on all
proposals referred by the City. The referral agency shall be requested to determine consistency of a
proposal with the referral agency's operating policies and standards and to suggest conditions of
approval on a land use review/application.
(B) This Chapter employs the use of referral agencies for the review of land use permit applications
according to a Referral Agency Distribution Schedule that is available and maintained by the
Planning Department.
(C) Referral agencies may be asked to review certain applications, in the judgment of the Planning
Director, the agency may have an interest in the proposal. Additional referral agencies may be
notified at the discretion of the Planning Director
(D) Referral Agency Action and Decision Time.
(1) After deeming an application complete per Section 10.122, the Planning Department shall
transmit one copy of the proposed legislation, or land use permit application, and necessary
accompanying data for review and comment to any governmental agency or private entity that
is entitled to notice per the Planning Department’s Distribution Schedule.
(a) Type IV Land Use Reviews: Referral agencies shall have thirty calendar days to
submit comments on all Type IV land use applications/reviews. If the referral agency
does not comment within thirty calendar days, then the referral agency is assumed to
have no comment. If requested in writing, by a referral agency, an extension of
thirty calendar days may be granted.
(b) Type II and III Land Use Reviews: Upon receipt of a Type II or III land use application
and necessary accompanying data, each referral agency shall make an investigation and
submit a written report within fifteen calendar days, and forward same to the Planning
Department, clearly specifying any recommended conditions for development or
approval.
(E) Referral Agency Reports.
Upon receipt of a request for review and comment, each referral agency shall make an investigation
and submit written comments to the Planning Department clearly specifying any recommended
conditions for development approval.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 12/83
(1) Affected Agency Reports. Other agencies having jurisdiction shall report to the Planning
Department as to any recommendations or provisions which in their determination are required
for the approval of the land use permit consistent with this code.
(2) City Engineer's Report. The City Engineer shall investigate and report on existing facilities
and make a recommendation on the manner in which the land use is to be provided city
services. The City Engineer shall appropriately condition the land use permit to adequately
provide for the provision of public infrastructure for the land constituting and surrounding the
proposed land use.
(3) Fire Department. The Fire Department shall investigate and report on existing facilities and
make a recommendation concerning the number and placement of fire hydrants and other fire
protection requirements for the proposed land use.
(4) Water Commission. The Water Commission shall investigate and report on the applicable
infrastructure that is in place, what easements pertain to the project, and what are the
improvements needed to provide adequate infrastructure to the site.
(5) Planning Department. The Planning Department shall review the land use permit
application in relation to the Comprehensive Plan, any applicable specific plans prescribed by
law which affect the proposed land use and in relation to any and all criteria and standards
applicable to the application type. The staff report shall either summarize, or incorporate by
reference, all referral agency reports and public comments received, and shall itemize such
conditions as it deems appropriate to be imposed by the approving authority if approval is to be
recommended. The staff report shall be made available at no cost by the Planning
Department seven days before the public hearing.
[Added Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018, (effective July 23, 2018); Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No.
2018-133, Dec. 6, 2018.]
10.114 Concurrent Land Use Review
The applicant of a land use application may choose to request consideration of all, any one, or a
combination of required land use reviews by the same approving authority at the same time.
Otherwise, a request for consideration of a specific land use application may follow, at any time, the
application for other required land use reviews.
[Added Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018.)]
10.116 Application Submittals
Land use applications shall be submitted to the Planning Department and shall consist of the
submittal requirements specified in this Chapter, Article II, or in other applicable sections of the
Medford Land Development Code. If an application does not include all required submittals, it shall
be deemed incomplete per Section 10.122.
[Added Sec. 17, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018.)]
10.118 Findings of Fact
Findings of Fact are statements of the criteria, facts, and conclusions used in making a decision. In
order for the approving authority to approve a land use application, it must find that the proposal
complies with the approval criteria and standards listed in this chapter. The findings must
demonstrate and lead to the conclusion, based on the facts, that the criteria are being met. Findings
which address applicable criteria shall accompany all actions required of this chapter for land use
review. At a minimum, the findings of fact shall include:
(A) The approval criteria applicable to the specific land use application.
(B) A complete description of the project including all facts about the proposal which support
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 13/83
approval.
(C) An analysis and rationale of how the facts demonstrate that the project meets each of the
criteria.
[Added Sec. 18, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.120 Due Process
Each of the procedural types outlined in Section 10.106 are subject to specific due process and
administrative requirements which are outlined below in Table 10.120-1 for each land use
application.
Table 10.120-1. Due Process Elements by Procedure Type
Due Process Element
Land Use Procedure Type
Type I Type
II
Type
III
Type
IV
1. Completeness Review x x x
2. Notification x x x
3. Disclosure x x
4. Conflict of Interest x x
5. Public Hearing x x
6. Cross-Examination x x
7. Action, Decision Time and Notice of Decision x x x
8. Findings of Fact x x x
9. Record x x x
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 5873, May 21, 1987; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2013-167, Nov. 21, 2013;
Replaced Sec. 19, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018, (effective July 23, 2018); Amd. Sec. 4, Ord.
No. 2018-133, Dec. 6, 2018.]
10.122 Due Process Element 1: Completeness Review
(A) Upon submittal of a land use application to the Planning Department, the date of receipt shall be
indicated on each copy of the materials submitted.
(B) Within 30 days of receipt, the Planning Department shall determine whether a Type II, III, or IV
land use application as submitted, along with the required information, is complete as per this
chapter.
(C) If the Planning Department fails to provide notice of completeness to the applicant of a Type II,
III, or IV land use application in writing within 30 days of receipt, the application shall be deemed
complete. For purposes of this section, the date of notice to the applicant shall be the date of
mailing.
(D) If it is determined that the Type II, III, or IV land use application is incomplete or otherwise does
not conform to the provisions of this chapter, the Planning Department shall notify the applicant in
writing to submit the missing material. The application shall be deemed complete upon receipt of (1)
all of the missing information; (2) some of the missing information and written notice from the
applicant that no other information will be provided; or (3) written notice from the applicant that none
of the missing information will be provided.
(E) If the Type II, III, or IV land use application is deemed complete as first submitted, or the
applicant submits the requested additional information within 180 days of the date the application
was first submitted, approval or denial of the application shall be based upon the standards and
criteria applicable at the time the application was submitted.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 14/83
(F) On the 181st day after first being submitted, the Type II, III, or IV land use application is void if
the applicant has been notified of the missing information and has not submitted:
(1) all of the missing information;
(2) some of the missing information and written notice that no other information will be
provided; or
(3) written notice that none of the missing information will be provided. Any applications that
are resubmitted to the Planning Department shall be subject to the standards and criteria in
effect at the time the application is resubmitted.
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6265, Dec. 15, 1988; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 7659, June 2, 1994; Amd. Sec.
1, Ord. No. 2002-95, June 20, 2002; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2003-284, Nov. 6, 2003; Amd. Sec. 4,
Ord. No. 2007-100, May 17, 2007; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2014-118, Sept. 4, 2014; Amd Sec. 4, Ord.
No. 2018-52, June 7, 2018 (effective July 9, 2018); Replaced Sec. 20, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21,
2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.123 [Repealed Sec. 21, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.124 Due Process Element 2: Notification
(A) Content of Public Hearing Notice. The Public Hearing notice shall:
(1) Explain the nature of the application and the proposed use or uses which could be
authorized;
(2) List the applicable criteria from the Code and the Comprehensive Plan that apply to the
application at issue;
(3) Set forth the street address or other easily understood geographical reference to the
subject property;
(4) State the date, time and location of the hearing; or, for Type II applications, state the date
the decision will be rendered;
(5) State that failure to raise an issue in a hearing, in person or by letter, or failure to provide
sufficient specificity to afford the decision maker an opportunity to respond to the issue
precludes appeal based on that issue;
(6) Include the name of a local government representative to contact and the telephone
number where additional information may be obtained;
(7) State that a copy of the application, all documents and evidence relied upon by the
applicant and applicable criteria are available for inspection at no cost and will be provided at
reasonable cost;
(8) State that a copy of the staff report will be available for inspection at no cost at least seven
days prior to the hearing and will be provided at reasonable cost; or for a Type II application
the staff report will be available on the day the decision is rendered; and
(9) Include a general explanation of the requirements for submission of testimony and the
procedure for conduct of hearings.
(B) Public Hearing Signs. On-Site Posting. Public hearing signs shall be posted on the project site
for any proposed Type III or IV (minor) land use actions according to the following:
(1) Contents of sign. Public Hearing signs shall include a description of the proposed land use
action, the date of the public hearing, and the City of Medford file number for the proposed
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 15/83
land use action.
(2) Location and number of signs. A posted notice sign must be placed on each existing street
frontage of the project site. If a frontage is over 600 feet long, a notice sign is required for
each 600 feet, or fraction thereof. Notice signs must be posted within 10 feet of a street lot line
and must be visible to pedestrians and motorists. Notice signs may not be posted in a public
right-of-way, unless the land use action specifically pertains to a public right-of-way. If posting
must occur in the right-of-way, care should be taken to comply with Section 10.735, Clear View
of Intersecting Streets.
(3) Sign posting schedule. The required sign(s) shall be posted as specified in Table 10.124-
1. Posted signs shall be removed within 10 days following the final decision.
(4) Consequences of failing to post the property as required. Failure to post the signs as
required by this section is a violation of the Medford Municipal Code.
(C) Notification, Affected Property Owners.
(1) Notice of Type II Land Use Action. In the case of Type II land use actions where there is no
public hearing, notification shall be mailed to the applicant and all affected property owners
within 14 calendar days of deeming an application complete pursuant to Section 10.122.
(a) Notice of Public Comment Period, Type II. The Planning Director shall provide a 14
day period for submission of written comments prior to making a decision on any
application requiring a Type II land use action.
(b) Notice Area, Type II. The Planning Director shall mail notice of the public comment
period to the following:
(i) The applicant.
(ii) Property owners within 200 feet of the entire contiguous site for which the
application is made. This list shall be compiled from the most recent property tax
assessment roll.
(iii) Any neighborhood or community organization recognized by the City and
whose boundaries include the site.
(iv) Public agencies which provide transportation facilities and services, such as
Jackson County and the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT), for all
partitions, which affect private access to roads.
(c) Notice of Comment Period Content, Type II. The notice shall:
(i) State that issues which may provide the basis for an appeal shall be raised in
writing prior to the expiration of the comment period. Issues shall be raised with
sufficient specificity to enable the decision maker to respond to the issue.
Note: The above language is required by ORS 197.195 for Limited Land Use
Decisions, even though the procedures provide for appeal of a Type II decision to
the Planning Commission through a de novo hearing, which allows new issues to
be raised and allows the introduction of new evidence. The ‘notice of comment
period’ and ‘notice of decision’ language below is slightly different than the statutory
language to reflect the fact this code allows for local appeal.
(ii) List, by commonly used citation, the applicable criteria for the decision.
(iii) Briefly summarize the local decision making process for the decision being
made.
(iv) Provide a project description that clearly describes the proposal and what is
being requested.
(v) Identify the street address or other easily understandable geographical
reference of the location of the site under review.
(vi) State the place, date and time the comments are due, and the person whom
the comments should be addressed.
(vii) State that copies of all evidence relied upon by the applicant are available for
review at no cost, and that copies can be obtained at reasonable cost from the City.
(viii) Include the name of the Planning Director or designee to contact and the
telephone number where additional information may be obtained regarding the
application.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 16/83
(ix) State that any person who is adversely affected or aggrieved, anyone who is
entitled to written notice in Subsection (C.1.b) above, and anyone who provides
written comments during the comment period may appeal the decision by filing an
appeal in accordance with this Code within 14 days of the date the written notice of
decision is mailed.
(x) State the decision will not become final until the period for filing a local appeal
has expired.
(xi) State that a person who is mailed written notice of the decision cannot appeal
the decision directly to the Land Use Board of Appeals under ORS 197.830.
(2) Notice of Type III and IV Land Use Actions. Notification shall be mailed to the applicant and
all affected property owners no later than 21 days prior to each public hearing date.
(3) All addresses for mailed notices shall be obtained from the latest property tax rolls of the
Jackson County Assessor's office.
(4) Affected property owners for each procedure type shall be determined as indicated in Table
10.124-1.
(D) Publication. Unless otherwise indicated, public hearing notices for all proposed land use actions
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation prior to the scheduled public hearing date
before the approving authority. The schedule of publication for each procedure type shall be as
specified in Table 10.124-1.
Table 10.124-1: Notice of Public Hearing Schedule by Procedure Type
Procedure Type Newspaper
Publication
On-Site Public
Hearing Sign
Affected Property
Owners Notice
Type I None None None
Type II None
None
Within 14 calendar days of
deeming an application
complete, notice will be
sent to all property owners
within 200 feet of the
project boundaries.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 17/83
Table 10.124-1: Notice of Public Hearing Schedule by Procedure Type
Procedure Type Newspaper
Publication
On-Site Public
Hearing Sign
Affected Property
Owners Notice
Type III: Conditional
Use Permit, Exception,
Park Development
Review, Preliminary
PUD Plan, Zone
Change
Notice shall be
published no later
than 10 days prior to
the public hearing
date before the
approving authority.
A sign shall be
placed on the
subject property
21 days prior to
the public
hearing date.
21 days prior to the public
hearing date notice will be
sent to all property owners
within the project
boundaries plus all
property owners within
200 feet of the project
boundaries.
For Preliminary PUD
Plans, in addition to the
above, the owners of no
less than 75 tax lots shall
be notified. If 75 tax lots
are not located within 200
feet of the exterior
boundary of the PUD, the
notification area shall be
extended by successive 50-
foot increments, until the
minimum number of lots
are included in the
notification area.
Type III: Historic
Review, Site Plan and
Architectural
Commission Review
None
A sign shall be
placed on the
subject property
21 days prior to
the public
hearing date.
AND
A notice shall be
posted in a
public place no
later than five
days prior to the
public hearing
date.
21 days prior to the public
hearing date notice will be
sent to all property owners
within the project
boundaries plus all
property owners within
200 feet of the project
boundaries.
Type III: Subdivision
Tentative Plat
Notice shall be
published no later
than 10 days prior to
the public hearing
date.
A sign shall be
placed on the
subject property
21 days prior to
the public
hearing date.
21 days prior to the public
hearing date notice will
sent to all property owners
within the project
boundaries plus all
property owners within
200 feet of the project
boundaries.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 18/83
Table 10.124-1: Notice of Public Hearing Schedule by Procedure Type
Procedure Type Newspaper
Publication
On-Site Public
Hearing Sign
Affected Property
Owners Notice
Type IV: Minor
Comprehensive Plan
Amendment, General
Land Use Plan Map
Amendment,
Transportation Facility
Development
Notice shall be
published no later
than 10 days prior to
the public hearing
date before the
Planning
Commission (the
advisory body)
AND
No later than 10
days prior to the
public hearing date
before City Council
(the approving
authority).
A sign shall be
placed on the
subject property
21 days prior to
the first public
hearing date.
21 days prior to each
public hearing date notice
will be sent to all property
owners within the project
boundaries plus all
property owners within
200 feet of the project
boundaries.
Type IV: Annexation
Notice shall be
published once each
week for two
successive weeks
prior to the public
hearing date.
Notice shall be
posted in four
public places for
two successive
weeks prior to
the public
hearing date.
21 days prior to the public
hearing date notice will be
sent to all property owners
within the project
boundaries plus all
property owners within
200 feet of the project
boundaries.
Type IV: Vacation of
Public Right-of-Way
Not less than 14
days before the
public hearing date
before the approving
authority, notice
shall be published
once a week for two
consecutive weeks.
Within five days
after publication
of the first
notice, and not
less than 14 days
before the
hearing, a sign
shall be placed at
or near each end
of the proposed
vacation in at
least two
conspicuous
places in the
proposed
vacation area.
21 days prior to the public
hearing date notice will be
sent to all property owners
within the area of a plat
vacation or all abutting
property and all attached
real property within 200
feet laterally and 400 feet
beyond the terminus of
each right-of-way to be
vacated.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 19/83
Table 10.124-1: Notice of Public Hearing Schedule by Procedure Type
Procedure Type Newspaper
Publication
On-Site Public
Hearing Sign
Affected Property
Owners Notice
Type IV: Land
Development Code
Amendment, Major
Comprehensive Plan
Amendment, Major
Zone Change,
Urbanization Plan
Notice shall be
published no later
than 10 days prior to
the public hearing
date before the
Planning
Commission (the
advisory body),
AND
No later than 10
days prior to the
public hearing date
before the City
Council (the
approving
authority).
None
Generally not applicable to
a legislative action unless
it meets ORS 227.186
criteria (i.e., the change
effectively rezones
property). For
Urbanization Plans, the
public hearing date notice
will be sent to all property
owners within the project
boundaries plus all
property owners within
200 feet of the project
boundaries.
[Replaced Sec. 22, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018.); Amd. Sec. 4, Ord.
No. 2018-86, July 19, 2018; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2018-130, Nov. 15, 2018; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No.
2018-133, Dec. 6, 2018.]
10.126 Due Process Element 3: Disclosure
There shall be provided to the applicant and other interested parties adequate opportunity to review
the facts, findings, staff report and other exhibits as soon as practical, but not less than seven days
prior to the time at which a decision is to be made on a land use application by the approving
authority.
[Added Sec. 23, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.128 Due Process Element 4: Conflict of Interest
See Section 10.130 (E) and 10.132.
[Added Section 24, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.130 Due Process Element 5: Public Hearing
The contents of this section shall govern the conduct of all quasi-judicial public hearings before an
advisory body/approving authority. A copy of this section shall be available for public inspection at
each quasi-judicial hearing and in the Planning Department. The conduct of public hearings on
legislative matters shall be at the discretion of the presiding officer.
(A) Nature of Hearing. All parties with standing shall have an opportunity to be heard, to present
and rebut evidence before an impartial tribunal, to have the proceedings recorded, and to have a
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 20/83
decision rendered in accordance with the facts on record and the law.
(B) Authority of Presiding Officer. The presiding officer of the advisory body/approving authority shall
have authority to:
(1) Regulate the course and decorum of the meeting.
(2) Dispose of procedural requests and similar matters.
(3) Impose reasonable limitations on the number of witnesses heard and set reasonable time
limits for oral presentation, questions, and rebuttal testimoFny.
(4) Question any person appearing, and allow other members to question any such person.
(5) Waive, at their discretion, the application of any rule herein where the circumstances of the
hearing indicate that it would be expedient and proper to do so, provided that such waiver
does not act to prejudice or deny any party their substantial rights as provided herein or
otherwise by law.
(6) Take such other action as authorized by the approving authority to appropriately conduct
the hearing.
(C) Challenge or Reversal of Presiding Officer Ruling. A ruling of the presiding officer may be
challenged by any member of that advisory body/approving authority present at the hearing. The
challenge must be seconded. A ruling may be reversed by a majority of the members present and
voting. A tie vote upholds the presiding officer's decision.
(D) Conduct of Participants. Proceedings shall at all times be orderly and respectful. The presiding
officer may refuse to recognize or exclude from the hearing anyone who:
(1) Is disorderly, abusive, or disruptive;
(2) Takes part in or encourages audience demonstrations such as applause, cheering, display
of signs, or other conduct disruptive to the hearing;
(3) Testifies without first receiving recognition from the presiding officer and stating his full
name and residence; and,
(4) Presents irrelevant, immaterial, or repetitious evidence.
(E) Order of Procedure. The presiding officer shall conduct the hearing in an orderly fashion, within
the guidelines set forth herein. The hearing shall proceed in the following manner:
(1) Commencement: At the commencement of a hearing under a Comprehensive Plan or
land use regulation, a statement shall be made to those in attendance that lists the applicable
substantive criteria; states that testimony and evidence must be directed toward the criteria
described in this subsection or other criteria in the plan or land use regulation which the person
believes to apply to the decision; and states that failure to raise an issue with sufficient
specificity to afford the decision maker and the parties an opportunity to respond to the issue
precludes appeal based on that issue.
(2) Abstentions, Conflict of Interest and Challenges. All members shall comply with ORS
244.120 and 244.130 regarding actual or potential conflicts of interest. Any member who is
disqualified or wishes to abstain from participation in the hearing on a proposal shall identify
the reasons for the record and shall not thereafter participate in the discussion as a member or
vote on the proposal. Any challenges to the impartiality shall also be decided at this time.
(3) Planning Director's Report. The presiding officer shall request that the Planning Director or
staff member report on the criteria and standards and the basic factual evidence applicable to
the case and indicate the action required to be taken.
(4) Applicant's Case. The presiding officer shall allow the applicant or applicant's
representative to present evidence in support of the application. The applicant shall be allowed
to produce witnesses on their behalf. Other parties in favor of the proposal shall thereafter be
allowed to present their evidence. Applicant may then reserve time for rebuttal. The Planning
Director may appear as an applicant on a staff proposal.
(5) Opponent's Case. The presiding officer shall allow opponents to present evidence in
opposition to the proposal. Opponents shall be allowed to produce witnesses on their behalf.
(6) Questioning of Witnesses. Cross examination shall be permitted as per Section 10.132.
(7) Applicant's Rebuttal if Reserved.
(8) Staff Summary and Recommendations. The Planning Director or staff person may present
any additional evidence, comments and recommendations at the close of the hearing.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 21/83
(9) Final Discussion. Upon conclusion of the evidence, members shall be allowed to openly
discuss the proposal and further question any party appearing for or against the proposal as
necessary.
(10) Unless there is a continuance, if a participant so requests before the conclusion of the
initial evidentiary hearing, the record shall remain open for at least seven days after the
hearing. Such an extension shall not be subject to the limitations of ORS 227.178, “120 Day
Rule.”
(11) When the advisory body/approving authority re-opens a record to admit new evidence or
testimony, any person may raise new issues which relate to the new evidence, testimony or
criteria for decision-making which apply to the matter at issue.
(12) The failure of the property owner to receive notice as provided in Section 10.124 shall not
invalidate such proceedings if the city can demonstrate by affidavit that such notice was
mailed. The notice provisions contained in Section 10.124 shall not restrict the giving of notice
by other means, including posting, newspaper publication, radio and television.
(F) Standing. A person has the right to appear as a party to a quasi-judicial proceeding if the
person:
(1) received official written notice of the hearing or was entitled to receive such notice, or
(2) has interests which could be adversely affected by the decision.
[Repealed, Sec. 51, Ord. No. 7659, June 1, 1994; Added, Sec. 25, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21,
2018, (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.132 Due Process Element 6: Cross Examination
(A) Prior to any quasi-judicial public hearing there shall be provided to all affected parties, upon
request, the right to question the advisory body/approving authority, relative to any actual or potential
conflict of interest. Once a member of the advisory body/approving authority is disqualified, no
further questions shall be directed to them.
(B) Any witness may be questioned in an orderly fashion by any member of the advisory
body/approving authority, applicant, proponent or opponent who has first been recognized by the
presiding officer. Questions shall be brief and to the point. All questions shall be submitted to the
witness through the presiding officer unless the presiding officer expressly permits the submission of
questions directly to a witness.
[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 7659, June 2, 1994; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2006-13, Jan. 5, 2006; Amd. Sec.
4, Ord. No. 2013-131, Sept. 5, 2013, effective Dec. 1, 2013; Replaced. Sec. 26, Ord. No. 2018-64,
June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.133 [Repealed Sec. 27, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.134 Due Process Element 7: Action, Decision Time, and Notice of Decision
(A) Action. After acceptance of an application, the approving authority shall approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the request. The decision of the approving authority shall be based upon the
application, the evidence and comments from referral agencies and the public, and compliance with
this chapter.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 22/83
(B) Decision Time. Action on all land use reviews shall be taken within the time herein prescribed.
(C) Notice of Decision, Type III/IV. The Planning Department shall, within five working days of the
decision date, provide written notification of the land use decision to the applicant and all persons
who testify orally or in writing on the land use review. The notice shall indicate the date that the
decision will take effect, the approval's expiration date, and the final date for appeal.
(D) Notice of Decision, Type II. Within three working days of a final decision on the application, the
Planning Director shall mail a copy of the decision to the applicant and any person who submits
comments during the public comment period. The Planning Director shall also mail notice of the
decision in writing to parties who were notified of the comment period in Section 10.124(C)(1)(b).
(1) Notice of Decision Content, Type II. The content of the notice of decision shall:
(a) Include a description of the applicant’s proposal and summary of the City’s decision
on the proposal.
(b) Identify the street address or other easily understandable geographical reference of
the location of the site.
(c) Identify a statement of where the City’s decision can be obtained and contact
information.
(d) Include a statement that all persons entitled to notice may appeal the decision.
(e) State that any person who is adversely affected or aggrieved, anyone who is entitled
to written notice in Section 10.124(C)(1)(b), and anyone who provides written comments
during the comment period may appeal the decision by filing an appeal in accordance
with this Code within 14 days of the date the written notice of decision is mailed.
(f) State that copies of all evidence relied upon by the decision-maker are available for
review at no cost, and that copies can be obtained at reasonable cost from the City.
(g) State the decision will not become final until the period for filing a local appeal has
expired.
(h) State that a person who is mailed written notice of the decision cannot appeal the
decision directly to the Land Use Board of Appeals under ORS 197.830.
(2) Final Decision and Effective Date, Type II. The effective date of the final decision shall be
14 calendar days following the date the notice of decision is mailed, unless appealed, in
which case the decision is effective when the appeal is decided.
(3) Appeal, Type II. A final decision may be appealed to the Planning Commission as provided
in Section 10.140 of this Code.
[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2006-13, Jan. 5, 2006; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2013-167, Nov. 21, 2013;
Replaced Sec. 28, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018); Amd. Sec. 6. Ord. No.
2018-133, Dec. 6, 2018.]
10.135 [Repealed Sec. 29, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 23/83
10.136 Due Process Element 8: Findings of Fact
See section 10.118.
[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2006-199, Sept. 7, 2006; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2013-131, Sept. 5, 2013,
effective Dec. 1, 2013; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2014-63, May 15, 2014; Replaced Sec. 30, Ord. No.
2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.137 [Repealed Sec. 31, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.138 Due Process Element 9: Records
The secretary to the advisory body/approving authority shall be present at each meeting and shall
cause the proceedings to be recorded stenographically or electronically.
(A) Testimony shall be transcribed if required for judicial review or if ordered by the advisory
body/approving authority.
(B) The total public record for any legislative or quasi-judi cial action includes, but is not limited to,
the application, the staff report, the hearing record, the appeal record, the decision or
recommendation of all public bodies that considered the matter, and all additional information,
correspondence and other items submitted to the city by any party or by the staff prior to the closing
of the record. The record shall be deemed closed at the end of the last hearing on the matter,
unless kept open to a later date as otherwise provided by law. Items submitted for the record do not
have to be formally introduced and admitted at the hearing. The Planning Department shall create
and maintain a separate file with a unique file number for each land use action and all items
received by the city for that action shall be placed in the Planning Department file.
(C) The Planning Director shall, where practi cable, retain as part of the record each item of physical
or documentary evidence presented including the staff report, and shall have the items marked to
show the identity of the person offering the same and whether presented on behalf of a proponent,
opponent or staff. Exhibits received into evidence shall be retained in the file until after the
applicable appeal period has expired, at which time the exhibits may be released to the person
identified thereon, or disposed of by the Planning Director if not claimed within 60 days of the
expiration of any appeal date.
(D) Included in the record shall be a brief statement that explains the criteria and standards
considered relevant to the decision, states the facts relied upon in rendering the decision, and
explains the justification for the decision based on the criteria, standards and facts set forth.
(E) A person shall have access to the record of the proceedings and the exhibit file during normal
working hours. A person shall be entitled to copies of the record at the person's own expense. The
custodian of record shall make the copies for a fee equal to the actual cost of reproduction.
[Added, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2006-199, Sept. 7, 2006; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2013-167. Nov. 21, 2013:
Replaced Sec. 32, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.140 Appeal of Land Use Decision
(A) Standing for Appeal.
(1) Any person with standing may appeal a land use decision of an approving authority
(Planning Commission, Site Plan and Architectural Commission, Landmarks and Historic
Preservation Commission, and Planning Director) which approves conditionally, approves, or
disapproves an appealable land use action per Subsection (E), by filing a written notice
together with the requisite filing fee with the Planning Department within 14 days after notice of
the decision is mailed.
(2) A person has standing if the person:
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 24/83
(a) appeared in the initial proceedings orally or in writing; and
(b) was entitled to a right of notice and hearing prior to the decision to be reviewed, or is
aggrieved by the decision, or has interests adversely affected by the decision.
(3) For a Type II land use decision, a person with standing is an applicant or owner of the
subject property, was entitled to written notice of the decision, or participated in the proceeding
by submitting written comments.
(B) Notice of Appeal.
(1) A notice of appeal shall be signed by the appellant or their agent and shall contain:
(a) An identification of the decision sought to be reviewed, including the date of the
decision.
(b) A statement demonstrating that the appellant has standing to appeal as required by
Subsection (A) above.
(c) A statement of the specific grounds which the appellant relies on as the basis for the
appeal. If the appellant contends that the findings of fact made by the approving
authority are incorrect or incomplete, the notice shall specify the factual matters omitted
or disputed. If the appellant contends that the decision is contrary to ordinance, statute
or other law, such errors shall be specifically identified in the notice along with the
specific grounds relied upon for review.
(2) Upon timely receipt of the notice of appeal and filing fee, the Planning Department shall
schedule the appeal for a hearing before the appropriate appeal body at the next regular
hearing that falls not less than fourteen days after the date of filing. The Planning Department
shall notify the appellant and other parties with standing, of the time and place of the hearing
by first class mail, enclosing a copy of the notice of appeal.
(C) Appeal Procedure.
Only the appellant and other parties with standing may participate in the appeal hearing. Appellant
shall make the initial presentation and shall be allowed rebuttal. Each participant in the appeal
hearing shall present to the appeal body those portions of the record which the participant deems
relevant to the appeal. If a party wishes the appeal body to review recorded testimony, the party
shall present a written summary or transcript of such testimony to be read by the appeal body in lieu
of actually listening to the recording.
For an appeal of a Type II land use decision, the appellant and other parties shall have an
opportunity to present testimony, arguments, and evidence as they would have had in a hearing
before the decision was issued. The presentation of testimony, arguments, and evidence shall not
be limited to the issues raised in the notice of appeal.
(D) Scope of Appeal.
An appeal hearing shall be either ‘de novo’, ‘limited to issues’, or ‘on the record’ as summarized
below.
(1) De novo: Anyone may testify. Issues are not limited to those raised in the appeal.
New evidence and argument may be presented.
An appeal of a Type II land use decision, shall be a ‘de novo’ hearing as required by ORS
227.175 (10)(a)(D). The de novo hearing shall be the initial evidentiary hearing required under
ORS 197.763 as the basis for an appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals.
(2) On the record: Issues are limited to those raised in the appeal. New evidence may not
be presented. New arguments may be presented so long as they relate to issues raised in the
initial proceedings.
a. The appeal body shall not re-examine issues of fact and shall limit its review to
determining whether there is substantial evidence to support the findings of the
approving authority, or determining if errors in law were committed. The appellant is also
precluded from raising an issue on appeal to the appeal body if they could have raised
the issue with the approving authority but failed to do so.
b. The record shall consist of the application and all materials submitted with it;
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 25/83
documentary evidence, exhibits and materials submitted at the initial hearing; recorded
testimony; the decision of the approving authority, including the findings and conclusions;
and the notice of appeal.
(E) Decision Regarding Appeals.
(1) Upon review of the appeal, the appeal body may by order affirm, reverse or modify in
whole or in part a determination or requirement of the decision that is under review. When the
appeal body modifies or renders a decision that reverses a decision of the approving authority,
the appeal body, in its final order, shall set forth its finding and state its reasons for taking the
action encompassed in the order. When the appeal body elects to remand the matter back to
the approving authority for such further consideration as it deems necessary, it shall include a
statement explaining the error to have materially affected the outcome of the original decision
and the action necessary to rectify such.
(2) Action by the appeal body shall be decided by a majority vote of its members present at
the meeting at which review was made and shall be taken either at that or any subsequent
meeting. The appeal body shall render its decision within the time limits allowed by State law.
(F) Appeal of Type I Land Use Decision.
(1) With the exception of Riparian Corridor Reductions or Deviations, Final PUD Plan
decisions and Minor Historic Review decisions, all other Type I land use decisions are final and
not appealable under this chapter or any other provision of the Medford Municipal Code.
(2) Riparian Corridor Reduction or Deviation decisions made by the Planning Director or
designee may be appealed to the City Council.
(3) Final PUD Plan decisions made by the Planning Director or designee may be appealed
to the Planning Commission.
(4) Minor Historic Review decisions made by the Planning Director or designee may be
appealed to the Landmarks and Historic Preservation Commission.
(G) Appeal of Type II Land Use Decisions.
Type II land use decisions made by the Planning Director or designee may be appealed to the
Planning Commission as a de novo hearing. The Planning Commission decision on appeal
shall be the final local decision on the matter.
(H) Appeal of Type III Land Use Decision.
Type III land use decisions made by the approving authority (Planning Commission, Site Plan
and Architectural Commission, or Landmarks and Historic Preservation Commission) may be
appealed to the City Council. The appeal shall be heard on the record.
(I) Appeal of Type IV Land Use Decision.
Type IV land use decisions made by City Council may be appealed to the Land Use Board of
Appeals (LUBA) pursuant to ORS 197.830.
[Replaced Sec. 32, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.141 Review and Appeal of Certain Affordable Housing Projects
Notwithstanding other code provisions to the contrary, when an application involves a residential
development that: (1) contains five or more residential units; (2) will sell or rent at least 50 percent of
the residential units as housing that is affordable to households with incomes equal to or less than
60 percent of the median family income for the county in which the development is built or for the
state, whichever is greater; and (3) is subject to a covenant appurtenant restricting the owner and
each successive owner of the development (or a residential unit of the development) from selling or
renting any affordable residential unit within the development as housing that is not affordable for a
period of 60 years from the date of the certificate of occupancy, the following review and appeal
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 26/83
procedures apply.
If the applicant has not requested an Exception as set forth in Section 10.717(F) or any adjustment
from the Special Development Standards as set forth in Sections 10.718 – 10.719, the application
shall be reviewed by the Planning Director with a substantive review consisting of the type of review
described in Section 10.200. Notification for such applications shall be the same as those for Type II
land use actions described in Section 10.124, with the addition of posting an on-site notification sign
that describes the application and the public comment period. Any appeal from the Planning
Director decisions shall be made to the City Council, and final action shall be taken within 100 days
unless an applicant has made a written request to extend the 100-day period for a specified period
of time, and any appeal therefrom shall be made to the Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA).
If the applicant has requested an Exception as set forth in Section 10.717(F) or any adjustment from
the Special Development Standards as set forth in Sections 10.718 – 10.719, the application shall
be reviewed by the Site Plan and Architectural Commission as per Sections 10.182 and 10.200, and
any appeal from the Site Plan and Architectural Commission decisions shall be made to the City
Council. Final action in such instances shall be taken within 120 days unless an applicant has made
a written request to extend the 120-day period for a specified period of time, and any appeal
therefrom shall be made to the Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA).
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-100, Sept. 6, 2018]
10.142 Type I Land Use Actions
Type I land use actions comprise the following land use reviews:
Type I Land Use Actions
De Minimis Revision(s) to an Approved PUD Plan
Final PUD Plan
Final Plat, Partition/Subdivision
Minor Historic Review
Minor Modification to Conditional Use Permit
Minor Modification to a Park Development Review
Minor Modification to a Site Plan and Architectural Review
Nonconformities
Pre-Application
Property Line Adjustment
Riparian Corridor Reduction or Deviation
Sign Permit
Wireless Communication Facilities in Public Right-of-Way
[Added Sec. 34, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018); Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No.
2018-86, July 19, 2018; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2018-106, Sept. 6, 2018.]
10.144 De Minimis Revision(s) to an Approved PUD Plan
See Section 10.198.
[Added Sec. 35, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.145 [Repealed Sec. 36, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.146 Final PUD Plan
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 27/83
See Section 10.196.
[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 5820, March 19, 1987; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6275, Jan. 5, 1989; Amd. Sec.
7, Ord. No. 7659, June 2, 1994; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 98-67, Apr. 2, 1998; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No.
2002-95, June 20, 2002; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2008-236, Nov. 20, 2008; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No.
2013-131, Sept. 5, 2013, effective Dec. 1, 2013; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2014-118, Sept. 4, 2014;
Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2015-75, July 2, 2015; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2015-90, Sept. 3, 2015; Amd.
Sec 2. Ord. No. 2016-35, March 3, 2016; Replaced Sec. 37, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018
(effective July 23, 2018).]
10.148 Minor Historic Review
See Section 10.188.
[Added Sec. 38, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.150 Minor Modification to an Approved Conditional Use Permit
See Section 10.184.
[Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 5820, March 19, 1987; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 7659, June 2, 1994; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord.
No. 2002-95, June 20, 2002; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2007-100, May 17, 2007; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2008-236,
Nov. 20, 2008; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2010-160, July 1, 2010 – effective Sept. 1, 2010; Replaced Sec. 39,
Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.152 Minor Modification to a Site Plan and Architecutral Review Approval
See Section 10.200.
[Added Sec. 40, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.154 Nonconformities
See sections 10.032 – 10.037.
[Added Sec. 41, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.155 [Repealed Sec. 42, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.156 Preapplication Conference
Prior to submitting a land use permit application, the applicant may apply for a preapplication
conference with the Planning Department. Upon receipt of an application the preapplication
conference shall be scheduled. At the conference there shall an exchange of information regarding
procedural requirements, required land use applications, consistency with the Comprehensive Plan
and this Chapter, scheduling and such other technical and design assistance as will aid the applicant
in preparing a complete application. Upon conclusion of the conference the Planning Department
shall provide the applicant with a written summary of the conference.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 28/83
Prior to submitting an Urbanization Plan, the applicant shall apply for a pre-application conference
with the Planning Department. All property owners within the proposed Urbanization Plan shall be
notified of the pre-application conference date, time, and location.
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5986, Oct. 1, 1987; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 7659, June 2, 1994; Amd. Sec. 4,
Ord. No. 2015-90, Sept. 3, 2015; Replaced Sec. 43, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July
23, 2018); Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2018-130, Nov. 15, 2018.]
10.157 [Repealed Sec. 44, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.158 Property Line Adjustment
(A) Property Line Adjustment Purpose.
The purpose of property line adjustments is to relocate or eliminate a common property line between
abutting properties.
(B) Property Line Adjustment Approval Criteria.
A property line adjustment shall be approved if it complies with the following:
(1) All properties were lawfully created;
(2) No new lots or parcels of land will result from the adjustment;
(3) The adjustment will not result in a unit of land that overlaps the city limit line, urban growth
boundary, or zoning districts;
(4) The adjusted property configurations shall not create a substandard condition relative to
the applicable standards of the Code. When one or more properties are less than the minimum
required area or width, none of the resulting units of land shall be made smaller in area or
narrower in width than the original smallest existing unit of land.
(C) Property Line Adjustment Application Form.
Property line adjustments shall be submitted to the Planning Department on application forms
supplied by the Planning Department. The Planning Director or designee may waive the submittal of
any of the materials or information that is deemed to be excessive, repetitive, or unnecessary. The
application for property line adjustment shall require the following information:
(1) A site plan drawn to scale by a land surveyor registered in the State of Oregon showing the
following:
(a) Existing and proposed property lines, including dimensions and square footage, for all
properties involved;
(b) Assessor’s map and tax lot identification for subject properties;
(c) Location of existing wells, septic systems, sanitary sewer, storm drain laterals, and
water service;
(d) Location, name, and purpose of all existing and proposed easements; If the property
line adjustment will result in any portion of a utility service, lateral, driveway, or water
service being located on a different parcel than the structure served by them, an
easement granting continued use of the improvement will be required;
(e) The name of public and private streets that abut or lie within the subject area;
(f) Accurate location, height, ground floor area, and use of all structures on the subject
properties including the distance from all proposed property lines. If the units of land are
vacant, a written statement certifying the same shall be provided;
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 29/83
(g) Names of subject property owners as shown on the accompanying deeds;
(h) Signature of person preparing the map, attesting to the accuracy of information
contained thereon;
(i) If items above are not shown on site plan, a statement is required stating the specific
items do not exist on the property;
(2) A report from a title company prepared within 30 days listing the vested owners,
easements, encumbrances, and other matters of record for each property;
(3) The owners of all properties that will be modified by the property line adjustment must sign
the application form or a letter of authorization.
(D) Property Line Adjustment Procedure.
(1) Preliminary Review.
Once the application has been submitted the Planning Department shall send a copy to affected
agencies and City departments for review. Within 25 working days after the application has been
submitted, the Planning Department shall send a written notification to the applicant indicating:
(a) The application is missing information required in Section 10.158. Once all of the missing
information is submitted, the City will have 25 working days to complete the review; or
(b) The application has been preliminarily approved consistent with Section 10.158; or
(c) The application has been disapproved as it is not consistent with Section 10.158.
(2) Final Review.
(a) Within one year of the preliminary approval date, the applicant shall submit to the Planning
Department all of the following:
(i) Map of survey showing the adjusted property lines prepared by an Oregon licensed
surveyor in accordance with the procedures of ORS 92.060(7) and 209.250. This
requirement applies to all properties regardless of size.
(ii) A report from a title company prepared within 15 days listing the current vested
owners, easements of record, encumbrances, and other matters of record;
(iii) A copy of proposed easements to be recorded. Proposed easements may be
included as a reservation on the property line adjustment deeds;
(iv) Deeds which include a statement that identifies the associated conveyance of
property as a property line adjustment and labeled as a “Property Line Adjustment.” If a
property line is being eliminated, the deeds shall be labeled “Property Line Adjustment –
Lot Consolidation.” (v) Property descriptions attached to the deeds shall either describe
the resultant properties or otherwise specify that the conveyed land shall be consolidated
with the property of the grantee. A property line adjustment deed shall contain the
names of the parties, the description of the adjusted line, references to original recorded
documents, and signatures of all parties with proper acknowledgment.
(b) Within 25 days of submittal, the City will conduct the final review for consistency with the
preliminary approval and the approval criteria. Upon approval, the survey will be signed by the
City Surveyor and the Planning Director.
(E) Property Line Adjustment Recordation and Expiration.
Within one year of the final decision date, the property line adjustment deeds must be filed with the
Jackson County Recorder’s Office. If the deeds are not filed within one year, the application
approval will expire.
[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5986, Oct. 1, 1987; Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 7659, June 2, 1994; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2009-253, Nov. 19,
2009; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2010-160, July 1, 2010 - effective Sept. 1, 2010; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2015-90, Sept. 3, 2015;
Replaced Sec. 45, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.159 [Repealed Sec. 46, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 30/83
10.160 Riparian Corridors, Reduction or Deviation
See Sections 10.920 – 10.928.
[Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2013-31, Feb. 21, 2013; Added Sec. 47, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21,
2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.161 [Repealed Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2018-86, July 19, 2018]
10.162 Subdivision and Partition Final Plats
(A) Final Plat Approval Required.
No person shall cause or permit the sale or development of any real property under their ownership
or control, nor shall any development permit be issued for such development, until final approval
therefor has been granted by the Planning Director in accordance with this chapter, and an approved
final plat has been recorded with the Jackson County Recorder. The requirements of this section
shall not be applicable to any of the following which are exempt from such provisions:
(1) Where final plat approval for the identical lot or site has been previously obtained from
the City within 10 years prior to the date of application for a building permit, in accord with such
ordinance requiring plat approval which was in effect at that time, and such final plat is of
record evidencing such plat approval;
(2) Developments made solely for the purpose of opening or widening a public street or
alley, or those involving conveyance, transfer, access, sewer, water, or public utility, provided
that no partitions or parcels of land are created other than those directly caused by such
action.
(3) Developments made solely because of the acquisition of lands by government agencies
for freeways, parks, public buildings, flood control channels, or other public purposes, or for the
sale of minor remnant parcels by such agencies to adjacent property owners where such land
involved in the sale is not designated in the City's Comprehensive Plan as a recreational
facility. In connection with the sale of any such minor remnant parcel, the person acquiring the
property shall consolidate the acquired remnant parcel with his existing contiguous ownership;
(4) Developments involving land dedicated for cemetery purposes; or
(5) Developments caused by a conveyance for the purpose of adding land to one parcel by
deducting it from another contiguous parcel, where such does not reduce the area of the
parcel from which such portion is taken below the minimum area, frontage, width or depth
prescribed for the zoning district in which said parcel is located, nor reduce any of the required
yard spaces surrounding any structure or use on such parcel below the minimum prescribed
for such zoning district.
(B) Final Plats, General.
The form and content of a final plat shall be in accord with the provisions of ORS 92.050 through
92.080, and this code. Final plats not submitted in accord with this code shall not be considered for
approval.
(C) Form of Final Plat and Data to Appear Thereon.
Where identified by an "X" in table 10.162-1, the final plat of subdivisions and partitions shall
conform to the following provisions:
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 31/83
Final Plat Form and Data – Table 10.162-1
Final Plat Provisions
Include on
Subdivision
Final Plat
Include on
Partition Final
Plat
1. Title and subtitle of plat. The title sheet shall contain the
name as approved by the Planning Commission. Below the
title sheet shall appear a subtitle giving a general location of
the property being developed by reference to the plats which
have previously been recorded. In case the property included
within the subdivision lies wholly in the city of Medford, the
following words shall appear below the title, "In the City of
Medford."
X
2. Distances and bearings. Sufficient data to determine
readily the bearing and length of every lot line, block line, and
boundary line. Dimensions of lots shall be given as total
dimensions, corner to corner and shall be shown in feet and
hundredths of a foot. The plat shall show the basis of bearings
and lengths of straight lines and radii, and all arc lengths,
central angle, or other data as necessary to define all curves
within the subdivision.
X X
3. Boundary references and monuments. The plat shall show
clearly what monuments (type and size) or other evidence is
found on the ground to determine boundaries of the
subdivision. The adjoining corners of all adjoining
subdivisions shall be identified by lot and block number, and
subdivision name. The plat shall show the location and
description of monuments found or placed in making the
survey for proper reference and data sufficient for relocation
and retracing of any and all exterior boundary lines and lot and
block lines. Whenever the city or county engineer has
established the centerline of a street adjacent to or in the
proposed subdivision, the data shall be shown on the plat.
X X
4. The plat shall note whether the subdivision or portion
thereof are subject to periodic inundation by water as
determined from the Federal Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
X X
5. The centerlines and sidelines of all streets, and total width
thereof, and the widths of each side of the centerline and
widths of any portion of a street being dedicated, the width of
existing dedications, and the widths of any railway, drainage
channel, or other rights-of-way shall be shown.
X X
6. The plat shall show all easements of record, or easements
to be recorded, to which the lots will be subject. Such
easements must be clearly labeled and identified if already of
record, and record reference given. If any easement is not
definitely located of record, a statement of such easement
must appear on the plat. All easements other than for streets
shall be denoted by fine broken lines and designated as to
type. Easement widths and the lengths and bearings of the
lines thereof, together with sufficient ties thereto, shall be set
forth to definitely locate the easement with respect to the
development.
X X
7. City boundary lines which bound, adjoin or cross the
development, shall be clearly designated and referenced. X X
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 32/83
Final Plat Form and Data – Table 10.162-1
Final Plat Provisions
Include on
Subdivision
Final Plat
Include on
Partition Final
Plat
8. Lot numbers shall begin with the number "1" and shall
continue consecutively throughout the development with no
omission or duplications, except that lot numbers in
subsequent contiguous development units may expand the
numbering sequence of the previous unit providing the
commercial name of the development remains unchanged.
Each block shall be shown on one sheet when possible.
Where adjoining blocks appear on separate sheets, the street
adjoining both blocks shall be shown on both sheets, complete
with centerline and property line data. All letters and figures
within the development shall be conspicuous and solid.
X X
9. The plat shall particularly define and designate all lots and
parcels, including those reserved for private purposes, all
parcels and easements offered for dedication for any purpose,
with all the dimensions, boundaries, and courses clearly
shown and defined in each case. Ditto (" ") marks shall not be
used.
X X
10. All street names, including those designated by numbers,
and including the words "Avenue", Boulevard", "Place", etc.,
shall be spelled out in full.
X X
11. The plat shall also show and delineate all other data that is
or may be required by other provisions of this chapter or
otherwise by law.
X X
12. Certificates: Areas dedicated to public use shall be free
and clear of all encumbrances, except public utility easements
which the City Engineer determines will not interfere with the
use contemplated by the dedication. All mortgages, trust
deeds, and other liens shall be released as to public use areas.
X X
13. Certificates: Each final plat shall contain the requisite
owner's certificate or dedication, release of liens, Surveyor's
certificate, City Engineer's certificate, City Surveyor's
certificate, County Recorder's certificate, and such other
certificates as may hereafter be required by law. The form of
each said certificate shall be prescribed by the City Attorney.
X X
14. Certificates: The owner's dedication statement shall
include offers of dedication of all streets and other easements
shown on the final plat intended for any public use, except
those parcels of land which are intended for the exclusive use
of the lot owners in the development, their licensees, visitors,
tenants and employees, which private streets and other private
easements shall be specifically designated as such on the plat.
X X
15. Certificates: The Planning Director certificate shall
contain a statement that acknowledges compliance with all
conditions of the development permit and recognition of same.
X X
(D) Filing of Final Plat with City Engineer.
(1) Prior to submitting a final plat to the Planning Department, the applicant shall:
(a) Cause the proposed land division to be accurately surveyed and a final plat to be
prepared substantially in accordance with the approved tentative plat;
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 33/83
(b) Cause a minimum of five copies of the final plat, with any and all alterations and
changes required thereto, to be filed with the City Engineer for approval. At the time of
filing of the final plat with the City Engineer, the developer shall also file concurrently
therewith the following:
(i) A traverse sheet, giving the latitude and departures, or computer print-out,
showing the mathematical closure, within allowable limits of error, of the exterior
boundaries of the tract in all cases in which said boundaries are irregular or in
which the tract is laid out in irregular blocks, and of the exterior boundaries of all
irregular lots and blocks.
(ii) Plans, profiles, details, and specifications for improvements conforming to all
ordinances of the city and to the standards of this code which must show full details
of all improvements and shall be to a scale of 40 or 50 feet to the inch horizontal
and four or five feet to the inch vertical.
(iii) A detailed estimate of quantities and costs of the proposed improvements for
approval by the City Engineer.
(iv) A title report or subdivision guarantee by a title company doing business in
Jackson County, showing names of all persons whose consent is necessary for the
preparation of said plat and for any dedication to public use, and their interest
therein, certified for the benefit and protection of the City that the persons therein
named are all of the persons necessary to give clear title to the streets and other
easements therein to be offered for dedication. Said title report shall be dated no
later than 15 days from the date of submittal.
(v) Two copies of all proposed covenants, conditions, and restrictions or a
statement in writing signed by the developer that no such restrictions will be
established.
(vi) Instruments prohibiting traffic over the side or rear lines of any street or other
public way when and if the same is required by this chapter.
(vii) Such streets, offers of dedication or other instruments affecting or conveying
title or any interest in land as are required under the conditions of approval of the
tentative plat.
(viii) A statement that all applicable fees required by the city code have been paid.
(ix) Two copies of the city's standard (or deferred) form of improvement agreement
executed by the developer, together with two executed copies of each labor and
material and improvement bond guaranteeing payment of the cost of setting
monuments (ORS 92.065) and county certification that the requisite tax bond has
been posted (ORS 92.095) and such other agreements and bonds as may from
time to time be required by law.
(2) The City Engineer shall examine the final plat and accompanying data and shall within 15
working days determine:
(a) Whether all engineering conditions of tentative plat approval have been satisfactorily
completed, or if incomplete, are matters which can be included in a regular or deferred
improvement agreement with the city;
(b) Whether said plat is technically correct.
(3) Upon the City Engineer's determination that conformity with the foregoing has been made,
they shall execute the City Engineer's certificate on said final plat and cause said plat to be
forwarded to the Planning Department for approval by the Planning Director.
(E) Filing of the Final Plat with Planning Department.
(1) No final plat shall be accepted by the Planning Department unless, in addition to the
above, the following is complied with:
(a) An accepted final plat shall be considered by the Planning Director 10 working
days following acceptance.
(b) The final plat is accompanied by:
(i) A blue or black line print thereof;
(ii) The approved improvement plans signed by the City Engineer;
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 34/83
(iii) All documents and matters previously submitted to the City Engineer under
Subsection (D) above.
(c) All required fees by the developer have been paid.
(d) A print of the final plat signed off by all affected referral agencies and involved
agencies.
(2) The Planning Department shall examine the final plat and accompanying data and shall
within five working days determine:
(a) Whether the land division is substantially the same as shown on the tentative plat
with only approved alterations thereof;
(b) Whether bonds and agreements guaranteeing improvement of all conditions of
tentative plat approval have been completed pursuant to Section 10.666, Improvement
Agreements, and Section 10.667, Security for Public Improvements.
(F) Action and Decision Time: Final Plat.
(1) The Planning Director shall within a period of not more than 25 working days after a
final plat is submitted to the Planning Department, approve or disapprove the final plat and
acknowledge compliance with all conditions of the tentative plat.
(2) If the final plat does not conform with all local code requirements applicable at the time
of approval of the tentative plat and all rulings made thereunder, the Planning Director may
disapprove said plat, or approve it; said approval to become unconditional at such time as said
plat is made to comply with the approved tentative plat and such code requirements.
(3) Upon disapproval of any final plat, the Planning Director shall return said plat to the
applicant together with a written statement setting forth the reasons for such disapproval.
(4) Upon approval by the Planning Director becoming unconditional, the Planning Director
shall sign and affix the city seal to the approving authority certificate attached to said plat.
(5) No land division will be recognized as complete until final plat is unconditionally
approved by the Planning Director and no title to or interest in any property described in any
offer of dedication on the final plat which is accepted by the Planning Director shall pass until
recordation of said plat.
(6) Within 10 days after recordation of the final plat, the applicant at their own expense
shall furnish to the Planning Department one copy.
[Replaced Sec. 48. Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.163 [Repealed Sec. 49, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.164 Wireless Communication Facilities in Public Right-of-Way
See section 10.824.
[Repealed Sec. 50, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018); Added Sec. 4, Ord.
No. 2018-106, Sept. 6, 2018.]
10.165 [Repealed Sec. 51, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.166 [Repealed Sec. 52, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 35/83
10.167 [Repealed Sec. 53, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.168 Type II Land Use Actions
(A) Type II actions comprise the following land use reviews:
Land Use Actions
Partition, Tentative Plat
Portable Storage Containers
(B) Type II Action and Decision Time.
The Planning Director shall take final action within 120 days after the application is deemed
complete. An applicant may make a written request to extend the 120-day period for a specified
period of time. In no case may the total extensions exceed 245 days. At the Planning Director’s
discretion, an application requiring a Type II land use action may be referred directly to the Planning
Commission for review through a Type III land use action.
[Replaced Sec. 54, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 9, 2018).]
10.169 [Repealed Sec. 55, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 9, 2018).]
10.170 Partition Tentative Plat
(A) Final Plat Approval Required.
The partitioning of land shall be subject to the application requirements as herein set forth and shall
include both the tentative and final platting requirements. The approval of a partition tentative plat is
a Type II administrative decision with notice and the Planning Director is the approving authority.
Final partition plat approval is a Type I ministerial action which relies on compliance with the
requirements established at the time of tentative plat approval, and on the requirements set forth in
Section 10.162.
(B) Application for Partition Tentative Plat. See Section 10.202(B).
(C) Form of Tentative Plat and Accompanying Data. See Section 10.202(C).
(D) Partition Approval Criteria.
The Planning Director shall not approve any tentative partition plat unless they can determine that
the proposed land partition, together with the provisions for its design and improvement:
(1) Is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, any other applicable specific plans thereto,
including Neighborhood Circulation Plans, and all applicable design standards set forth in
Article IV and V;
(2) Will not prevent development of the remainder of the property under the same ownership,
if any, or of adjoining land or of access thereto, in accordance with this chapter;
(3) If it includes the creation of streets or alleys, that such streets or alleys are laid out to be
consistent with existing and planned streets and alleys and with the plats of land divisions
already approved for adjoining property, unless the approving authority determines it is in the
public interest to modify the street pattern;
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 36/83
(4) If it has streets or alleys that are proposed to be held for private use, that they are
distinguished from the public streets or alleys on the tentative plat, and reservations or
restrictions relating to the private streets or alleys are set forth;
(5) Will not cause an unmitigated land use conflict between the land partition and adjoining
agricultural lands within the EFU (Exclusive Farm Use) zoning district.
(E) Expiration of Partition Tentative Plat Approval.
Approval of a tentative partition plat application shall take effect on the date the Planning Director’s
decision is signed, unless appealed, and shall expire two years from the effective date unless the
final plat has been approved by the Planning Director pursuant to Sections 10.162. If a request for
an extension of a tentative partition plat application approval is filed with the Planning Department
within two years from the date of the Planning Director’s decision, an extension not to exceed one
additional year shall be granted. Extensions shall be based on findings that the facts upon which the
tentative partition plat application was first approved have not changed to an extent sufficient to
warrant refiling of the application.
[Added Sec. 56, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.172 Portable Storage Containers
(See Section 10.840(d)(6)).
[Added Sec. 57, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.175 [Repealed Sec. 58, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.176 [Repealed Sec. 59, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.180 [Repealed Sec. 60, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.181 [Repealed Sec. 61, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.182 Type III Land Use Actions
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 37/83
(A) Type III actions comprise the following land use reviews:
Land Use Action
Conditional Use Permit
Exception
Historic Review
Park Development Review
Preliminary PUD Plan
Site Plan and Architectural Review
Subdivision Tentative Plat
Zone Change
(B) Type III Action and Decision Time.
(1) The approving authority shall take final action within 120 days after the application is
deemed complete.
(2) An applicant may make a written request to extend the 120-day period for a specified
period of time. In no case may the total extensions exceed 245 days.
(C) Resubmission of Type III Application. After 60 working days of the final determination
denying a Type III action, the applicant may make appropriate alterations to a proposal and resubmit
along with the payment of any additional fees as required by Section 10.070.
(D) Effective Date of a Type III Application. A Type III land use decision shall take effect on the
date the final order or resolution for approval is signed.
[Repealed, Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2010-160, July 1, 2010 – effective Sept. 1, 2010; Added Sec. 62, Ord.
No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018); Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2018-86, July 19,
2018).]
10.183 [Repealed Sec. 63, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.184 Conditional Use Permit
(A) A development classified as a conditional use shall be given special review via this process in
order to assure its appropriateness for the site and allow for adjustment to be made to assure its
compatibility with adjacent land uses.
(B) Conditional Use Permits Exempt of Site Plan and Architectural Commission Review.
(1) Conditional Use Permits (CUPs) approved under this Section shall be exempt from, and
there shall be no requirement to apply separately for, a Site Plan and Architectural
Commission review or to demonstrate compliance with the approval criteria in Section
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 38/83
10.200(E). However, the Planning Director in their discretion may forward a CUP proposal or
proposed revisions thereto to the Site Plan and Architectural Commission for review. When
forwarded by the Planning Director, the Site Plan and Architectural Commission shall have
authority to review the CUP plans and make recommendations to the Planning Commission.
(2) Delegation of Authority.
The Planning Commission may delegate authority to the Site Plan and Architectural
Commission or to the Planning Director to approve in its name the plans for buildings or any
other element of a CUP or revisions thereto after the Planning Commission has approved the
CUP. The authority delegated by the Planning Commission under this Subsection shall be
delimited in conditions attached to the approval. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
Code, the approval of delegated matters shall be subject to a Type III Procedure as set forth in
Article II.
(C) Conditional Use Permit Approval Criteria.
(1) The Planning Commission must determine that the development proposal complies
with either of the following criteria before approval can be granted.
(a) The development proposal will cause no significant adverse impact on the
livability, value, or appropriate development of abutting property, or the surrounding area
when compared to the impacts of permitted development that is not classified as
conditional.
(b) The development proposal is in the public interest, and although the development
proposal may cause some adverse impacts, conditions have been imposed by the
Planning Commission to produce a balance between the conflicting interests.
(2) In authorizing a conditional use permit the Planning Commission may impose any of the
following conditions:
(a) Limit the manner in which the use is conducted, including restricting the time an
activity may occur, and restraints to minimize such environmental effects as noise,
vibration, air pollution, glare and odor.
(b) Establish a special yard or other open space or lot area or dimension requirement.
(c) Limit the height, size, or location of a building or other structure.
(d) Designate the size, number, location, or nature of vehicle access points.
(e) Increase the amount of street dedication, roadway width, or improvements within
the street right-of-way.
(f) Designate the size, location, screening, drainage, surfacing, or other improvement
of parking or truck loading areas.
(g) Limit or otherwise designate the number, size, location, height, or lighting of signs.
(h) Limit the location and intensity of outdoor lighting, or require its shielding.
(i) Require screening, landscaping, or other facilities to protect adjacent or nearby
property, and designate standards for installation or maintenance thereof.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 39/83
(j) Designate the size, height, location, or materials for a fence.
(k) Protect existing trees, vegetation, water resources, wildlife habitat, or other
significant natural resources.
(D) Conditional Use Permits, Mitigation of Impacts.
A conditional use requiring the mitigation of impacts under Subsection (C)(1)( b) above must do one
of the following:
(1) Preserve unique assets of interest to the community.
(2) Provide a public facility or public nonprofit service to the immediate area or community.
(3) Otherwise provide a use or improvement that is consistent with the overall needs of the
community in a location that is reasonably suitable for its purpose.
(E) Modifications of a Conditional Use Permit.
(1) Major Modification of a CUP. Any modification that is not a minor modification is a
major modification. A request to substantially modify a conditional use permit shall be
processed in the same manner as a request for a conditional use permit in this section. The
Planning Director or designee may waive submittal requirements deemed unnecessary or
inapplicable to the proposal.
(2) Minor Modification of a CUP. A minor modification to an approved permit may be
approved provided the Planning Director can determine that the modification does not
constitute a major modification. The purpose of the determination is to assure that a
modification does not significantly affect other property or uses; will not cause any deterioration
or loss of any natural feature, process or open space; nor significantly affect any public facility.
A minor modification shall meet all of the following standards:
(a) Meets all requirements of the Land Development Code and other legal
requirements.
(b) The amount of open space and landscaping is not decreased.
(c) No relocation of vehicle access points and parking areas where the change will
generate an impact that would adversely affect off-site or on-site traffic circulation.
(d) No reduction or elimination of any project amenities such as recreational facilities,
significant natural resources (streams, creeks, landform), fencing and other screening
material.
(e) Modifications to facilities and utilities conform to the adopted facility plans.
(f) Modifications to any other components of the plan conform to standards of the
Land Development Code.
(g) No modification to any condition of approval.
(F) Expiration of Conditional Use Permit.
Within one year following the final order date, issuance of building permit for vertical construction
shall be completed, or if a use, the use shall have commenced. If a request for an extension is filed
with the planning department within one year from the approval date of the final order, the Planning
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 40/83
Commission, may, upon written request by the applicant, grant a single extension of the expiration
date for a period not to exceed one year from the expiration date of the final order. An extension
shall be based on findings that the facts upon which the conditional use permit was first approved
have not changed to an extent sufficient to warrant re-filing of the conditional use permit.
(G) Conditional Use Permit Application Form
An application for a conditional use permit shall contain the following:
(1) Vicinity map drawn at a scale of l" = 1,000' identifying the location of the proposed site.
(2) Assessor's map with subject site identified.
(3) Site plan drawn to scale on an eighteen inch by twenty-four inch (18" x 24") sheet. Site plan
shall identify all existing and proposed buildings, parking, drives, vegetation or landscaping,
adjacent development.
(4) Property owner's (and agent's) names, addresses, and map and tax lot numbers within 200
feet of the subject site, typed on mailing labels.
(5) Findings prepared by the applicant or his/her representative addressing the criteria set forth
in Section 10.184 (C), Conditional Use Permit Approval Criteria.
(6) A conceptual stormwater facility plan with associated landscape plan, if applicable,
pursuant to Sections 10.486(B) or 10.729(B).
(7) A Landscape Plan, meeting the specifications and requirements in Section 10.780, if
applicable.
[Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2010-160, July 1, 2010 – effective Sept. 1, 2010; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No.
2011-196, Oct. 6, 2011; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2012-32, March 1, 2012; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2015-
123, Dec. 17, 2015; Replaced Sec. 64, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.185 Park Development Review
In order to ensure a harmonious transition between parkland and surrounding uses, a Park
Development Review is required for new and expanded parks, trails, and paths within the Public Parks
zone. All park facilities, including paths and trails within the Public Parks zone, previously approved
under a Conditional Use Permit are subject to the Park Development Review process as described in
this section.
The following uses are subject to a Conditional Use Permit:
1. New or expanded parks, trails, and paths outside of the Public Parks zone
2. New or expanded trails and paths within a riparian corridor
A. Park Development Review Criteria
The approving authority (Planning Commission) shall approve a Park Development Review application
if it can find the proposed park development conforms, or can be made to conform through the
imposition of conditions, with all of the following criteria:
1. The proposed park or park building facility is located within the Public Park zone.
2. The proposal is substantially consistent with the Leisure Services Plan of the Comprehensive
Plan.
3. The proposal complies with all applicable provisions of all city ordinances or the Planning
Commission has approved an exception as provided in Section 10.251.
4. The proposal addresses the mitigation of impacts as described in 10.185(B).
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 41/83
B. Special Conditions
In authorizing a Park Development Review approval, the Planning Commission may impose any of the
following conditions to ensure compliance with the standards of the code, and to otherwise ensure the
general welfare of the surrounding area and the community as a whole:
1. Modify the manner in which the park operates, including restricting the time an activity may
occur, restraints to minimize noise, vibration, air pollution, glare, and odor;
2. Establish a special setback;
3. Modify the height, size, bulk, or location of a building or other structure; this can be
accomplished with changes in: building orientation and articulation, surface materials, windows,
doors, and other architectural features;
4. Designate the size, number, location, or nature of vehicular access points;
5. Modify the improvements within the street right-of-way;
6. Designate the size, location, screening, drainage, surfacing, or other improvement of the parking
areas;
7. Designate the location, surfacing, or type of bicycle parking;
8. Limit or increase the number of vehicular and bicycle parking spaces;
9. Limit the number, size, location, height, or lighting of signs;
10. Limit the number, location, height, directional orientation, and intensity of exterior lighting;
11. Require the installation of landscaping, walls, or fences or other methods of screening and
buffering; designate the size, height, location, or materials of fencing;
12. Increase or decrease the amount of landscaping on the site;
13. Protect, restore, and retain existing natural features.
C. Modifications of a Park Development Review.
1. Major Modification.
Any modification that is not a minor modification is a major modification. A request to
substantially modify a Park Development Review shall be processed in the same manner as a
request for a Park Development Review in Section 10.185. For existing park facilities with
conditional use permit approvals issued prior to the creation of the Park Development Review
process, the review shall be limited to the new or expanded park uses or development. Previously
approved uses or development under the conditional use permit process shall be incorporated into
the Park Development Review decision in order to combine existing and new approvals under this
land use procedure. The Planning Director may waive submittal requirements deemed
unnecessary or inapplicable to the proposal.
2. Minor Modification.
A minor modification to an approved Park Development Review or prior conditional use permit
approval may be approved by the Planning Director provided the Planning Director determines
that the modification does not constitute a major modification. The purpose of the determination
is to assure that a modification does not significantly affect other property or uses; will not cause
any deterioration or loss of any natural feature, nor significantly affect any public facility. A
minor modification is an alteration or change to an approved plan that does not:
(a) Conflict with any required Code and other legal requirements (the proposal
must meet all Land Development Code and other legal requirements);
(b) Relocate vehicle access points and parking areas where the change will generate an
impact that would adversely affect off-site or on-site traffic circulation;
(c) Reduce or eliminate any significant natural resources (streams, creeks, landform).
(d) Conflict with adopted facility and utility plans;
(e) Permit new accessory buildings larger than 1,000 square feet;
(f) Permit open-aired picnic shelters/canopies larger than 1,500 square feet;
(g) Allow a path or trail within a riparian area (paths or trails within existing parks or parks
property, outside of the riparian area, are allowed);
(h) Remove, modify, or reduce previously approved mitigation measures, including but not
limited to fencing or landscaping;
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 42/83
(i) Modify any condition of approval.
D. Expiration of a Park Development Review.
1. Within three (3) years following the final order date, substantial construction on the development
shall be initiated, or if a use, the use shall have commenced operation. If a request for an extension is
filed with the planning department within three (3) years from the approval date of the final order, the
approving authority (Planning Commission), may, upon written request by the applicant, grant a single
extension of the expiration date for a period not to exceed two (2) years from the expiration date of the
final order. An extension shall be based on findings that the facts upon which the Park Development
Review was first approved have not changed to an extent sufficient to warrant refiling of the Park
Development Review application.
2. When it is the intent to complete an approved project in phases, the approving authority may
authorize a time schedule for the issuance of building permits and for the commencement of phases for
a period of eight (8) years, but in no case shall the total time period be greater than eight (8) years
without having to resubmit a new application for Park Development Review.
(E) Park Development Review Application Form
An application for a Park Development Review shall contain the following:
(1) Vicinity map drawn at a scale of 1" = 1,000' identifying the location of the proposed site.
(2) Assessor's map with subject site identified.
(3) Site plan drawn to scale on an eighteen inch by twenty-four inch (18" x 24") sheet. The site
plan shall identify all existing and proposed buildings, parking, drives, vegetation, and/or
landscaping, and adjacent development.
(4) Property owner's and agent's (if any) names, addresses, and map and tax lot numbers of
property within 200 feet of the subject site, typed on mailing labels.
(5) Findings prepared by the applicant or his/her representative addressing the criteria set forth in
Section 10.185(A), Park Development Review Criteria.
(6) A conceptual stormwater facility plan with associated landscape plan, if applicable pursuant
to Sections 10.486(B) or 10.729(B).
(7) A Landscape Plan, drawn to scape, showing existing and proposed landscaping.
[Repealed Sec. 65, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018); Add Sec. 8, Ord. No.
2018-86, July 19, 2018; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2018-133, Dec. 6, 2018.]
10.186 Exception
(A) Exception, Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to empower the approving authority to vary or adapt the strict
application of the public improvement and site development standards as contained in Article III,
Sections 10.349 through 10.361, and 10.370 through 10.385, as well as Articles IV and V of this
chapter. Exceptions may be appropriate for reasons of:
(1) exceptional narrowness or shape of a parcel; or
(2) exceptional topographic conditions; or
(3) extraordinary and exceptional building restrictions on a piece of property; or
(4) if strict applications of the public improvement or site development standards in the abovereferenced
Articles would result in peculiar, exceptional, and undue hardship on the owner.
(B) Criteria for an Exception.
No exception, in the strict application of the provisions of this chapter, shall be granted by the
approving authority having jurisdiction over the land use review unless it finds that all of the following
criteria and standards are satisfied. The power to authorize an exception from the terms of this code
shall be sparingly exercised. Findings must indicate that:
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 43/83
(1) The granting of the exception shall be in harmony with the general purpose and intent
of the regulations imposed by this code for the zoning district in which the exception request is
located, and shall not be injurious to the general area or otherwise detrimental to the health,
safety, and general welfare or adjacent natural resources. The approving authority shall have
the authority to impose conditions to assure that this criterion is met.
(2) The granting of an exception will not permit the establishment of a use which is not
permitted in the zoning district within which the exception is located.
(3) There are unique or unusual circumstances which apply to this site which do not
typically apply elsewhere in the City, and that the strict application of the standard(s) for which
an exception is being requested would result in peculiar, exceptional, and undue hardship on
the owner.
(4) The need for the exception is not the result of an illegal act nor can it be established on
this basis by one who purchases the land or building with or without knowledge of the
standards of this code. It must result from the application of this chapter, and it must be
suffered directly by the property in question. It is not sufficient proof in granting an exception to
show that greater profit would result.
(C) Expiration of an Exception.
Within one year following the final order date, issuance of building permit for vertical construction
shall be completed, or if a use, the use shall have commenced. If a request for an extension is filed
with the Planning Department within one year from the approval date of the final order, the approving
authority may, upon written request by the applicant, grant a single extension of the expiration date
for a period not to exceed one year from the expiration date of the final order. An extension shall be
based on findings that the facts upon which the exception was first approved have not changed to
an extent sufficient to warrant re-filing of the exception. An exception directly related to another land
use review(s), such as an exception which was filed concurrently with the other land use review(s),
and/or an exception which is integrally intertwined with and necessary to the development or use
authorized by the other land use review(s), shall expire when the related land use review(s) expires.
(D) Exception Application Form
An application for an exception shall be made by the owner of the property for which the exception is
requested to the approving authority for the plan authorization involving the exception. An exception
application shall include the following:
(1) A list of the specific standard(s) for which an exception is being requested and a description
of the degree of exception(s) being requested, including findings prepared by the applicant or
applicant's representative addressing the criteria as set forth in Section 10.186 (B), Criteria for
an Exception.
(2) Vicinity map drawn at a scale of 1" = 1000' identifying the location of the site of the
variance.
(3) Assessor's map with the subject site identified.
(4) Site plan showing in detail the circumstance(s) which justifies each exception.
[Amd. Sec. 23, Ord. No. 7659, June 2, 1994; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2003-148, May 15, 2003; Amd.
Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2012-137, Sept. 6, 2012; Replaced Sec. 66, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018
(effective July 23, 2018).]
10.187 [Repealed Sec. 67, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.188 Historic Review
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 44/83
The Historic Review process is hereby established to assure compliance with the Historic
Preservation Overlay, Sections 10.401 through 10.407, the Oregon Administrative Rules, Oregon
Revised Statutes, and to achieve consistency with The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the
Treatment of Historic Properties.
(A) An application for Historic Review is required in the following instances:
(1) To request addition to or removal from the Historic Preservation Overlay for any area,
parcel, or portion thereof. The property owner, Planning Director, Landmarks and Historic
Preservation Commission, or City Council may request initiation of proceedings to change the
extent of the Historic Preservation Overlay.
(2) For proposed exterior alteration and/or new construction within an Historic Preservation
Overlay.
(3) Prior to application for a demolition or relocation permit for all or part of a building,
structure, object or site in an Historic Preservation Overlay.
(B) Historic Review of proposed exterior alteration and/or new construction is required
irrespective of whether a building permit or a development permit is required. Historic Review final
actions shall be taken prior to application for a building permit or proceeding with work that does not
require a permit.
(C) Historic Review, Approval Criteria.
Approval of Historic Review applications shall require findings that the proposal is consistent with the
indicated approval criteria:
(1) Changes to the Historic Preservation Overlay.
The extent of the Historic Preservation Overlay may be changed to include a historic resource
other than those specified in Section 10.402 (1), (2), and (3) through a Type III Historic Review
process if findings can be made substantiating that the proposal is consistent with the criteria
below:
(a) It has been demonstrated that the designation of the historic resource is consistent
with the purposes of the Historic Preservation Overlay in Section 10.401; and,
(b) It has been demonstrated that the designation of the historic resource is
appropriate, considering the historic value of the resource and any other conflicting
values, and will not result in a loss of substantial beneficial use of the property; and,
(c) It has been demonstrated that the historic resource has a significance rank of
“primary” or “secondary” on an historical survey conducted in conformance with the
standards of the Oregon State Historic Preservation Office; or, the historic value of the
resource has sufficient local significance to merit designation as a Local Historic
Resource.
(2) Exterior Alteration and/or New Construction.
The Landmarks and Historic Preservation Commission shall approve a Historic Review
application for exterior alteration and/or new construction within an Historic Preservation
Overlay after consideration during a public hearing, if findings can be made substantiating that
the proposal is consistent, or can be made consistent through the imposition of conditions, with
all of the following criteria:
(a) It has been demonstrated that the proposed exterior alteration and/or new
construction is consistent with the purposes of the Historic Preservation Overlay in
Section 10.401; and,
(b) It has been demonstrated that the proposed exterior alteration and/or new
construction will preserve the historic character, form, and integrity of the historic
resource; and,
(c) It has been demonstrated that the proposed exterior alteration and/or new
construction is consistent with the most current version of the The Secretary of the
Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties; and,
(d) It has been demonstrated that the proposed exterior alteration and/or new
construction is compatible with the historical and architectural style of the historic
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 45/83
resource, of adjacent historic properties, and of the historic district within which it is
located, if any. Assessment of compatibility may include consideration of the design,
arrangement, proportion, detail, scale, color, texture, and materials, and the way new
features will be differentiated from the old; and,
(e) It has been demonstrated that the proposed exterior alteration and/or new
construction is consistent with all other applicable provisions of this Code.
(3) Minor Historic Review.
Minor Historic Review of certain exterior alterations may be conducted by the Planning
Director, according to standards adopted by the Landmarks and Historic Preservation
Commission. The Planning Director shall approve a Minor Historic Review application if the
proposal conforms to approval criteria adopted by the Landmarks and Historic Preservation
Commission. These approval criteria are available at the Planning Department.
Minor Historic Review shall be limited to the review of:
(a) Changes in roofing materials and exterior paint colors in residentially-zoned
Historic Preservation Overlay Districts as per the Paint and Roofing Approval Criteria
adopted in December 2007;
(b) Changes in exterior paint colors in commercially-zoned Historic Preservation
Overlay Districts, when new paint colors are chosen from the adopted color palette;
(c) Changes in awning fabric materials without a change in the shape of the awning
frame, in Historic Preservation Overlay Districts, if the new fabric is either solid or striped
and the fabric colors are chosen from the adopted color palette;
(d) Change of sign face/copy as defined in Section 10.1010.
(4) Demolition and Relocation. The Landmarks and Historic Preservation Commission
shall temporarily delay issuance of a demolition or relocation permit for all or part of a building,
structure, object or site in an Historic Preservation Overlay, unless, during a public hearing:
(a) It is demonstrated that a temporary suspension of the demolition or relocation
permit would not aid in avoiding the demolition or relocation of the historic resource; in
informing the owner of the benefits of renovation; nor in pursuing public or private
acquisition or restoration; and,
(b) In the case of a demolition, it is demonstrated that there is no practical opportunity
to relocate the historic resource to another site, nor to salvage historic or architectural
elements; and,
(c) It is demonstrated that the proposed demolition or relocation would not adversely
affect the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, improvement, or use of any historic
district or other historic resource; and,
(d) It is demonstrated that the benefits of protecting the historic resource no longer
outweigh the benefits of allowing the demolition or relocation.
(5) Temporary Suspension of a Demolition or Relocation Permit.
(a) In the case of temporary suspension of a demolition or relocation permit by the
Landmarks and Historic Preservation Commission, issuance of the permit shall be
delayed for a period of 120 days from the date of application for Historic Review or for
the demolition or relocation permit, whichever is earlier.
(b) The Landmarks and Historic Preservation Commission may invoke an extension of
the suspension period for an additional period not exceeding 90 days if it determines
during a subsequent public hearing that there is a program underway that could result in
public or private acquisition, or preservation or restoration of such building, structure,
object, or site, and that there are reasonable grounds to believe that such a program will
be successful.
(c) During the period of suspension, no permit shall be issued for demolition or
relocation, nor shall any person demolish or move the building, structure, object, or site.
(d) At the end of the suspension period, if all such programs have been unsuccessful,
the Medford Building Safety Director shall issue a demolition or relocation permit as long
as the application otherwise com-plies with all other city ordinances.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 46/83
(D) Historic Review, Conditions of Approval.
In approving a Historic Review application, the Landmarks and Historic Preservation Commission
may impose conditions necessary to ensure compliance with the standards of this Code and the
criteria in this section, and to otherwise protect the health, safety and general welfare of the
surrounding area and community as a whole. These conditions may include, but are not limited to
the following:
(1) Limiting the number, height, location and size of signs;
(2) Requiring the installation of appropriate public facilities and services and dedication of
land to accommodate public facilities when needed;
(3) Limiting the visibility of mechanical equipment through screening or other appropriate
measures;
(4) Requiring the installation or modification of irrigated landscaping, walls, fences or other
methods of screening and buffering;
(5) Limiting or altering the location, height, bulk, configuration or setback of buildings,
structures and improvements;
(6) Requiring the improvement of an existing, dedicated alley which will be used for ingress
or egress for a development;
(7) Controlling the number and location of parking and loading facilities, points of ingress
and egress and providing for the internal circulation of motorized vehicles, bicycles, public
transit and pedestrians;
(8) Requiring the retention of existing natural features;
(9) Modifying architectural design elements including exterior construction materials and
their colors, roofline, fenestration and restricting openings in the exterior walls of structures;
(10) Restricting the height, directional orientation and intensity of exterior lighting.
(E) Historic Review Approval, Expiration.
(1) Approval of a Historic Review application shall take effect on the date the final order for
approval is signed, unless appealed, and shall expire two years from the effective date. Within
two years following the effective date, issuance of building permit for vertical construction must
have occurred or an extension of the approval shall be necessary. If a request for an
extension of a Historic Review application approval is filed with the Planning Department within
two years from the effective date, the Landmarks and Historic Preservation Commission may
grant an extension not to exceed one additional year if based upon findings that the facts upon
which the Historic Review application was first approved have not changed to an extent
sufficient to warrant re-filing of the application.
(2) When it is the developer’s intent to complete an approved project in phases, the
Landmarks and Historic Preservation Commission may authorize a time schedule for the
issuance of building permits for a period exceeding two years, but in no case shall the total
time period for the issuance of building permits be greater than five years without having to resubmit
a new application for Historic Review. Phases developed after the passage of two
years from approval of the Historic Review application shall be required to modify the plans if
necessary to avoid conflicts with changes in the Comprehensive Plan or this chapter.
(F) Major Revisions or Amendments to Historic Review Approval.
Major revisions or amendments to plans approved through Historic Review shall require reapplication.
(G) Issuance of Building Permits Consistent with Historic Review Approval.
(1) All applications for a building permit, wherein Historic Review has been required, shall
be consistent with the plans as approved and all conditions of approval imposed thereon and
shall be accompanied by an accurate and correct plan.
(2) Security for Completion of Public Improvements: If all required public improvements, as
specified in the conditions of Historic Review approval, have not been satisfactorily completed
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 47/83
before issuance of a building permit, the developer shall enter into a written agreement
(provided by the City) to secure full and faithful performance thereof, according to Sections
10.666 and 10.667(A) respectively.
(H) Historic Review Application Content
An application for Historic Review shall include the information and materials listed below:
(1) Application form.
(2) All information requested on the application form.
(3) Findings of fact demonstrating compliance with the approval criteria in Section 10.258,
Historic Review, Approval Criteria.
(4) Appropriate fee.
In addition to that listed, the City may require the applicant to submit additional information
deemed necessary to take action on an application in accordance with this Code and
applicable State laws.
[Added Sec. 68, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.190 Planned Unit Development (PUD) - Application and Approval Provisions
(A) Purpose and Intent of PUDs.
The PUD approach permits flexibility to allow creative and imaginative urban development that
would otherwise not be possible under the strict requirements of this Code. The intent is to promote
more efficient use of urban land and urban services while protecting natural features, creating
common open space, promoting the development of transit-oriented design along designated transit
corridors and within designated transit-oriented development (TOD) areas, and encouraging a
mixture of land uses and housing types that are thoughtfully planned and integrated.
(B) PUD Stepped Process.
Consolidated Applications Authorized: Approval of a PUD shall be a two-step process involving
approval of a Preliminary PUD Plan by the Planning Commission as a Type III land use action as the
first step and approval of a Final PUD Plan by the Planning Director as a Type I land use action as
the second step. As used in Sections 10.190 through 10.194, the Planning Director shall mean the
Director of the Medford Planning Department or their designee. Except applications for annexations
and comprehensive plan amendments, applications authorized in Article II may be consolidated with
an application for a Preliminary PUD Plan per Section 10.114.
(C) Application for a Preliminary PUD Plan.
(1) An application for Preliminary PUD Plan shall be on forms supplied by the City. A complete
application shall include the materials and information listed in this Subsection. However, the
Planning Director, in their discretion, may waive the submittal of any of the materials or
information that are deemed to be excessive, repetitive or unnecessary based upon the size
and nature of the PUD. Unless waived by the Planning Director, the following items shall be
required to constitute a complete application for a Preliminary PUD Plan:
(a) Current assessor map with the boundaries of the proposed PUD identified.
(b) Preliminary PUD Plan (16 copies) and supplemental materials conforming to the Site
Plan and Architectural Review application requirements in Section 10.200 (J).
Additionally, such plans shall include preliminary plans for providing public water and
sanitary sewer service. The Preliminary PUD Plan shall indicate boundaries within the
property which distinguish areas devoted to different land uses pursuant to Subsections
10.190 (C)(1)(c)(vi), 10.192(B)(7) and 10.230(D)(8). Where different land uses are
separated by streets, railroad rights-of-way, drainage channels or other water courses,
the centerlines of such features shall be their boundaries. One copy of the Preliminary
PUD Plan shall be a reduced size suitable for photocopy. If a tentative plat for a land
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 48/83
division is submitted concurrently with a Preliminary PUD Plan, the Preliminary PUD Plan
and tentative plat shall be on separate sheets. It is further provided that:
(i) Unless otherwise required in this Code, architectural plans for single family
detached dwellings and landscaping plans for lots occupied by single family
detached dwellings are not subject to review or approval as part of a PUD.
However, nothing shall prevent an applicant from supplying architectural or
landscaping plans for single family detached housing as a means to comply with
one or more approval criteria.
(ii) If private or non-city standard street lighting is proposed, a street lighting plan
shall be provided which provides a detail of the proposed lighting fixture(s). The
Preliminary PUD Plan shall indicate the location of proposed private or non-city
standard light fixtures.
(iii) An applicant may postpone the submission and approval of architectural plans
for proposed buildings and to have such plans approved later as a separate matter
under Subsection 10.192 (I) after the Preliminary PUD Plan has been approved.
When the approval of architectural plans has been postponed, the Preliminary PUD
Plan shall show a conceptual footprint for each planned building and each building
footprint shall be separately enclosed by a dashed line which shall be called and
labeled a building envelope. Building envelopes shall reasonably anticipate and
define the maximum extent of the footprint for each building in the PUD.
(c) A narrative description of the PUD which shall cover:
(i) The rationale for planning this development as a PUD.
(ii) The nature, planned use, future ownership and method of perpetual
maintenance of land to be left in natural or developed open space or which will be
held in common ownership.
(iii) A listing of all modified applications of the Code that are proposed, followed by
a brief explanation which covers the nature of, extent of, and reason for each
modification.
(iv) If one or more signs are intended to vary from the provisions of this Code, then
a detailed plan for all signs which require a sign permit shall be submitted. The sign
plan shall specify the size, number, type, height and location of all signs which
require a sign permit and shall clearly indicate all proposed modifications.
(v) A proposed development schedule. If the PUD will be constructed in phases,
the development schedule for each phase shall be keyed to a plan that indicates
the boundaries of each phase.
(vi) The gross acreage devoted to the various proposed land uses and housing
types.
(d) Written findings of fact and conclusions of law which address the approval criteria in
Subsection 10.190 (D)
(e) The names and mailing addresses of the owners of record of tax lots, obtained by the latest
tax rolls of the Jackson County Assessor’s Office, located within 200 feet of the exterior
boundary of the whole PUD. The owners of no less than seventy-five (75) tax lots shall be
notified of the pending land use hearing. If seventy-five (75) tax lots are not located within twohundred
(200) feet of the exterior boundary of the PUD, the notification area shall be extended
by successive fifty (50) foot increments, until a minimum of seventy-five (75) tax lots are
included in the notification area. The owners of all tax lots within the extended notification area
shall receive written notice; therefore, noticing of more than seventy-five (75) tax lots may be
required. The names and mailing addresses shall be typed on mailing labels and shall include
the assessor map and tax lot numbers for each parcel.
(f) A conceptual stormwater facility plan with associated landscape plan, if applicable, pursuant
to Sections 10.486(B) or 10.729(B).
(g) Documentation of pre-submittal PUD Neighborhood Meeting. Documentation shall include:
(i)A copy of a Certificate of Mailing for the neighborhood meeting notification mailing
pursuant to Section 10.194(C);
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 49/83
(ii) A completed Verification of Neighborhood Meeting form attesting to the contents of
the materials provided or reviewed at the meeting;
(iii) A set of the notification materials listed in Section 10.194 (B); and,
(iv)The signature sheet(s) from the Neighborhood Meeting.
(2) An applicant may postpone the submission and approval of architectural plans for proposed
buildings and to have such plans approved later as a separate matter under Section 10.192(I)
after the Preliminary PUD Plan has been approved. When the approval of architectural plans
has been postponed, the Preliminary PUD Plan shall show a conceptual footprint for each
planned building and each building footprint shall be separately enclosed by a dashed line
which shall be called and labeled a building envelope. Building envelopes shall reasonably
anticipate and define the maximum extent of the footprint for each building in the PUD.
(3) Extended Notification Area, PUD. The application for Preliminary PUD Plan shall include
the names and mailing addresses of the owners of record of tax lots, obtained by the latest tax
rolls of the Jackson County Assessor’s Office, located within 200 feet of the exterior boundary
of the whole PUD. The owners of no less than seventy-five (75) tax lots shall be notified of the
pending land use hearing. If seventy-five (75) tax lots are not located within two-hundred (200)
feet of the exterior boundary of the PUD, the notification area shall be extended by successive
fifty (50) foot increments, until a minimum of seventy-five (75) tax lots are included in the
notification area. The owners of all tax lots within the extended notification area shall receive
written notice; therefore, noticing of more than seventy-five (75) tax lots may be required. The
names and mailing addresses shall be typed on mailing labels and shall include the assessor
map and tax lot numbers for each parcel.
(D) Approval Criteria for Preliminary PUD Plan.
The Planning Commission shall approve a Preliminary PUD if it concludes that compliance exists
with each of the following criteria:
(1) The proposed PUD:
(a) preserves an important natural feature of the land; or
(b) includes a mixture of residential and commercial land uses; or
(c) includes a mixture of housing types in residential areas; or
(d) includes open space, common areas, or other elements intended for common use or
ownership; or
(e) is otherwise required by the Medford Land Development Code.
(2) The proposed PUD complies with the applicable requirements of this Code, or
(a) the narrative describes the proposed modified standards of the Code and how they
are related specifically to the implementation of the rationale for the PUD as described in
the application, and
(b) the proposed modifications enhance the development as a whole resulting in a more
creative and desirable project, and
(c) the proposed modifications to the limitations, restrictions, and design standards of this
Code will not materially impair the function, safety, or efficiency of the circulation system
or the development as a whole.
(3) The property is not subject to any of the following measures or if subject thereto the PUD
can be approved under the standards and criteria thereunder:
(a) Moratorium on Construction or Land Development pursuant to ORS 197.505 through
197.540, as amended.
(b) Public Facilities Strategy pursuant to ORS 197.768 as amended.
(c) Limited Service Area adopted as part of the Medford Comprehensive Plan.
(4) The location, size, shape and character of all common elements in the PUD are appropriate
for their intended use and function.
(5) If the Preliminary PUD Plan includes uses not allowed in the underlying zone pursuant to
Subsection 10.192(B)(7)(c), the applicant shall alternatively demonstrate that either:
(a) Demands for the Category “A” public facilities listed below are equivalent to or less
than for one or more permitted uses listed for the underlying zone, or
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 50/83
(b) By the time of development the property can be supplied with the following Category
“A” public facilities in sufficient condition and capacity to support development of the
proposed use:
(i) Public sanitary sewerage collection and treatment facilities.
(ii) Public domestic water distribution and treatment facilities.
(iii) Storm drainage facilities.
(iv) Public streets.
Determinations of compliance with this criterion shall be based upon standards of public
facility adequacy as set forth in this Code and in goals and policies of the comprehensive
plan which by their language and context function as approval criteria for comprehensive
plan amendments, zone changes or new development. In instances where the Planning
Commission determines that there is insufficient public facility capacity to support the
development of a particular use, nothing in this criterion shall prevent the approval of
early phases of a phased PUD which can be supplied with adequate public facilities.
(6) If the Preliminary PUD Plan includes uses proposed under Subsection 10.192(B)(7)(c),
approval of the PUD shall also be subject to compliance with the conditional use permit criteria
in Section 10.184.
(7) If approval of the PUD application includes the division of land or the approval of other
concurrent land use applications as authorized in Subsection 10.190(B), approval of the PUD
shall also be subject to compliance with the substantive approval criteria in Article II for each of
the additional land use applications.
(E) Conditions of Preliminary PUD Plan Approval.
If the Planning Commission approves a Preliminary PUD Plan, in addition to conditions of approval
authorized under Section 10.200(F), it may attach conditions to the Preliminary PUD Plan approval
which are determined to be reasonably necessary to ensure:
(1) The Final PUD Plan will be substantially consistent with the approved Preliminary PUD
Plan and specifications related thereto.
(2) Development of the PUD will be consistent with the approved Final PUD Plan and
specifications related thereto. To ensure satisfactory completion of a PUD in compliance with
the approved plans, the Planning Commission may require the developer to enter into an
agreement with the City as specified under Section 10.200(I).
(3) The PUD will comply with the Comprehensive Plan, the Medford Municipal Code and all
provisions of this Code except the specific provisions for which there are approved
modifications.
(4) There are appropriate safeguards to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(5) There will be ongoing compliance with the standards and criteria in this Section.
(6) To guarantee that streets, public facilities and utilities can be appropriately extended from
one PUD phase to each successive future phase in accordance with the approved Preliminary
PUD Plan, the City may require the conveyance of easements or other assurances.
(F) Expiration of Preliminary PUD Plan Approval.
Preliminary PUD Plan approval shall be valid for three years and may not be extended. The threeyear
period shall begin the date the Final Order approving the Preliminary PUD Plan is signed by the
Planning Commission Chairperson. If a Preliminary PUD Plan is appealed, the three-year period
shall begin on the date on which all appeals are resolved, including the resolution of all issues on
remand. Within the three-year time period, an application for a Final PUD Plan must be filed for the
entire site or for the first phase if the PUD has been approved for phased development.
(G) Time Limit Between PUD Phases.
After Final PUD Plan approval for the first phase of a PUD having approved multiple phases, and for
each successive phase thereafter, no more than five years shall lapse between the approval of
phases. If more than five years pass between the Final PUD Plan approval of any two PUD phases
after the first phase, the Planning Commission may, without the consent of the owner(s) of the PUD,
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 51/83
initiate action to terminate undeveloped portions of the PUD under Section 10.198(B).
(H) Binding Effect; Previously Approved PUDs.
A PUD Plan approval shall run with the land and shall be binding upon all successors in interest in
all land within the whole PUD. It is further provided that a Preliminary PUD Plan approval shall
remain in full force and effect unless the approval expires or is terminated by action of the City
pursuant to Section 10.198(B). Preliminary plans submitted prior to the adoption date of this
ordinance, and final plans resulting from those preliminary plans, are subject to the regulations for
PUDs in effect at the time the preliminary plan application was submitted.
[Replaced Sec. 69, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.191 [Repealed Sec. 70, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.192 Preliminary PUD Plan - General Provisions
(A) Minimum Acreage for a PUD.
PUDs must contain one acre or more at the time of application filing.
(B) Modified Application of Standards Authorized for PUDs.
To fulfill the purpose and intents of the standards set forth in Section 10.190(A), authority is herewith
granted for the approval of PUDs which vary from the strict standards of this Code. The nature and
extent of potential modifications shall be limited to the categories below described, provided that the
City, in approving such modifications, shall not violate substantive provisions of the Oregon
Transportation Planning Rule:
(1) Lots and Parcels in PUDs. Limitations, restrictions and design standards pertaining to
the size, dimension, location, position and coverage of lots, and restrictions related to through
lots.
(2) Yards, Setbacks and Building Height in PUDs. Limitations, restrictions and design
standards pertaining to the location, size, height, yards and setbacks for buildings and other
structures.
(3) Parking, Bicycle and Pedestrian Standards in PUDs. Limitations, restrictions and
design standards pertaining to off-street vehicle and bicycle parking and loading, and
standards related to pedestrian access.
(4) Frontage, Access, Landscaping and Signs in PUDs. Limitations, restrictions and
design standards pertaining to lot frontage, access, required landscaping, signs and
bufferyards.
(5) Streets Generally in PUDs. Streets within PUDs may be either city streets dedicated
for public use or private streets owned and maintained by an association of owners, and may
exceed maximum block length and perimeter standards provided in Section 10.426(C)(1).
Streets within or adjacent to a PUD shall comply with the following:
(a) Collector and arterial streets shall be dedicated city streets, the existence and
general location of which shall be determined by the Comprehensive Plan.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 52/83
(b) City streets shall comply fully with the strict requirements of this Code, provided that
the City in approving a PUD may permit the width of parking lanes for city streets to be
less than the Code otherwise requires.
(c) The City may require any proposed PUD street or segment thereof to be constructed
and dedicated as a city street.
(6) Private Streets in PUDs. Private streets may vary from the limitations, restrictions and
design standards pertaining to streets with respect to length, width, position, aspect,
intersection standards, grades, curve radii, cul-de-sac turnarounds, street lights, easements,
sidewalks, curbs and driveway approaches for streets within the PUD, provided:
(a) With respect to the amount, quality and installation of construction materials, private
streets shall be structurally equivalent to or better than city-standard streets.
(b) The City Fire Marshall shall approve the design of all private streets for access by
emergency vehicles before approval of the Preliminary PUD.
(c) Private streets shall be posted as private streets and shall connect to the public
street system. The applicant shall convey to the City and all appropriate utility
companies a perpetual easement over the private street(s) for use by emergency
vehicles and employees of the City and utility company(s) in the maintenance of public
facilities and utilities.
(7) Allowed Uses and Housing Types in PUDs. The following uses and housing types shall be
permitted as part of a PUD subject to the following:
(a) In addition to permitted uses, any portion of a PUD may contain any housing type
listed in Subsection 10.314(1-3). In approving housing types, the Planning Commission
may waive or reduce any of the special use regulations or standards contained in
Sections 10.811 through 10.839.
(b) Any conditional use listed for the underlying zone may be permitted without
addressing the Conditional Use Permit criteria in Section 10.184 except when the
conditional use is within 200 feet of the perimeter of the PUD. This exemption does not
apply to conditional uses within Riparian Corridors pursuant to Section 10.925.
(c) Use(s) not permitted in the underlying zone may, nevertheless, be permitted and
approved to occupy up to 20% of the gross area of the PUD provided that no portion of
the use(s), including its parking, is located nearer than 200 feet from the exterior
boundary of the PUD. If any portion of the use(s) is nearer than 200 feet from the
exterior PUD boundary, then said use(s) shall be considered to be a conditional use and
may be approved subject to compliance with the conditional use permit criteria in Section
10.184. However, this provision shall not apply where the land outside the PUD which is
nearer than 200 feet from proposed use(s) is inside a zone in which the proposed use(s)
is permitted.
(8) Mixed Land Use Designations in PUDs.
Unless otherwise prohibited, PUDs that have more than one General Land Use Plan
designation or Southeast Plan land use category shall have the flexibility to mix or relocate
such designations within the boundaries of the PUD in any manner and/or location as may be
approved by the Planning Commission.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 53/83
(C) Common Elements in PUDs.
A multi-family residential PUD must include a minimum of 20% of the land area as common area
unless otherwise modified by the Planning Commission. This common area shall be for the purpose
of providing protection for natural features, common recreational space, landscaped area, or
commonly enjoyed amenities other than parking areas or private streets. Where a PUD has open
spaces, private streets, parking or other elements to be owned or maintained in common by the
owners or future owners of land or improvements within the PUD, the Final PUD Plan shall not be
approved and no unit shall be sold or conveyed until the PUD has been found to comply with the
following requirements, as applicable:
(1) PUD Planned Community.
If the PUD is a planned community under ORS Chapter 94, the declaration and tentative plat
for the planned community shall be submitted with the Final PUD Plan for approval by the
Planning Director before recording in the official records of Jackson County.
(2) PUD Condominium.
If the PUD is a condominium under ORS Chapter 100, a copy of the recorded declaration and
plat shall be submitted to the City after it has been approved by the Oregon Real Estate
Commissioner and recorded in the official records of Jackson County. A condominium
declaration and plat shall not be reviewed and approved by the Planning Director and the
Planning Director shall have no authority under this Subsection to require changes thereto.
(3) PUD Common Ownership.
If the PUD contains elements intended for common ownership but ORS Chapters 94 and 100
do not apply, there shall be appropriate legal documents which assure that the common
elements will be improved and perpetually maintained for their intended purposes. The legal
documents in such instance shall be submitted to the Planning Director for approval as part of
the Final PUD Plan before recording in the official records of Jackson County.
(4) Phased PUDs.
When a PUD is proposed to be developed in phases, the phased provision of improved
common elements shall be roughly proportional with the development of housing and other
elements intended for private ownership. Unless approved by the Planning Commission as
part of a phasing plan or which was approved by the Planning Commission prior to the
adoption of this ordinance, no significant common element shall be postponed to the final
phase of a PUD. Nothing in this Subsection shall prevent the provision of improved common
elements at a rate that is proportionally greater than the development of housing and other
elements intended for private ownership.
(5) Public Dedications and PUDs.
Land shown on the Final PUD Plan as a common element or which is intended for public
dedication shall be conveyed under one of the following options:
(a) To a public entity which shall agree in writing to perpetually maintain the common
element(s) being conveyed.
(b) To an association of owners created pursuant to ORS Chapters 94 or 100 or as
otherwise created under Subsection 10.192(C)(3) in which instance the legal document
which establishes the association shall provide that the association cannot be terminated
or discontinued without the City’s prior consent.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 54/83
(6) Private Streets in PUDs.
If the PUD will have private streets, the legal document which establishes the association of
owners shall provide that the City may enforce the maintenance or protection of its easements
or public facilities.
(D) PUDs Exempt from Site Plan and Architectural Review.
PUDs approved under this Section shall be exempt and there shall be no requirement to apply
separately for Site Plan and Architectural Review or to demonstrate compliance with the criteria in
Section 10.200. However, the Planning Director in their discretion may forward a Preliminary PUD
Plan or proposed revisions thereto to the Site Plan and Architectural Commission for review. When
forwarded by the Planning Director, the Site Plan and Architectural Commission shall have authority
to review the PUD plans and make recommendations to the Planning Commission.
(E) Delegation of Authority.
The Planning Commission may delegate authority to the Site Plan and Architectural Commission or
to the Planning Director to approve in its name the plans for buildings or any other element of a PUD
or revisions thereto after the Planning Commission has approved the Preliminary PUD Plan. The
authority delegated by the Planning Commission under this Subsection shall be delimited in
conditions attached to the approval. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code and subject to
an applicant’s written request, the approval of delegated matters, where eligible, shall be
procedurally treated as an Expedited Land Division pursuant to ORS 197.360 through 197.380, as
amended. Lacking a written request from the applicant, approval of delegated matters shall be
subject to a Type III Procedure as set forth in this Article.
(F) Building Permits, Development and Operation of a PUD.
All building and construction plans submitted to the City for the purpose of obtaining building and
other site improvement permits shall be consistent with the approved Final PUD Plan. The
development and operation of the PUD shall conform in all respects with the approved Final PUD
Plan.
(G) Residential Density in PUDs.
(1) Residential Density Calculation.
Minimum and maximum residential densities in PUDs shall be calculated pursuant to Section
10.708, except, in PUDs having residential and non-residential land uses within a residential
zoning district, including mixed-use buildings as defined herein, the minimum and maximum
number of dwelling units shall be calculated using the gross area of the residentially zoned
land including any to be occupied by non-residential uses. “Natural unbuildable areas” may be
excluded at the developer’s option as provided in Section 10.708.
(2) Residential Density Bonus.
In PUDs larger than five acres, the residential density may be increased by up to 20% more
than the maximum density permitted by Subsection (1) above.
(H) Revised Preliminary PUD Plans.
In instances where conditions of approval result in substantial, complex or unpredictable changes to
a proposed Preliminary PUD Plan, the Planning Commission, as a condition of Preliminary PUD
Plan approval, may require an applicant to incorporate the changes into a revised Preliminary PUD
Plan. When required, the revised plans shall be approved by the Planning Commission and when
approved, the revised plans shall become the approved Preliminary PUD Plan and any conditions
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 55/83
satisfied by the revised plans shall be stricken or appropriately altered.
(I) Postponed Preliminary PUD Plan Approval for Building Architecture.
When the approval of architectural plans for buildings in the PUD has been postponed under Section
10.190(C)(2), no Final PUD Plan shall be approved until the architecture of buildings has been
approved by the Planning Commission, or by the Site Plan and Architectural Commission pursuant
to Subsection (E) above, and the Final Order for such approval has been appended to the earlier
approval of the Preliminary PUD Plan.
(J) Engineering Construction Plans, Preliminary PUD Plans.
Engineering construction plans, profiles, details and specifications for all public facility and utility
improvements shall be prepared by a qualified engineer registered in Oregon. The engineering
plans shall be approved by the City before the start of construction. Unless specifically authorized
by the Planning Commission in the Preliminary PUD Plan approval, all public facilities and utilities
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards and procedures of the City or
other public entity to which ownership will be conveyed. The procedures for engineering design, plan
approval and inspection shall in all respects be the same as for land divisions under this Code.
[Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2010-160, July 1, 2010 – effective Sept. 1, 2010; Replaced Sec. 71, Ord.
No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.194 Preliminary PUD Plan - Neighborhood Meeting Requirement
(A) Purpose of Neighborhood Meeting Requirement for Preliminary PUD Plans.
To ensure neighborhood knowledge of proposed development and to provide an opportunity for
direct communication, the applicant shall present the development proposal at a neighborhood
meeting prior to submitting the land use application to the Planning Department. The applicant shall
arrange and conduct the neighborhood meeting. City staff need not attend. Attendees shall be
asked to sign a signature sheet and provide their mailing address. Attendance at the neighborhood
meeting does not give an attendee legal standing for appeal.
(B) Neighborhood Meeting Presentation, Preliminary PUD Plans.
The presentation at the neighborhood meeting shall include at a minimum the following:
(1) A map depicting the location of the subject property proposed for development; and,
(2) A visual description of the project including a tentative site plan, tentative subdivision plan
and elevation drawings of any structures, if applicable; and,
(3) A description of the nature of the proposed uses and physical characteristics, including but
not limited to, sizes and heights of structures, proposed lot sizes, density; and,
(4) A description of requested modifications to code standards; and
(5) Notification that attendance at the neighborhood meeting does not give legal standing to
appeal to the City Council, the Land Use Board of Appeals, or Circuit Court.
(C) Scheduling and Noticing Neighborhood Meeting, Preliminary PUD Plans.
It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to schedule the neighborhood meeting and provide
adequate notification of the meeting. The applicant shall send mailed notice of the neighborhood
meeting to the owners of no less than 75 of the nearest tax lots regarding the neighborhood
meeting. If 75 tax lots are not located within 200 feet of the exterior boundary of the PUD, the
notification area shall be extended by successive 50-foot increments, until a minimum of 75 tax lots
are included in the notification area. The owners of all tax lots within the extended notification shall
receive written notice; therefore, noticing of more than 75 tax lots may be required. In addition to the
affected property owners, the applicant shall also provide notice to the Planning Department. The
applicant shall use the Jackson County Tax Assessor’s property owner list from the most recent
property tax assessment roll. The notice shall be mailed a minimum of 15 days prior to the
neighborhood meeting which shall be held in Medford on a weekday evening. A certificate of
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 56/83
mailing attesting to the date of mailing and the name and signature of the agent responsible for
mailing said notices shall be prepared and submitted to the Planning Department in accordance with
the materials identified in the application for Preliminary PUD Plan. The notice for PUD
neighborhood meeting shall include:
(1) Date, time and location of the neighborhood meeting; and,
(2) A brief written description of the proposal; and,
(3) The location of the subject property, including address (if applicable), nearest cross streets
and any other easily understood geographical reference, and a map (such as a tax assessor’s
map) which depicts the subject property.
[Added Sec. 72, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.195 [Repealed Sec. 73, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.196 Final PUD Plan - Application Procedures
(A) Application for a Final PUD Plan.
Application for a Final PUD Plan shall be on forms supplied by the Planning Department. The Final
PUD Plan shall contain all information and materials listed on the application unless certain items
are or have been waived by the Planning Director as therein provided. However, there shall be no
burden to demonstrate compliance with the criteria in Subsection 10.190(D). As appropriate, the
Final PUD Plan shall incorporate all conditions imposed on the Preliminary PUD Plan approval. The
application for a Final PUD Plan shall include a written narrative explaining how the Final PUD Plan
complies with the Final PUD Plan approval criteria in Subsection (D) below, and the conditions of
approval.
(B) Phased PUD.
The Final PUD Plan may be submitted for the entire project or for each phase consistent with the
approved Preliminary PUD Plan. If a Preliminary PUD Plan was not approved as a phased project,
nothing in this Section shall prevent the Planning Director from approving a Final PUD Plan in
phases provided that they approve a phasing plan pursuant to Sections 10.190(G) and 10.192(C)(4)
as part of the Final PUD Plan approval, and provided further that the phasing plan ensures that
essential services such as roads, fire access, storm drain, and sewer are available to serve each
successive phase. After Final PUD Plan approval for the first phase, Final PUD Plans for all
subsequent phases must be filed with the Planning Director.
(C) Final Plat for Land Division.
Application for the approval of a Final PUD Plan may occur before or concurrent with the approval of
a final plat for a land division. However, no building permits shall be issued by the City and no
buildings intended for human occupancy shall be constructed and no lot shall be sold until the Final
PUD Plan has been approved by the Planning Director.
(D) Approval Criteria for Final PUD Plan.
A Final PUD Plan shall be approved by the Planning Director if the Director concludes that it
complies with each of the following criteria:
(1) Provisions for the establishment and maintenance of elements to be held in common
ownership, if any, have or will comply with the standards in Section 10.192(C).
(2) The Final PUD Plan is substantially consistent with the Preliminary PUD Plan and with any
and all conditions imposed by the Planning Commission which were attached to the approval
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 57/83
of the Preliminary PUD Plan.
(E) The Planning Director in their discretion may forward a Final PUD Plan to the Planning
Commission for written clarification regarding whether the Final PUD Plan is substantially consistent
with the Preliminary PUD Plan. When forwarded by the Planning Director, the Planning Commission
shall have authority to review the PUD plans and advise the Planning Director.
(F) Modification of a phasing plan shall be considered substantially consistent with the Preliminary
PUD Plan unless the revised phasing plan affects the provision of essential services such as public
streets, sewer or storm drain to serve the successive phases.
(G) A Final PUD Plan shall be found to be inconsistent with the Preliminary PUD Plan when any of
the following apply. If such inconsistencies are identified, an application for revision to the
Preliminary PUD Plan shall be required:
(1) The exterior boundaries of the PUD have changed except for slight deviations which result
from the resolution of boundary errors or inconsistencies discovered when the PUD property
was surveyed,
(2) The number of housing units has increased,
(3) The number of housing units has decreased by more than five percent,
(4) Modifications to the provisions of this Code have been included which were not approved
as part of the Preliminary PUD Plan under Section 10.192(B).
[Amd. Sec. 25, Ord. No. 7659, June 2, 1994; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2003-284, Nov. 6, 2003; Amd.
Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2008-236, Nov. 20, 2008; Replaced Sec. 74, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018
(effective July 23, 2018).]
10.197 [Repealed Sec. 75, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.198 Revision or Termination of a PUD
(A) Revision of a Preliminary or Final PUD Plan.
The expansion or modification of a PUD approved under earlier PUD ordinances of the City or the
revision of a Preliminary or Final PUD Plan shall follow the same procedures required for initial
approval of a Preliminary PUD Plan in this Section, provided:
(1) Applicant for Revision; Filing Materials; Procedures.
An application to revise an approved PUD Plan shall be on forms supplied by the Planning
Department. The application form shall bear the signature of the owner(s) who control a
majority interest in more than 50% of the vacant land covered by the approved PUD and who
are also the owner(s) of land and improvements within the PUD which constitute more than
50% of the total assessed value of vacant portion of the PUD. For changes deemed by the
Planning Director to be minor but not de minimis, the Planning Director shall exercise
appropriate discretion under Section 10.190(C)(1) to limit or waive the submittal of filing
materials deemed to be excessive, repetitive or unnecessary based upon the scope and
nature of the proposed PUD revisions. PUD revisions shall follow the same procedures used
for initial approval of a Preliminary PUD Plan.
(2) Consolidated Procedure.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 58/83
At the discretion of the Planning Director, revisions to an approved PUD Plan may be
consolidated into a single procedure, the effect of which will be the approval of both a
Preliminary PUD Plan and Final PUD Plan by the Planning Commission.
(3) Burden of Proof; Criteria for Revisions.
The burden of proof and supporting findings of fact and conclusions of law for the criteria in
Sections 10.190(D) or 10.196(D), as applicable, shall be strictly limited to the specific nature
and magnitude of the proposed revision. However, it is further provided that the design and
development aspects of the whole PUD may be relied upon in reaching findings of fact and
conclusions of law for the criterion at Section 10.190(D)(5). It is further provided that before
the Planning Commission can approve a PUD Plan revision, it must determine that the
proposed revision is compatible with existing developed portions of the whole PUD.
(4) De Minimis Revisions.
Notwithstanding Section 10.192(E), the Planning Director may approve revisions to an
approved Preliminary or Final PUD Plan that they determine is de minimis. Proposed revisions
shall be considered de minimis if the Planning Director determines the changes to be slight
and inconsequential and will not violate any substantive provision of this Code. The Planning
Director’s written approval of a de minimis revision(s) shall be appended to the Final Order of
the Planning Commission or Final Approval of the Final PUD Plan. Revisions that are de
minimis shall not require public notice, public hearing or an opportunity to provide written
testimony. However, if, while the record is open, any party requests in writing to be notified of
future de minimis revisions of a Preliminary PUD Plan, then all de minimis revisions of a
Preliminary PUD Plan shall be subject to review as a Type III land use action or such other
procedure as may be permitted by law.
(B) Termination of a PUD.
A PUD may be terminated by action of the Planning Commission subject to the following
procedures:
(1) If issuance of building permits for vertical construction has not occurred or if no lots or
units therein have been sold, the PUD may be terminated as provided in this Subsection.
Termination proceedings may be initiated by filing with the City a written petition signed by the
owner(s) who control a majority interest in more than 50% of the land covered by the approved
PUD and which also constitutes more than 50% of the total assessed value of land and
improvements of the PUD. Upon receipt of a valid petition, the Planning Commission shall
consider the matter in an open meeting and shall declare the PUD terminated. The Planning
Commission’s termination of a PUD shall be evidenced by a Final Order declaring the same.
When the Final Order is signed the PUD shall be terminated and previous PUD Plan approvals
shall be considered void and of no further effect. Termination of a PUD shall not affect other
land use actions taken by the City which concern the PUD property.
(2) If issuance of building permits for vertical construction has occurred or if lots or units
within the PUD have been sold, the PUD may be terminated as provided in this Subsection.
Termination proceedings may be initiated by filing with the City a written petition signed by the
owner(s) who control a majority interest in more than 50% of the vacant land covered by the
approved PUD which also constitutes more than 50% of the total assessed value of vacant
land within the PUD. If there is an association of owners established within the boundaries of
the whole PUD, the owner(s) petitioning for termination of the PUD shall also supply the City
with the correct mailing address of the association which shall be notified along with others
entitled to notice under this Subsection. Upon receipt of the petition, the Planning Commission
shall provide notification of the proposed PUD termination and conduct a public hearing on the
matter. The Notice and public hearing shall be subject to Type III procedures. The Planning
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 59/83
Commission shall declare the PUD terminated if it concludes that the termination will not
produce greater than minimal harm to the public health, safety or general welfare. The
Planning Commission’s termination of a PUD shall be evidenced by a Final Order declaring the
same and after the Final Order is signed the PUD shall be terminated and previous PUD Plan
approvals shall be considered void and of no further effect. Termination of a PUD shall not
affect other land use actions taken by the City which concern the PUD property.
[Amd. Ord. No. 7857, April 6, 1995; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2003-284, Nov. 6, 2003; Replaced Sec.
76, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018); Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2018-133,
Dec. 6, 2018.]
10.199 [Repealed Sec. 77, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.200 Site Plan and Architectural Review
(A) Purpose of Site Plan and Architectural Review.
The Site Plan and Architectural Review process is established in order to provide for review of the
functional and aesthetic adequacy of commercial, industrial and multi-family development and to
assure compliance with the standards and criteria set forth in this chapter for the development of
property as applied to the improvement of individual lots or parcels of land as required by this code.
Site Plan and Architectural Review considers consistency in the aesthetic design, site planning and
general placement of related facilities such as street improvements, off-street parking, loading and
unloading areas, points of ingress and egress as related to bordering traffic flow patterns, the
design, placement and arrangement of buildings as well as any other subjects included in the code
which are essential to the best utilization of land in order to preserve the public safety and general
welfare, and which will encourage development and use of lands in harmony with the character of
the neighborhood within which the development is proposed.
(B) Site Plan and Architectural Review Required.
Projects which are not exempt from Site Plan and Architectural Commission Review pursuant to
Subsection (C) below, except that exterior alterations to a building or site and new construction in a
Historic Overlay shall require Historic Review pursuant to Section 10.188, but shall not require Site
Plan and Architectural Review.
(C) Exemptions from the Site Plan and Architectural Commission Review Requirement.
(1) An exemption from Site Plan and Architectural Commission (SPAC) review does not
exempt the use or development from compliance with the applicable standards of this chapter,
including but not limited to access, parking, riparian protection, and landscaping. Exemptions
under this section do not apply to uses subject to a conditional use permit or park development
review or major modification thereof.
(2) The following uses or developments do not require SPAC review.
(a) Parking lots and parking lot additions, when not associated with building
construction required to be reviewed by the Site Plan and Architectural Commission,
except any parking lot or parking lot additions located within a Historic Overlay requires
Historic Review. (Effective Dec. 1, 2013.)
(b) Construction of a new building if it does not increase motor vehicle trip generation
by more than 10 average daily trips, unless within a Historic Overlay, in which case,
Historic Review is required for all new construction. (Effective Dec. 1, 2013.)
(c) A building addition similar to the existing building in architectural style and exterior
building materials and that is no more than a 20 percent or 2,500 square-foot increase in
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 60/83
gross floor area, whichever is less, unless within a Historic Overlay, in which case,
Historic Review is required for all building additions and exterior alterations. (Effective
Dec. 1, 2013.)
(d) Detached single-family residential development on a lot within a final platted land
division or on an otherwise legally created lot, unless within a Historic Overlay, in which
case, Historic Review is required for all single-family residential development. (Effective
Dec. 1, 2013.)
(e) Solar Photovoltaic/Solarvoltaic energy systems, as defined in ORS 757.360,
except when located on historic landmarks or within historic districts, in which case the
review authority shall be the Landmarks and Historic Preservation Commission.
(f) One duplex dwelling divided by a lot-line or on a single, vacant lot within a final
platted land division or on an otherwise legally created lot, unless within a Historic
Overlay, in which case, Historic Review is required.
(g) Airport accessory structure(s) including hangars, aircraft storage, maintenance
facilities, warehouse storage, and office buildings to be located on airport property within
the secured fence area (as shown on the Medford Zoning Map) not intended for public
use.
(D) Site Plan and Architectural Review approval and a development permit shall be required prior
to the application for a building permit.
(E) Site Plan and Architectural Review Approval Criteria.
(1) The Site Plan and Architectural Commission shall approve a site plan and architectural review
application for a commercial or industrial development, if it can find that the proposed development
conforms, or can be made to conform through the imposition of conditions, with the following criteria:
(a) The proposed development is compatible with uses and development that exist on
adjacent land, and
(b) The proposed development complies with the applicable provisions of all city ordinances or
the Site Plan and Architectural Commission has approved (an) exception(s) as provided in
Section 10.186.
(2) The Site Plan and Architectural Commission shall approve a site plan and architectural review
application for a residential development if the proposed development complies with the applicable
provisions of all city ordinances, or if the Site Plan and Architectural Commission has approved
either of the following:
(a) Any Exceptions, as provided for in MLDC Section 10.186, which resolve(s) any instances
of non-compliance with those provisions.
(b) Any Adjustments or Exceptions from the Special Development Standards for Multiple-
Family Dwellings, as provided for in MLDC Section 10.715A through 10.717.
(F) Site Plan and Architectural Review Conditions of Approval. In approving a site plan and
architectural review application, the Site Plan and Architectural Commission may impose, in addition
to those standards expressly specified in this code, conditions determined to be reasonably
necessary to ensure compliance with the standards of the code and the criteria in Subsection (E)
above, and to otherwise protect the health, safety and general welfare of the surrounding area and
community as a whole. These conditions may include, but are not limited to the following:
(1) Limiting the number, height, location and size of signs;
(2) Requiring the installation of appropriate public facilities and services and dedication of land
to accommodate public facilities when needed;
(3) Limiting the visibility of mechanical equipment through screening or other appropriate
measures;
(4) Requiring the installation or modification of irrigated landscaping, walls, fences or other
methods of screening and buffering;
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 61/83
(5) Limiting or altering the location, height, bulk, configuration or setback of commercial and
industrial buildings, structures and improvements.
(6) Requiring the improvement of an existing, dedicated alley which will be used for ingress or
egress for a development;
(7) Controlling the number and location of parking and loading facilities, points of ingress and
egress and providing for the internal circulation of motorized vehicles, bicycles, public transit
and pedestrians;
(8) Requiring the retention of existing natural features;
(9) Modifying architectural design elements of commercial and industrial buildings. Such
modifications may include, but are not necessarily limited to: exterior construction materials
and their colors, roofline, and fenestration; and, restricting openings in the exterior walls of
structures;
(10) Modifying architectural design elements of multiple-family dwelling buildings when the
applicant has affirmatively elected to request an adjustment from the Special Development
Standards in MLDC Sections 10.715A through 10.717. Such modifications may include but
are not necessarily limited to: exterior construction materials and their colors, roofline, and
fenestration; and, restricting openings in the exterior walls of structures;
(11) Restricting the height, directional orientation and intensity of exterior lighting
(G) Expiration of a Site Plan and Architectural Review Approval.
(1) Approval of a Site Plan and Architectural Commission application shall take effect on the
date the final order for approval is signed, unless appealed and shall expire two years from the
effective date. Within two years following the effective date, issuance of building permit for
vertical construction must have occurred or an extension of the approval will be necessary. If a
request for an extension is filed with the Planning Department within two years from approval
of the final order, the Site Plan and Architectural Commission shall grant an extension not to
exceed one additional year. Extensions shall be based on findings that the facts upon which
the Site Plan and Architectural Commission application was first approved have not changed
to an extent sufficient to warrant re-filing of the application.
(2) When it is the developer’s intent to complete an approved project in phases, the approving
authority may authorize a time schedule for the issuance of building permits for a period
exceeding one year, but in no case shall the total time period for the issuance of building
permits be greater than five years without having to resubmit a new application for Site Plan
and Architectural Commission review. Phases developed after the passage of one year from
approval of the Site Plan and Architectural Commission application will be required to modify
the plans as necessary to avoid conflicts with changes in the Comprehensive Plan or this
chapter.
(H) Modifications of an Approved Site Plan and Architectural Review.
(1) Major Modification. Any modification that is not a minor modification is a major
modification. When modification to an approved plan is determined to be a Major Modification,
the plan shall be processed as a Type III application for Site Plan and Architectural Review.
The Planning Director may waive submittal requirements deemed unnecessary or inapplicable
to the proposal.
(2) Minor Modification. A minor modification to an approved plan may be made by the
Planning Director provided the Planning Director can make the determination that the
modification does not constitute a major modification. A minor modification shall meet all of the
following standards:
(a) Meets the exemption standards of Subsection (C) above.
(b) No increase in the number of dwelling units.
(c) The amount of open space or landscaping is decreased by no more than 10% of the
previously approved area, provided the resulting area does not drop below the minimum
standards as required by the code.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 62/83
(d) No relocation of vehicle access points and parking areas where the change will
generate an impact that would adversely affect off-site or on-site traffic circulation.
(e) No reduction or elimination of any project amenities such as recreational facilities,
significant natural resources (streams, creeks, landforms), fencing and other screening
material.
(f) Modifications to facilities and utilities conform to the adopted facility plans.
(g) Modifications to any other components of the plan conform to standards of the
Code.
(h) No modification to any condition of approval.
(I) Issuance of Building Permits, Consistent with Site Plan and Architectural Review Approval.
All applications for a building permit, wherein Site Plan and Architectural Review has been required,
shall be consistent with the plans as approved and all conditions of approval imposed thereon and
shall be accompanied by an accurate and correct site plan.
(1) Security for Completion of Public Improvements. If all required public improvements, as
specified in the conditions of site plan and architectural review approval, have not been
satisfactorily completed before issuance of a building permit, the developer shall enter into a
written agreement (provided by the City) to secure full and faithful performance thereof,
according to Sections 10.666 and 10.667(A) respectively.
(2) Agreement for Completion of Private Improvements (for projects with signed agreements
prior to January 1, 2015). The following regulations shall apply to all Building Site
Improvement Agreements (BSIA) signed prior to January 1, 2015. After said date, the
provisions of Building Site Improvement Agreements (BSIA) shall no longer be used as a
means to ensure the completion of private improvements. If all required private improvements,
as specified in the conditions of site plan and architectural review approval, have not been
satisfactorily completed before issuance of a building permit, the permit shall not be issued
unless the owner and all other parties having an interest in the property enter into a written and
recorded agreement, called a Building Site Improvement Agreement (BSIA), (provided by the
City) with the City. The agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the City Attorney and shall
specify that, within six months after signing the agreement or such longer time period as
specified by the Site Plan and Architectural Commission, all improvement work shall be
completed according to the approved plans. The Planning Director or other person designated
by the City Manager shall sign the agreement on behalf of the City.
(a) Extension. If a request for an extension of a Building Site Improvement
Agreement is filed with the Planning Department within six months after signing the
agreement, the Planning Director may grant an extension not to exceed six additional
months. Extensions shall be based on findings that the extension is necessary for good
cause, such as: circumstances beyond the developer’s control that are causing delay in
completing private improvements (i.e., ODOT work, weather-related delays, building
permit delays), so long as no applicable development standards have changed.
(b) Procedure and Enforcement. The agreement shall be recorded in the Official
Records of Jackson County, and once recorded the burdens of the agreement shall run
with the title of the affected property. The property affected by the agreement shall be
the property depicted on the approved site plan. The agreement shall provide that, if the
work is not completed in accordance with its terms within the allotted time, the property
may not thereafter be occupied or used until all deficiencies are corrected. The
agreement shall provide for enforcement by the City through a civil suit for injunction and
provide that the prevailing party shall be awarded costs and reasonable attorney's fees.
When made in substantial compliance with this section, such an agreement shall be
enforceable according to its terms, regardless of whether it would be enforceable as a
covenant at common law.
(c) Satisfaction. Once improvements have been satisfactorily completed according to
the approved plans, a Satisfaction of Building Site Improvement Agreement shall be
signed by the Planning Director or other person designated by the City Manager. The
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 63/83
agreement shall be recorded in the Official Records of Jackson County.
(J) Site Plan and Architectural Review Application Form
The application for Site Plan and Architectural Review (SPAR) shall contain the following plans,
submitted in the quantity and sizes specified on the Site Plan and Architectural Review application
form, including legible reduced copies of all plan documents.
(1) Landscape Plan meeting the specifications and requirements in Section 10.780.
(2) Building Construction Plans: A site plan and architectural plan which are clearly and
legibly drawn to scale shall be provided. Building construction plans shall include north arrow,
orientation of building elevations indicating full dimensions and providing the following
information:
(a) Site Plan:
(i) Lot dimensions.
(ii) All proposed and existing buildings and structures: location, size, height,
proposed use.
(iii) Public and private yards and open space between buildings.
(iv) Walls and fences: location, height and material.
(v) Existing and proposed off-street parking: location, number, type and
dimensions of spaces, parking area, internal circulation pattern.
(vi) Access: pedestrian, vehicular, service, points of ingress and egress.
(vii) Loading: location, dimension, number of spaces, type of space (A or B),
internal circulation.
(viii) Lighting: location and general nature, hooding devices.
(ix) Street dedication and improvements.
(x) Drainage plan.
(xi) Location of existing public improvements including streets, curbs, sidewalks,
street trees, utility poles, light fixtures, traffic signs and signals, and such other data
as may be required to permit the Site Plan and Architectural Commission to make
the required findings.
(xii) Location and screening of mechanical equipment.
(xiii) Location and screening of outdoor trash bins.
(b) Architectural Plans:
(i) Roof plan.
(ii) Floor plan.
(iii) Architectural elevations.
(iv) Materials and Colors.
(c) A conceptual stormwater facility plan with associated landscape plan, if applicable,
pursuant to Sections 10.486(B) or 10.729(B).
[Amd. Sec. 26, Ord. No. 7659, June 2, 1994; Replaced Sec. 78, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018
(effective July 23, 2018); Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2018-86, July 19, 2018; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No.
2018-100, Sept. 6, 2018.]
10.201 [Repealed Sec. 79, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.202 Subdivision Tentative Plat
(A) Application.
The subdividing of land shall be subject to the application requirements as herein set forth and shall
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 64/83
include both the tentative and final platting requirements. The approval of a tentative plat is a Type
III procedure, with the Planning Commission being the approving authority. Final plat approval is a
Type I ministerial procedure which relies on compliance with the requirements established at the
time of tentative plat approval, and on the requirements set forth in Section 10.162.
(B) Application for Tentative Plat.
The tentative plat for each proposed land division shall be filed with the Planning Department.
(C) Form of Tentative Plat and Accompanying Data.
All tentative plats shall be clearly and legibly drawn on tracing paper of good quality and prepared by
a civil engineer or land surveyor registered in the State of Oregon. It shall have a dimension of not
less than 18 inches by 24 inches, and the scale shall be as follows: One inch shall be equal to 50
feet for 20 acres or less, and one inch shall be equal to 100 feet for all divisions of land over 20
acres in area. The tentative plat shall contain the following data:
(1) Proposed land division name (if a subdivision), date, north arrow, scale, total acreage,
and sufficient legal information to define the boundaries of the proposed development.
(2) A key map located in the upper right hand corner identifying the location of the
development relative to section and township lines and to adjacent property and major physical
features such as streets, railroads, and waterways.
(3) Names of abutting property owners on all sides, names and widths of adjoining rightsof-
way, topographic features and all public improvements on adjacent property located within
200 feet of the project boundary.
(4) Name and address of the owner(s) of record, developer, and engineer or land surveyor
registered in the State of Oregon who prepared the tentative plat.
(5) Locations, names, widths, approximate intersection angle, centerline radii, center line
slopes, and improvement section of all streets, highways and other ways in the proposed
project.
(6) Number of lots, dimensions of lots (to the nearest foot), including frontage, width, and
area (to the nearest 50 square feet).
(7) Location and height of all existing structures to remain on property and distance from
proposed property lines.
(8) Location and character of all easements existing and proposed by the developer for
drainage, sewage and public utilities.
(9) Five foot topographic contours describing the area. Where the grade of any part of the
proposed land division exceeds 10%, or where the development abuts existing developed lots,
an overall conceptual grading plan shall be required showing features adjacent to the
development within a reasonable distance therefrom which could affect said project. Where a
conceptual grading plan is required it shall show how runoff of surface water from individual
lots will be achieved and the ultimate disposal of all development surface waters. All
topographic information shall be based on city data.
(10) A conceptual stormwater facility plan with associated landscape plan, if applicable,
pursuant to Sections 10.486(B) or 10.729(B).
(11) Location of all creeks, streams and other watercourses, showing top of existing bank
and areas subject to inundation as shown on the latest Federal Flood Rate Insurance Maps.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 65/83
(12) Existing wells and irrigation canals, active or abandoned, and proposed disposition.
(13) Public or common area proposed, if any.
(14) The approximate distance to, and location of, the nearest sanitary sewer main.
(15) Name of the irrigation district, if any, within which the project is located and whether it is
currently being assessed.
(16) Name of the school district within which the project is located.
(D) Expiration of Tentative Plat Approval.
(1) Approval of a tentative plat application shall take effect on the date the final order for
approval is signed, unless appealed, and shall expire two years from the effective date unless
the final plat has been approved by the Planning Director pursuant to Section 10.158. If a
request for an extension of a tentative plat application approval is filed with the Planning
Department within two years from the date of the final order, the Planning Commission shall
grant an extension not to exceed one additional year. Extensions shall be based on findings
that the facts upon which the tentative plat application was first approved have not changed to
an extent sufficient to warrant re-filing of the application.
(2) When it is the developer’s intent to record and develop a tentatively platted land division
in phases, the Planning Commission may authorize a time schedule for platting the various
phases in periods exceeding one year, but in no case shall the total time period for platting all
phases be greater than five years without having to re-submit the tentative plan. Phases
platted after the passage of one year from approval of the tentative plat will be required to
modify the tentative plat as necessary to avoid conflicts with changes in the Comprehensive
Plan or this chapter.
(E) Land Division Approval Criteria.
The Planning Commission shall not approve any tentative plat unless it first finds that the proposed
land division, together with the provisions for its design and improvement:
(1) Is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, any other applicable specific plans thereto,
including Neighborhood Circulation Plans, and all applicable design standards set forth in
Articles IV and V;
(2) Will not prevent development of the remainder of the property under the same
ownership, if any, or of adjoining land or of access thereto, in accordance with this chapter;
(3) Bears a name that has been approved by the approving authority and does not use a
word which is the same as, similar to, or pronounced the same as a word in the name of any
other subdivision in the City of Medford; except for the words "town", "city", "place", "court",
"addition", or similar words; unless the land platted is contiguous to and platted by the same
applicant that platted the land division bearing that name; or unless the applicant files and
records the consent of the party who platted the land division bearing that name and the block
numbers continue those of the plat of the same name last filed;
(4) If it includes the creation of streets or alleys, that such streets or alleys are laid out to be
consistent with existing and planned streets and alleys and with the plats of land divisions
already approved for adjoining property, unless the Planning Commission determines it is in
the public interest to modify the street pattern;
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 66/83
(5) If it has streets or alleys that are proposed to be held for private use, that they are
distinguished from the public streets or alleys on the tentative plat, and reservations or
restrictions relating to the private streets or alleys are set forth;
(6) Will not cause an unmitigated land use conflict between the land division and adjoining
agricultural lands within the EFU (Exclusive Farm Use) zoning district.
[Amd. Sec. 28, Ord. No. 7659, June 2, 1994; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2011-32, Mar. 3, 2011; Replaced
Sec. 80, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.204 Zone Change
(A) Zone Change Initiation.
A zoning district boundary change may be initiated by the Planning Commission either on its own
motion or at the request of the City Council, or by application of the property owner(s) in the area
subject to the zone change.
(B) Zone Change Approval Criteria.
The Planning Commission shall approve a quasi-judicial, minor zone change if it finds that the zone
change complies with subsections (1) through (3) below:
(1) The proposed zone is consistent with the Transportation System Plan (TSP) and the
General Land Use Plan Map designation. A demonstration of consistency with the
acknowledged TSP will assure compliance with the Oregon Transportation Planning Rule.
(2) Where applicable, the proposed zone shall also be consistent with the additional locational
standards of the below sections (2)(a), (2)(b), (2)(c), or (2)(d). Where a special area plan
requires a specific zone, any conflicting or additional requirements of the plan shall take
precedence over the locational criteria below.
(a) For zone changes to SFR-2, the zoning shall be approved under either of the
following circumstances:
(i) if at least 70% of the area proposed to be re-zoned exceeds a slope of 15%,
(ii) if other environmental constraints, such as soils, geology, wetlands, and
flooding, restrict the capacity of the land to support higher densities.
(b) For zone changes to SFR-10 where the permitted density is proposed to increase,
one of the following conditions must exist:
(i) At least one parcel that abuts the subject property is zoned SFR-10; or
(ii) The area to be re-zoned is five acres or larger; or
(iii) The subject property, and any abutting parcel(s) that is(are) in the same
General Land Use Plan Map designation and is(are) vacant, when combined, total
at least five acres.
(c) For zone changes to any commercial zoning district, the following criteria shall be met
for the applicable zoning sought:
(i) The overall area of the C-N zoning district shall be three acres or less in size and
within, or abutting on at least one boundary, with residential zoning. In determining
the overall area, all abutting property(s) zoned C-N shall be included in the size of
the district.
(ii) The overall area of the C-C zoning district shall be over three acres in size and
shall front upon a collector or arterial street or state highway. In determining the
overall area, all abutting property(s) zoned C-C shall be included in the size of the
district.
(iii) The overall area of the C-R zoning district shall be over three acres in size,
shall front upon an arterial street or state highway, and shall be in a centralized
location that does not otherwise constitute a neighborhood shopping center or
portion thereof. In determining the overall area, all abutting property(s) zoned C-R
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 67/83
shall be included in the size of the district. The C-R zone is ordinarily considered to
be unsuitable if abutting any residential zones, unless the applicant can show it
would be suitable pursuant to (2)(e) below.
(iv) The C-H zone shall front upon an arterial street or state highway. The C-H
zone may abut the General Industrial (I-G), Light Industrial (I-L), and/or any
commercial zone. The C-H zone is ordinarily considered to be unsuitable if
abutting any residential or I-H zones, unless the applicant can show it would be
suitable pursuant to (2)(e) below.
(d) For zone changes to any industrial zoning district, the following criteria shall be met
for the applicable zoning sought:
(i) The I-L zone may abut residential and commercial zones, and the General
Industrial (I-G) zone. The I-L zone is ordinarily considered to be unsuitable when
abutting the Heavy Industrial (I-H) zone, unless the applicant can show it would be
suitable pursuant to (2)(e) below.
(ii) The I-G zone may abut the Heavy Commercial (C-H), Light Industrial (I-L), and
the Heavy Industrial (I-H) zones. The I-G zone is ordinarily considered to be
unsuitable when abutting the other commercial and residential zones, unless the
applicant can show it would be suitable pursuant to (2)(e) below.
(iii) The I-H zone may abut the General Industrial (I-G) zone. The I-H zone is
ordinarily considered to be unsuitable when abutting other zones, unless the
applicant can show it would be suitable pursuant to (2)(e) below.
(e) For purposes of (2)(c) and (2)(d) above, a zone change may be found to be suitable
where compliance is demonstrated with one or more of the following criteria:
(i) The subject property has been sited on the General Land Use Plan Map with a
GLUP Map designation that allows only one zone;
(ii) At least 50% of the subject property’s boundaries abut zones that are expressly
allowed under the criteria in (2)(c) or (2)(d) above;
(iii) At least 50% of the subject property’s boundaries abut properties that contain
one or more existing use(s) which are permitted or conditional use(s) in the zone
sought by the applicant, regardless of whether the abutting properties are actually
zoned for such existing use(s); or
(iv) Notwithstanding the definition of “abutting” in Section 10.012 and for purposes
of determining suitability under Subsection (2) (e), the subject property is separated
from the “unsuitable” zone by a public right-of-way of at least 60 feet in width.
(f) For zone changes to apply or to remove an overlay zone (Limited Industrial, Exclusive
Agricultural, Freeway, Southeast, Historic) the criteria can be found in the applicable
overlay section (Sections 10.345 through 10.413).
(3) It shall be demonstrated that Category A urban services and facilities are available or can
and will be provided, as described below, to adequately serve the subject property with the
permitted uses allowed under the proposed zoning, except as provided in subsection (c)
below. The minimum standards for Category A services and facilities are contained in Section
10.462 as well as the Public Facilities Element and Transportation System Plan in the
Comprehensive Plan.
(a) Storm drainage, sanitary sewer, and water facilities must already be adequate in
condition, capacity, and location to serve the property or be extended or otherwise
improved to adequately serve the property at the time of issuance of a building permit for
vertical construction.
(b) Adequate streets and street capacity must be provided in one of the following ways:
(i) Streets which serve the subject property, as defined in Section 10.461(2),
presently exist and have adequate capacity; or
(ii) Existing and new streets that will serve the subject property will be improved
and/or constructed, sufficient to meet the required condition and capacity, at the
time building permits for vertical construction are issued; or
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 68/83
(iii) If it is determined that a street must be constructed or improved in order to
provide adequate capacity for more than one proposed or anticipated land use, the
Planning Commission may find the street to be adequate when the improvements
needed to make the street adequate are fully funded. A street project is deemed to
be fully funded when one of the following occurs: the project is in the City’s adopted
capital improvement plan budget, or is a programmed project in the first two years
of the State’s current STIP (State Transportation Improvement Plan), or any other
public agencies adopted capital improvement plan budget; or an applicant funds
the improvement through a reimbursement district pursuant to the Section
10.432.The cost of the improvements will be either the actual cost of construction, if
constructed by the applicant, or the estimated cost.The “estimated cost” shall be
125% of a professional engineer’s estimated cost that has been approved by the
City, including the cost of any right-of-way acquisition.The method described in this
paragraph shall not be used if the Public Works Department determines, for
reasons of public safety, that the improvement must be constructed prior to
issuance of building permits.
(iv) When a street must be improved under (b)(ii) or (b)(iii) above, the specific
street improvement(s) needed to make the street adequate must be identified, and
it must be demonstrated by the applicant that the improvement(s) will make the
street adequate in condition and capacity.
(c) In determining the adequacy of Category A facilities, the Planning Commission may
mitigate potential impacts through the imposition of special development conditions,
stipulations, or restrictions attached to the zone change request. Special development
conditions, stipulations, or restrictions shall be established by deed restriction or
covenant, and must be recorded at the County Recorder’s office with proof of recordation
returned to the Planning Department. Such special development conditions shall
include, but are not limited to the following:
(i) Restricted Zoning is a restriction of uses by type or intensity. In cases where
such a restriction is proposed, the Planning Commission must find that the resulting
development pattern will not preclude future development, or intensification of
development on the subject property or adjacent parcels. In no case shall
residential densities be approved that do not meet minimum density standards;
(ii) Mixed-use, pedestrian-friendly design which qualifies for the trip reduction
percentage allowed by the Transportation Planning Rule;
(iii) Transportation Demand Management (TDM) measures which can be
reasonably quantified, monitored, and enforced, such as mandatory car/van pools.
(C) Removal of Special Development Conditions on Zone Changes and General Land Use Plan
(GLUP) Map Amendments.
Deed restrictions, covenants, or conditions of approval on zone changes established in order to
comply with Section 10.204, or General Land Use Plan (GLUP) Map amendments established in
order to comply with Section 10.220, shall only be removed by the following actions:
(1) If an improvement is made to any facility that was lacking adequacy, or if a level of service
standard is changed so that the facility is now determined to be adequate, the property
owner(s) may submit a letter to the Planning Department requesting that development
conditions be removed. If the Planning Director agrees that the facility is adequate and the
condition(s) is no longer necessary, the special development condition can be removed. The
letter signed by the Planning Director, shall be appended to the original approval resolution or
ordinance. In making the determination of facility adequacy, the Planning Director may ask the
property owner(s) for information to demonstrate facility adequacy.
(2) For Zone Change: If the development condition is not removed through the method
described in (1) above, the condition may be removed pursuant to a Type III minor zone
change procedure.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 69/83
(3) For GLUP Map Amendments: If the development condition is not removed through the
method described in (1) above, the condition may be removed pursuant to a Type IV
Comprehensive Plan Map Amendment procedure.
(D) Zone Change Application Form
A zone change application shall contain the following items:
(1) Vicinity map drawn at a scale of 1" = 1,000' identifying the proposed area of change.
(2) Assessor's map with proposed zone change area identified.
(3) Legal description of area to be changed. Legal description shall be prepared by a licensed
surveyor or title company.
(4) Property owner's names, addresses, and map and tax lot numbers within 200 feet of the
subject site, typed on mailing labels.
(5) Findings prepared by the applicant or his representative addressing the criteria for zone
changes as per Section 10.204(B) Zone Change Criteria.
[Added Sec. 81, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018); Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No.
2018-133, Dec. 6, 2018.]
10.205 [Repealed Sec. 82, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.206 [Repealed Sec. 83, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.207 [Repealed Sec. 84, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.208 [Repealed Sec. 85, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.214 Type IV Land Use Actions
(A) Type IV Actions.
Type IV actions comprise the following land use reviews:
Type IV Land Use Application
Annexation, except as provided in Section 10.216
Land Development Code Amendment
Major Comprehensive Plan Amendment
Major General Land Use Plan Map Amendment
Major Urban Growth Boundary Amendment
Major Zoning Map Amendment
Minor Comprehensive Plan Amendment
Minor General Land Use Plan Map Amendment
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 70/83
Minor Urban Growth Boundary Amendment
Transportation Facility Development
Urbanization Plan
Vacation of Public Right-of-Way
(B) Major Type IV land use reviews including amendments to the Land Development Code are
legislative actions and may only be initiated by the Planning Commission or City Council. An
Urbanization Plan is a Major Comprehensive Plan Amendment that may be initiated by the property
owners representing the subject area. See Review & Amendments chapter of the Comprehensive
Plan for definitions of “major” and “minor.”
(C) Minor Type IV land use reviews including Annexations, Transportation Facility Developments
and Vacations are quasi-judicial actions and may be initiated by the Planning Commission, City
Council, or property owners representing the subject area. An exception to the preceding rule is that
the Planning Commission does not initiate annexations.
(D) Type IV Approving Authorities. For Type IV actions the City Council is the approving authority
and the Planning Commission acts as an advisory body to City Council. At a public hearing the
Planning Commission will consider the request and make a recommendation to City Council to
approve or deny the request. For annexations, the City Council makes a decision without a
recommendation from the Planning Commission. Following completion of a recommendation by the
Planning Commission, it shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the City Council. The
decision of the City Council shall be based upon the application, the evidence, comments from
referral agencies, comments from affected property owners (if any), the Planning Commission’s
recommendation (if applicable), compliance with the Statewide Planning Goals and Guidelines, this
code and the Comprehensive Plan.
[Add Sec. 86, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018); Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No.
2018-130, Nov. 15, 2018.]
10.216 Annexation
(A) Annexation is the action taken to incorporate land into a city. The state requires annexation of
property that is contiguous to city limits and within the city’s Urban Growth Boundary.
(B) Application for Annexation. Except for the annexation of unincorporated territory surrounded by
the city as provided in Subsection (E) below, applications for annexation shall, in addition to
requirements contained in the application form, be subject to the provisions of ORS 222.111 to
222.180 or 222.840 to 222.915.
(C) Annexation Approval Criteria. The City Council must find that the following State requirements
are met in order to approve an annexation:
(1) The land is within the City’s Urban Growth Boundary,
(2) The land is contiguous to the current city limits, and
(3) Unless the land being considered for annexation is enclaved by the City or the City
chooses to hold an election, a majority of the land owners and/or electors have consented in
writing to the annexation per ORS 222.125 or ORS 222.170.
(D) Zoning of Annexed Property.
At the time of annexation, the City shall apply a City zoning designation comparable to the previous
County zoning designation. Where no comparable City zoning designation exists, the SFR-00
(Single-Family Residential – one dwelling unit per existing lot) zone or the I-OO (Limited Industrial
Overlay) shall be applied.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 71/83
(E) Annexation of Territory Surrounded by the City.
(1) As authorized in ORS 222.750, the City Council may, by ordinance, annex territory
surrounded by the corporate boundaries of Medford with or without the consent of any owner
of property within the territory or resident of the territory.
(2) Such annexation may be initiated at the request of the Planning Department or City
Council and shall not be subject to the requirements of Sections 10.106, 10.110(D), 10.112,
10.124, 10.214, and 10.216.
(3) A public hearing shall be held prior to the Council’s adoption of an ordinance for
annexation.
(4) Prior to the public hearing, notification shall be mailed to all owners of property within the
area proposed for annexation.
(5) For property that is zoned for, and in, residential use when annexation is initiated by the
City, the City shall specify an effective date for the annexation that is at least three years and
not more than 10 years after the date the City proclaims the annexation approved.
(6) The City shall notify the Jackson County Clerk of the territory subject to delayed annexation
not sooner than 120 days and not later than 90 days before the annexation takes effect.
(F) Annexation Application Form
An application for annexation shall contain the following information:
(1) Vicinity Map drawn at a scale of 1" = 1,000' identifying the proposed area of annexation
and existing city limits.
(2) Assessor's Maps of the proposed annexation area. The assessor's maps shall have
identified those parcels for which consents to annex have been acquired and adjacent right-ofway
to be annexed.
(3) Consent to annex forms completed and signed by all consenting property owners within
the proposed annexation area.
(4) Legal metes and bounds or lot and block description of the annexation area including to
the centerline of the adjacent right-of-way in electronic form per the instructions of the City of
Medford Planning Department.
(5) Specific information on each parcel within the proposed annexation area:
(a) Current assessed valuation shown on County Assessor's tax rolls.
(b) Acreage of both public and private property to be annexed.
(c) Map and tax lot number.
(6) Addresses of all dwelling units and businesses located within the annexation area and
names of all residents and whether they are registered voters.
(7) The following information shall be supplied by the applicant:
(a) Existing land uses within annexation area.
(b) Existing zoning within the annexation area.
(c) Existing improvements:
-water system
- streets
- sanitary sewer
- storm drainage
(d) Special Districts within the area:
- water district
- irrigation district
- fire district
- school district
- Rogue Valley Sewer Services
- other
(e) A completed Census Information Sheet for all parcels being considered for
annexation.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 72/83
(f) Written findings indicating compliance with all of the annexation criteria 1 through 3
contained in Section 10.216(C) Annexation Approval Criteria.
(8) Property owners' (and agents') names, addresses and map and tax lot numbers within 200
feet of the subject site, typed on mailing labels.
[Added Sec. 87, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.218 Land Development Code Amendment Approval Criteria
The Planning Commission shall base its recommendation and the City Council its decision on the
following criteria:
(A) Explanation of the public benefit of the amendment.
(B) The justification for the amendment with respect to the following factors:
(1) Conformity with goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan considered relevant to
the decision.
(2) Comments from applicable referral agencies regarding applicable statutes or
regulations.
(3) Public comments.
(4) Applicable governmental agreements.
[Added Sec. 88, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.220 Major Type IV Amendments
(A) Major Type IV Amendments are those land use changes that have widespread and significant
impact beyond the immediate area, such as changes capable of producing large volumes of traffic,
changes to the character of the land use itself, or changes that affect large areas or involve many
different ownerships. Major Type IV Amendments include:
(1) Major Comprehensive Plan, including separate plans adopted by reference;
(2) Major General Land Use Plan Map;
(3) Major Urban Growth Boundary;
(4) Major Zoning Map Amendment;
(5) Urban Reserves;
(6) Urban Growth Management Agreement; or
(7) Urban Reserve Management Agreement.
(8) Urbanization Plan
(B) Major Type IV Amendment Approval Criteria.
Refer to the Review and Amendment section of the Comprehensive Plan, except in the case of the
following four actions:
(1) Major Zoning Map Amendment. Refer to the approval criteria for Land Development Code
Amendments in Section 10.218.
(2) Urban Growth Boundary Amendment. Refer to Urbanization Element of the
Comprehensive Plan.
(3) Urban Reserve Adoption/Amendment. Refer to ORS 195.137–145 and OAR 660-021.
(4) Urbanization Plan. Refer to Sections 5 and 6 in the Urbanization Planning Chapter in the
Neighborhood Element.
(C) Urbanization Plan Application Form.
An application for an Urbanization Plan shall contain the following items:
(1) Written consent of the owner(s) within the planning unit per the Urbanization Planning
requirements in the Comprehensive Plan.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 73/83
(2) Urbanization Plan map(s) drawn to scale that includes the Plan Contents found in Section
5 in the Urbanization Planning Chapter in the Neighborhood Element (20 copies).
(3) One reduced copy of each size plan (8.5" x 11" and 11" x 17").
(4) Electronic files in dwg format or shapefiles.
(5) Vicinity map including other adjacent planning units and their General Land Use Plan
designations.
(6) Property lines for the subject planning unit and adjacent properties, particularly where new
streets are proposed.
(7) Existing easements of record, irrigation canals, and structures.
(8) Areas designated as unbuildable per the Urban Growth Boundary City Council Report
dated August 18, 2016 (Map A-1), and the status of those areas, including agricultural buffers.
(9) Written or graphical representation of compliance with the Plan Contents found in Section
5 of the Urbanization Planning Chapter in the Neighborhood Element.
(10) Written findings showing compliance with the Regional Plan requirements
(11) Contour lines and topography
(12) Property owners' names, addresses, and map and tax lot numbers within 200 feet of the
project boundaries, typed on mailing labels.
(13) Documentation that a neighborhood meeting was conducted in accordance with Section
10. 194.
[Amd. Sec. 29, Ord. No. 7659, June 2, 1994; Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2007-100, May 17, 2007;
Replaced Sec. 89, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018); Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No.
2018-130, Nov. 15, 2018.]
10.221 [Repealed Sec. 90, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.222 Minor Type IV Amendments
(A) Minor Type IV Amendments typically focus on specific individual properties and are therefore
considered quasi-judicial. Minor Type IV Amendments include:
(1) Minor Comprehensive Plan Amendment;
(2) Minor General Land Use Plan Map Amendment;
(3) Minor Urban Growth Boundary Amendment;
(4) Transportation Facility Development; or
(5) Vacation of Public Right-of-Way.
(B) Minor Type IV Amendment Approval Criteria. For minor amendments to the Comprehensive
Plan, General Land Use Plan Map, or Urban Growth Boundary refer to the Review and Amendment
section of the Comprehensive Plan. For Transportation Facility Development approval criteria refer
to Section 10.226 (B). For the approval criteria for Vacation of Public Right-of-Way refer to Section
10. 228 (D).
[Amd. Sec. 31, Ord. No. 7659, June 2, 1994; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2004-225, Nov. 18, 2004;
Replaced Sec. 91, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 74/83
10.223 [Repealed Sec. 92, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.224 [Repealed Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2018-86, July 19, 2018]
10.224 Minor Comprehensive Plan Application Form
An application for a minor Comprehensive Plan amendment shall contain the following items:
(1) Vicinity map drawn at a scale of 1" = 1,000' identifying the proposed area to be changed on the
General Land Use Map.
(2) Written findings which address the following:
(a) Consistency with applicable Statewide Planning Goals.
(b) Consistency with the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
(c) Consistency with the applicable provisions of the Land Development Code.
[Replaced Sec. 93, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.225 [Repealed Sec. 94, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.226 Transportation Facility Development
(A) Where the City intends to improve a new or existing street and the improvement is to be built
with public funds, the improvement standards set forth in this code are not binding on the City and
the City Council may authorize such exceptions to the standards as it deems proper in the exercise
of its sole and absolute discretion without regard to the exceptions process of Section 10.186.
However, the City shall follow the procedure prescribed through this Subsection in authorizing such
projects. Land use issues decided at the time of approval of the Transportation System Plan (TSP)
do not have to be reexamined at the time of project development.
(B) Transportation Facility Development Approval Criteria.
Preliminary plans for transportation facility development projects shall be consistent with the
following criteria:
(1) Transportation facility development projects shall be consistent with the Transportation
Goals and Policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Transportation facility projects should not prevent development of the remainder of the
property under the same ownership or development of adjoining land.
(3) If the project includes the creation of new streets, such streets should be laid out to
conform to the plats of land divisions already approved for adjoining property.
(4) All transportation projects must be consistent with the adopted Transportation System
Plan (TSP).
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 75/83
(C) City Council Action on Transportation Facility Development.
The resolution or ordinance approving, modifying or disapproving such development shall identify all
exceptions to the design and improvement standards of this Code which are being authorized. The
City Engineer shall prepare detailed final construction plans and specifications in accordance with
such resolution and solicit bids for the construction of the improvements.
(D) Transportation Facility Development Application Form
Preliminary plans required for the transportation facility approval process shall show the following
items:
(1) The location and alignment of the project.
(2) The number of street lanes, bike lanes or sidewalks as applicable.
(3) The extent or limits of such work.
(4) Any exceptions to the design standards established in Sections 10.437 through 10.455.
The City shall cause to be prepared six (6) copies of preliminary project plans which shall be filed
with the Planning Department. Additional copies may be required for transmittal to local agencies
which may be affected by the street improvement.
[Replaced Sec. 95, Ord. No. 2018-65, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.227 [Repealed Sec. 96, Ord. No. 2018-65, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.228 Vacation of Public Right-of-Way
(A) Vacations of public rights-of-way are a means of returning ownership of unneeded public streets
and alleys to adjacent property owners. Vacations of plats and public utility easements (PUEs) are a
means of removing unnecessary easements or plat designations from a parcel of land.
(B) Vacation of Public Right-of-Way Application. A request to vacate a public street, alley,
easement, plat, or public place shall, in addition to the requirements contained herein, be subject to
ORS Chapter 271.
(C) Vacation of Public Right-of-Way Initiation.
Vacations of public rights-of-way shall be initiated either by petition under ORS 271.080 or by City
Council under ORS 271.130.
(D) Vacation of Public Right-of-Way Approval Criteria. A request to vacate shall only be approved by
City Council when the following criteria have been met:
(1) Compliance with the Public Facilities Element of the Comprehensive Plan, including the
Transportation System Plan.
(2) If initiated by petition under ORS 271.080, the findings required by ORS 271.120.
(3) If initiated by the Council, the applicable criteria found in ORS 271.130.
(E) Vacation Application Form
Petitioners or persons requesting a vacation shall file an application containing the following items:
(1) Vicinity Map drawn at a scale of 1" = 1,000' identifying the proposed area of vacation.
(2) Legal description of area proposed to be vacated in electronic form per the instructions of
the City of Medford Planning Department.
(3) A letter requesting City Council initiation, or, if initiated by petition rather than by Council,
consent to vacate forms completed and signed by owners of all abutting property and of not
less than two-thirds in area of the real property affected as defined in ORS 271.080
(4) Assessor’s maps of the proposed vacation area identifying abutting and affected properties.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 76/83
The assessor’s maps shall identify those parcels for which consents to vacate have been
acquired.
(5) Names and addresses of property owners within the area of a plat vacation or all abutting
property and all attached real property within 200 feet laterally and 400 feet beyond the
terminus of each right-of-way to be vacated, including map and tax lot numbers typed on
mailing labels.
(6) Findings that address the approval criteria in Section 10. 228(D), Vacation Criteria.
[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 1999-88, June 3, 1999; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2003-37, Feb. 6, 2003;
Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2011-196, Oct. 6, 2011; Replaced Sec. 97, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018
(effective July 23, 2018).]
10.230 [Repealed, Sec. 98, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.231 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8393, June 19, 1997.]
10.232 [Repealed, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 8393, June 19, 1997.]
10.234 [Repealed, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 8393, June 19, 1997.]
10.235 [Repealed Sec. 99, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.236 [Repealed, Sec. 6, Ord. No. 8393, June 19, 1997.]
10.237 [Repealed, Sec. 7, Ord. No. 8393, June 19, 1997.]
10.238 [Repealed, Sec. 8, Ord. No. 8393, June 19, 1997.]
10.239 [Repealed, Sec. 9, Ord. No. 8393, June 19, 1997.]
10.240 Final PUD Plan - Application Procedures
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 77/83
A. Application for a Final PUD Plan: Application for a Final PUD Plan shall be on forms supplied by the City. The Final PUD
Plan shall contain in final form all information and materials required by Subsection 10.235(B) unless certain items are or
have been waived by the Planning Director as therein provided. However, there shall be no burden to demonstrate
compliance with the criteria in Subsection 10.235(D). As appropriate, the Final PUD Plan shall incorporate all conditions
imposed in the Preliminary PUD Plan approval. The application for a Final PUD Plan shall include a written narrative
explaining how the Final PUD Plan complies with 10.240(G), Approval Criteria for Final PUD Plan, including compliance
with the conditions of approval.
B. Time Limit for Preliminary PUD Plan Approval: Preliminary PUD Plan approval shall be valid for three (3) years and may
not be extended. The three-year period shall be the date the Final Order approving the Preliminary PUD Plan was signed
by the Planning Commission Chairperson. If a Preliminary PUD Plan is appealed, the three-year period shall begin on the
date on which all appeals were resolved, including the resolution of all issues on remand. Within the three-year time period,
an application for a Final PUD Plan must be filed for the entire site or for the first phase if the PUD has been approved for
phased development.
C. Phased PUD: The Final PUD Plan may be submitted for the entire project or for each phase consistent with the
approved Preliminary PUD Plan. If a Preliminary PUD Plan was not approved as a phased project, nothing in this
Subsection shall prevent the Planning Director from approving a Final PUD Plan in phases provided that the Planning
Director approves a phasing plan pursuant to Subsections 10.235(B)(3)(c) and 10.230(E)(4) as part of the Final PUD Plan
approval, and provided further that the phasing plan ensures that essential services such as roads, fire access, storm drain,
and sewer are available to serve each successive phase. After Final PUD Plan approval for the first phase, Final PUD
Plans must be filed with the City for any subsequent phases.
D. Time Limit Between Phases: After Final PUD Plan approval for the first phase of a PUD having approved multiple
phases, and for each successive phase thereafter, no more than five (5) years shall lapse between the approval of phases.
If more than five (5) years pass between the Final PUD Plan approval of any two (2) PUD phases after the first phase, the
Planning Commission may, without the consent of the owners of the PUD, initiate action to terminate undeveloped portions
of the PUD under Subsection 10.245(B).
E. Binding Effect; Previously Approved PUDs: A PUD Plan approval shall run with the land and shall be binding upon all
successors in interest in all land within the whole PUD. It is further provided that a Preliminary PUD Plan approval shall
remain in full force and effect unless the approval expires or is terminated by action of the City pursuant to Subsection
10.245(B). Preliminary plans submitted prior to the adoption date of this ordinance, and final plans resulting from those
preliminary plans, are subject to the regulations for PUDs in effect at the time the preliminary plan application was
submitted.
F. Final Plat for Land Division: Application for the approval of a Final PUD Plan may occur before or concurrent with the
approval of a final plat for a land division. However, no building permits shall be issued by the City and no buildings
intended for human occupancy shall be constructed and no lot shall be sold until the Final PUD Plan has been approved by
the Planning Director.
G. Approval Criteria for Final PUD Plan: A Final PUD Plan shall be approved by the Planning Director if the Director
concludes that compliance exists with each of the following criteria:
1. Provisions for the establishment and maintenance of elements to be held in common ownership, if any, have or
will comply with the standards in Subsection 10.230(E).
2. The Final PUD Plan is substantially consistent with the Preliminary PUD Plan and with any and all conditions
imposed by the Planning Commission which were attached to the approval of the Preliminary PUD Plan.
The Planning Director in his/her discretion may forward a Final PUD Plan to the Planning Commission for written
clarification regarding whether the Final PUD Plan is substantially consistent with the Preliminary PUD Plan. When
forwarded by the Planning Director, the Planning Commission shall have authority to review the PUD plans and
advise the Planning Director.
Modification of a phasing plan shall be considered substantially consistent with the Preliminary PUD Plan unless the
revised phasing plan affects the provision of essential services such as public streets, sewer or storm drain to serve
the successive phases.
A Final PUD Plan shall be found to be inconsistent with the Preliminary PUD Plan when any of the following are
found to apply. If such inconsistencies are identified, an application for revision to the Preliminary PUD Plan shall be
required:
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 78/83
a. The exterior boundaries of the PUD have changed except for slight deviations which result from the
resolution of boundary errors or inconsistencies discovered when the PUD property was surveyed,
b. The number of housing units has increased,
c. The number of housing units has decreased by more than five percent (5%),
d. Modifications to the provisions of this Code have been included which were not approved as part of the
Preliminary PUD Plan under Section 10.230(D).
[Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 8393, June 19, 1997; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2005-97, June 2, 2005; Amd. Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2007-
100, May 17, 2007.]
10.241 [Repealed, Sec. 101, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.242 [Repealed, Sec. 12, Ord. No. 8393, June 19, 1997.]
10.243 [Repealed, Sec. 13, Ord. No. 8393, June 19, 1997.]
10.244 [Repealed, Sec. 14, Ord. No. 8393, June 19, 1997.]
10.245 [Repealed Sec. 102, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.246 [Repealed Sec. 103, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.247a [Repealed Sec. 105, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.247 [Repealed Sec. 104, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.248 [Repealed Sec. 106, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 79/83
10.249 [Repealed Sec. 107, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.250 [Repealed Sec. 108, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.251 [Repealed Sec. 109, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.252 [Repealed Sec. 110, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.253 [Repealed Sec. 111, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.254 [Repealed Sec. 112, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.255 [Repealed, Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2012-137, Sept. 6, 2012.]
Repealed
10.256 [Repealed, Sec. 113, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.257 [Repealed, Sec. 114, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 80/83
10.258 [Repealed Sec. 115, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.259 [Repealed Sec. 116, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.260 [Repealed, Sec. 117, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.261 [Repealed, Sec. 118, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.262 [Repealed, Sec. 119, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.263 [Repealed, Sec. 120, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.264 [Repealed, Sec. 51, Ord. No. 7659, June 2, 1994.]
10.264 -1 [Repealed, Sec. 51, Ord. No. 7659, June 2, 1994.]
10.265 [Repealed, Sec. 121, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.266 [Repealed, Sec. 122, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 81/83
10.267 [Repealed, Sec. 123, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.268 [Repealed, Sec. 124, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.269 [Repealed, Sec. 125, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.270 [Repealed, Sec. 126, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.273 [Repealed, Sec. 127, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.276 [Repealed, Sec. 128, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.277 [Repealed, Sec. 129, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.278 [Repealed, Sec. 130, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.279 [Repealed, Sec. 131, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 82/83
10.280 [Repealed, Sec. 132, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.285 [Repealed, Sec. 133, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.287 [Repealed, Sec. 134, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.290 [Repealed, Sec. 135, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.291 [Repealed, Sec. 136, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.292 [Repealed, Sec. 137, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.294 [Repealed, Sec. 138, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.295 [Repealed, Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2018-86, July 19, 2018]
10.296 [Repealed, Sec. 139, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.297 [Repealed, Sec. 140, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 83/83
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 1/81
10 Article 3-Zoning Districts (10.300 to 10.411)
10.300 Establishment of Zoning Districts
This Code separates the city into four basic use classifications, 17 zoning districts, nine overlay districts,
and five administrative mapping categories as follows:
A. RESIDENTIAL
SFR-00 Single-Family Residential - (1 dwelling unit per existing lot)
SFR-2 Single-Family Residential - (2 dwelling units per gross acre)
SFR-4 Single-Family Residential - (4 dwelling units per gross acre)
SFR-6 Single-Family Residential - (6 dwelling units per gross acre)
SFR-10 Single-Family Residential - (10 dwelling units per gross acre)
MFR-15 Multiple-Family Residential - (15 dwelling units per gross acre)
MFR-20 Multiple-Family Residential - (20 dwelling units per gross acre)
MFR-30 Multiple-Family Residential - (30 dwelling units per gross acre)
B. COMMERCIAL
C-S/P Commercial, Service and Professional Office
C-N Commercial, Neighborhood
C-C Commercial, Community
C-R Commercial, Regional
C-H Commercial, Heavy
C. INDUSTRIAL
I-L Industrial, Light
I-G Industrial, General
I-H Industrial, Heavy
D. Public
P-1 Public Parks
E. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
I-00 Limited Industrial
A-A Airport Approach
A-R Airport Radar
A-C Airport Area of Concern
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 2/81
C-B Central Business
E-A Exclusive Agriculture
F Freeway
S-E Southeast
H Historic
F. ADMINISTRATIVE MAPPING CATEGORIES
Downtown Parking
Limited Service
P-D Planned Unit Development
R-Z Restricted Zoning
Airport Fence Line
It is the intent in establishing the above districts to implement the "General Land Use Plan Element" of the
Comprehensive Plan, and to achieve compatibility of adjacent land uses.
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8285, Feb. 6, 1997; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No.
98-67, Apr. 2, 1998; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 1999-215, June 1, 2000; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2003-258, Sept.
18, 2003; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-227, Nov. 6, 2008; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2011-196, Oct. 6, 2011; Amd
Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2016-35, March 3, 2016; Amd Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2018-52, June 7, 2018 (effective July 9,
2018).]
10.301 City of Medford Zoning Map
The zoning districts established by this Code are officially identified and defined on the map entitled City of
Medford Zoning Map which, together with the explanatory information contained thereon, is hereby made a
part of this Code.
10.302 Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries
This section sets forth criteria to be used in determining the location of any zoning district boundary as shown
on the Zoning Map. Zoning district boundaries, as shown on the City of Medford Zoning Map, shall be
construed to follow:
(1) City limit lines;
(2) Platted lot-lines or other property lines as shown on the Jackson County Assessor's Plat Maps;
(3) The centerline of street, railroad, or irrigation district rights-of-way.
(4) The centerline of streams or other water courses, as measured at mean low water, and, in the event
of a natural change in location of the centerline of such water course, the zoning district boundary shall
be construed as moving with the channel centerline.
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996.]
10.305 Purpose of Zoning Districts
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 3/81
Each zoning district represents a land use category which has common location, development, and use
characteristics. Minor (Type III) zone changes shall be based upon the criteria in Section 10.204. Major
(Type IV) zone changes shall be based on the criteria in Section 10.220. The following sections specify the
purpose of each zoning district, and the use and intensity standards applicable to land within each district.
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2011-196, Oct. 6, 2011; Amd. Sec. 141,
Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.306 Residential Land Use Classification
The residential land use classification provides a wide range of residential density alternatives and dwelling
types designed to provide for the housing needs of the community as identified in the Housing Element of the
Comprehensive Plan. Each district is intended to provide for specific dwelling types and densities in a quality
living environment, conforming to the Urban, Urban Medium, and Urban High Density Residential
designations of the Comprehensive Plan. The maximum number of dwelling units (DU) per acre (the density
factor or "gross density" as defined herein) can be increased in a Planned Unit Development per Section
10.192(G). Examples of minimum and maximum residential density calculations are provided in Article 5,
Section 10.708. The residential land use classification is comprised of eight (8) zoning districts as specified in
the following sections of this Article.
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2003-258, Sept. 18, 2003; Amd. Sec. 7,
Ord. No. 2011-196, Oct. 6, 2011; Amd. Sec. 142, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.307 SFR-00, Single-Family Residential - 1 dwelling unit per existing lot
The primary purpose of this zoning district is to provide a holding zone for properties that are changing from
County to City zoning and have not yet been tested for facility adequacy to allow develoment to urban level
densities and intensities. These parcels will primarily be located within the City's urbanizable area, and where
necessary, within the City limits. In addition to one dwelling unit, one accessory dwelling unit (ADU) will be
allowed per existing parcel.
[Added, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2003-258, Sept. 18, 2003.]
10.308 SFR-2, Single-Family Residential - 2 dwelling units per gross acre
The density requirements and locational characteristics of this urban residential district are a function of
topographic conditions, such as slopes of over fifteen percent (15%), and/or other environmental constraints,
such as soils, geology, and flooding, which restrict the carrying capacity of the land. This district provides for
very low density, large lot single-family detached dwellings, where such topographic conditions and
environmental constraints occur.
In SFR-2, the minimum and maximum number of dwelling units (DU) permitted per gross acre, or fraction
thereof, shall fall within the following range:
Minimum and Maximum Density Factor (df) . . . . . . . . 0.8 to 2.0 DU/gross acre.
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7037, Dec. 5, 1991; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996.]
10.309 SFR-4, Single-Family Residential - 4 dwelling units per gross acre
This urban residential district is representative of historical low density, large lot single-family development.
New SFR-4 zoning should be located in areas where slopes exceed five percent (5%), but are less than
fifteen percent (15%) to prevent excessive grading .
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 4/81
In SFR-4, the maximum number of dwelling units (DU) permitted per gross acre, or fraction thereof, shall fall
within the following range:
Minimum and Maximum Density Factor (df) . . . . . . . . 2.5 to 4.0 DU/gross acre.
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996.]
10.310 (-1) SFR-6 and SFR-10, Single-Family Residential - 6 or 10 dwelling units per gross acre
These two urban residential districts provide for standard and higher density single-family detached
dwellings, duplexes, and mobile home parks.
In SFR-6, the maximum number of dwelling units (DU) permitted per gross acre, or fraction thereof, shall fall
within the following range:
Minimum and Maximum Density Factor (df) . . . . . . 4.0 to 6.0 DU/gross acre
In SFR-10, the maximum number of dwelling units (DU) permitted per gross acre, or fraction thereof, shall fall
within the following range:
Minimum and Maximum Density Factor (df) . . . . . . 6.0 to 10.0 DU/gross acre
10.310 (-2) MFR-15, Multiple-Family Residential - 15 dwelling units per gross acre
This urban residential district provides for medium density townhouses (rowhouses), duplexes, apartments,
mobile home parks, and group quarters. It is suitable and desirable for locations near neighborhood activity
centers or mass transit.
In MFR-15, the maximum number of dwelling units (DU) permitted per gross acre, or fraction thereof, shall
fall within the following range:
Minimum and Maximum Density Factor (df) . . . . . . 10.0 to 15.0 DU/gross acre
[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 6231, Nov. 3, 1988; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996.]
10.311 MFR-20, Multiple-Family Residential - 20 dwelling units per gross acre
This urban residential district provides for higher density townhouses and multiple-family dwellings, including
duplexes and apartments, and group quarters. It is suitable and desirable for locations near neighborhood
activity centers or mass transit.
In MFR-20, the maximum number of dwelling units (DU) permitted per gross acre, or fraction thereof, shall
fall within the following range:
Minimum and Maximum Density Factor (df) . . . . . . 15.0 to 20.0 DU/gross acre
[Amd. Sec. 2. Ord. No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996.]
10.312 MFR-30, Multiple-Family Residential - 30 dwelling units per gross acre
This urban residential district provides for the highest density multiple-family dwellings and group quarters. It
is suitable and desirable for locations within or near employment centers or near mass transit.
The maximum number of dwelling units (DU) permitted per gross acre, or fraction thereof, shall fall within the
following range:
Minimum and Maximum Density Factor (df) . . . . . . . 20.0 to 30.0 DU/gross acre
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996.]
10.313 [Repealed Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 5/81
10.314 Permitted Uses in Residential Land Use Classification
The following table sets forth the uses allowed within the residential land use classification by zoning district.
Uses not identified herein are not allowed. (See Article I, Section 10.012, for the definition of each listed use.)
These symbols indicate the status of each listed use:
"P" = Permitted Use.
"C" = Conditional Use; permitted subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit. (See Article II, Section
10.184. )
"X" = Prohibited Use .
"s" = Special Use (See Article V, Sections 10.811- 10.900, Special Use Regulations)
"EA" = Permitted only when within an EA (Exclusive Agriculture) overlay district.
"PD" = Permitted Use if in a PD (Planned Unit Development).
[Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 5820, Mar. 19, 1987; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 6231, Nov. 3, 1988; Amd. Ord. No.
6332, Apr. 20, 1989; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord No. 6783, Dec. 20, 1989; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 7167, July 16, 1992;
Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 7768, Nov. 17, 1994; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7790, Dec. 15, 1994; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord.
No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2003-258, Sept. 18, 2003; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2006-279,
Dec. 7, 2006; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2004-08, Jan. 3, 2008; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2008-173, Aug. 21, 2008;
Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2008-227, Nov. 6, 2008; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2011-196, Oct. 6, 2011; Amd. Sec. 2,
Ord. No. 2012-58, May 3, 2012; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2012-59, May 3, 2012; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2013-
82, June 6, 2013; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2013-81, June 20, 2013; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2015-37, May 7,
2015; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2018-52, June 7, 2018 (effective July 9, 2018); Amd. Sec. 143, Ord. No. 2018-
64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018); Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2018-113, Sept. 20, 2018; Amd. Sec. 10.
Ord. No. 2018-133, Dec. 6, 2018; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2018-132, Dec. 20, 2018.]
PERMITTED USES IN
RESIDENTIAL ZONING
DISTRICTS
SFR
00
SFR
2
SFR
4
SFR
6
SFR
10
MFR
15
MFR
20
MFR
30
Special Use
or Other
Code Section
1. SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
(a) Single-Family
Detached Dwelling
P P P P P Ps Ps Ps 10.710 &
10.82
(b) Zero Lot-Line
Detached Dwelling
P P P P P X X X 10.707
(c) Manufactured Home
on Individual Lot
PS Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps 10.710,
10.821 (with
ADU), 10.826
& 10.900
(d) Temporary Residence Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps 10.840
(e) Residential Home
(care, training,
treatment) (5 or
fewer residents)
P P P P P P P P
2. MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
(a) Duplex Dwelling -
Interior Lot
X X X P Ps Ps Ps Ps 10.713,
10.820 &
10.821
(ADUs only)
(b) Duplex Dwelling -
Corner Lot
X X P P Ps Ps Ps Ps 10.713,
10.820 &
10.821
(ADUs only)
(c) Multiple-Family,
Multiplex, or
Apartment Dwelling
X X X X P P P P 10.714
(d) Townhouse/Rowhouse
Dwelling
X X X X P P P X 10.712 &
10.821
(ADUs only)
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 6/81
PERMITTED USES IN
RESIDENTIAL ZONING
DISTRICTS
SFR
00
SFR
2
SFR
4
SFR
6
SFR
10
MFR
15
MFR
20
MFR
30
Special Use
or Other
Code Section
3. SPECIAL RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS
(a) Planned Unit
Development
X PD PD PD PD PD PD PD 10.190-198
& 10.412
(b) Mobile Home Park X X X Cs Cs Cs X X 10.860-
10.896
4. ACCESSORY USES
(a) Accessory Dwelling
Unit (ADU)
Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps 10.821 &
10.826
(b) Guest House P P P P P X X X
(c) Accessory Building or
Use
p P P P P Ps Ps Ps 10.838
(d) Child (Family) Day
Care Home
P P P P P P P P
(16 or fewer
children)
P
P P P P P P P
(e) Garage or Yard Sale Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps 10.832
(f) Home Occupation Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps 8.001
5. GROUP QUARTERS
(a) Boarding/Lodging
House (1-2 guest
rooms)
P P P P P P P P
(3-5 guest rooms)
(owner occupied)
C C C C C P P P
(b) Retirement or
Congregate Living
Facility
X X X X X Ps Ps Ps 10.838
(c) Nursing Home/Long
Term Care Facility
X X X X X P P P
(d) Residential Facility (6
to 15 Residents)
Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps P P P 10.836
(e)
Residential
Facility (16 or
more
residents)
X X X X X Ps Ps Ps 10.836
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 7/81
PERMITTED USES IN
RESIDENTIAL ZONING
DISTRICTS
SFR
00
SFR
2
SFR
4
SFR
6
SFR
10
MFR
15
MFR
20
MFR
30
Special Use
or Other
Code Section
(f) Halfway Homes for
Delinquents;
Juvenile Correctional
Homes, Residential
Training Schools for
Delinquents (6 to 15
Residents)
X X X X X P P P
(g) Residential Drug and
Alcohol Treatment
Facility (16 or More
Residents)
X X X X X C C C
6. NONRESIDENTIAL SPECIAL USES
(a) Bed and Breakfast
Inn
X X Cs Cs Cs Ps Ps Ps 10.828
(b) Child Day Care
Center
Cs Cs Cs Cs Cs Cs Cs Cs 10.811
(c) Institutional Uses Cs Cs Cs Cs Cs Cs Cs Cs 10.815-817
(c)
(i)
Temporary
Shelters
accessory to
Institutional
Uses
Cs Cs Cs Cs Cs Cs Cs Cs 10.816-
817 &
10.819A
(d) Community Services
Facilities (Parks,
Recreation, etc.)
C C C C C C C C 10.817
(e) Transit, Pedestrian, or
Bicycle Facilities
P P P P P P P P 10.747-810
(f) Utility Distribution
Systems
Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps 10.830
(g) (i) Agriculture,
Agricultural Building,
Livestock, Farm
(ii) Conditional
Agriculture-Related
Activities (On-Site Farm
Product Sales, Small
Winery, Public/Private
Events)
EA
EA/C
EA
EA/C
EA
EA/C
EA
EA/C
EA
EA/C
EA
EA/C
EA
EA/C
EA
EA/C
10.360-361
10.362
(h) Riding Stable or
Paddock (Private)
EA EA EA EA EA EA EA EA 10.813
(i) Temporary
Contractor's Office
and/or Construction
Equipment Shed
Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps 10.840
(j) Temporary Model
Home
Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps 10.840
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 8/81
PERMITTED USES IN
RESIDENTIAL ZONING
DISTRICTS
SFR
00
SFR
2
SFR
4
SFR
6
SFR
10
MFR
15
MFR
20
MFR
30
Special Use
or Other
Code Section
(k) Temporary Real Estate
Office
Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps 10.840
(l) Wireless
Communication
Support Structure
Cs Cs Cs Cs Cs Cs Cs Cs 10.824
(m) Wireless
Communication
Facilities, other than
Support Structure
Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps 10.824
(n) Beekeeping Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps X X X 10.813(C)
10.325 Commercial, Industrial, and Public Land Use Classifications
The City's commercial, industrial, and public land is divided into nine (9) zoning districts as follows:
(1) Service Commercial and Professional Office C-S/P
(2) Neighborhood Commercial C-N
(3) Community Commercial C-C
(4) Heavy Commercial C-H
(5) Regional Commercial C-R
(6) Light Industrial I-L
(7) General Industrial I-G
(8) Heavy Industrial I-H
(9) Public Parks P-1
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6179, Sept. 1, 1988; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7862, Apr. 20, 1995; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord.
No. 8285, Feb. 6, 1997; Amd. Sec.2, Ord. No. 8291, Feb. 20, 1997; Amd Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2018-52, June 7,
2018 (effective July 9, 2018).]
10.326 Service Commercial and Professional Office, C-S/P
The C-S/P district provides land for professional offices, hospitals, and limited service commercial uses. This
district is intended to be customer-oriented, however, retail uses are limited. Development in this zone is
expected to be suitable for locations adjacent to residential neighborhoods.
[Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 8285, Feb. 6, 1997.]
10.327 Neighborhood Commercial, C-N
The C-N district provides land for the development of small integrated commercial centers servicing the
frequent and daily convenience requirements and service needs of adjacent residential neighborhoods.
Development in this zone is intended to be pedestrian-oriented and compatible with the scale and character
of surrounding residential areas. All uses, except as noted in section 10.337, do not exceed 2,500 square
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 9/81
feet of gross floor area.
[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 8285, Feb. 6, 1997.]
10.328 Community Commercial, C-C
The C-C district provides land for the development of commercial facilities servicing the shopping needs of
the community and is typically comprised of community shopping centers. All uses, except as noted in
section 10.337, do not exceed 50,000 square feet of gross floor area.
[Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 8285, Feb. 6, 1997.]
10.328 (-1) Regional Commercial, C-R
The C-R zone provides land for the development of those service and commercial uses which serve
shoppers from the surrounding region as well as from the local community. The C-R zone shall be located in
areas served by adequate regional and local street systems to avoid the impact of regional traffic using
neighborhood streets.
[Added Sec. 7, Ord. No. 8285, Feb. 6, 1997.]
10.329 Heavy Commercial, C-H
The C-H district provides lands for those heavier commercial and service commercial uses which typically
may produce a greater degree of noise, vibration, air pollution, and glare than residential or other commercial
zones. All uses, excepting those customarily conducted outdoors, shall be conducted wholly within an
enclosed building.
[Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 8285, Feb. 6, 1997; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2003-37, Feb. 6, 2003.]
10.330 Light Industrial District, I-L
The I-L district provides land for warehouse, office, and low intensity industrial uses in areas near residential
and commercial zones. It is intended for industrial uses which involve the lowest level of noise, vibration, air
pollution, radiation, glare, or fire and explosive hazards. This district is not intended to be retail customeroriented,
and retailing shall be permitted as an accessory use only or as specifically allowed. Because of the
locational character and proximity of the I-L district to residential lands, restrictive performance standards
shall be imposed to limit the physical effects of industrial activities to levels as per the performance standards
set forth in Article V.
[Amd. Sec. 13, Ord. No. 5820, Mar. 19, 1987; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 8285, Feb. 6, 1997.]
10.331 General Industrial , I-G
The I-G district provides land for industrial uses in which production and processing activities involve a
degree of noise, vibration, air pollution, radiation, glare phenomena, and fire and explosive hazards. The
physical effects of such phenomena shall be limited to levels as per the performance standards contained in
Article V. Offices shall be permitted only when accessory and subordinate to the principle permitted use. This
district is not intended to be customer-oriented, and retailing shall be permitted as an accessory use only.
[Amd. Sec. 14, Ord. No. 5820, Mar. 19, 1987; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 8285, Feb. 6, 1997.]
10.332 Heavy Industrial District, I-H
The I-H district provides land for industrial uses in which production and processing activities involve the
highest expected amounts of noise, vibration, air pollution, radiation, glare, and fire and explosive hazards.
[Amd. Sec. 15, Ord. No. 5820, Mar. 19, 1987; Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 8285, Feb. 6, 1997.]
10.333 Public Parks, P-1
The P-1 district provides land for publicly owned open space, parkland, and trails. It is intended for city
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 10/81
parks, recreational facilities, trails, paths, and open space publicly owned within the city.
[Added Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2018-52 June 7, 2018 (effective July 9, 2018).]
10.334 Uses Permitted in the Public Parks Zone
A. The following table sets forth the uses allowed within the Public Parks land use classification. The uses,
other than (002) Parks, Recreation, and Leisure Facilities and (881) Dwelling Units, are allowed based upon
the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Manual, 1987 Edition.
B. These abbreviations indicate the allowance type listed in the following table:
“P” = Permitted Use.
“Ps” = Special Use (see Special Use Regulations)
“C” = Conditional Use; permitted subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit. (See Article II,
Sections 10.246 - 10.250.)
“Cs” = Conditional uses permitted subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit and the
applicable Special Use Regulations
C. These abbreviations indicate the land use requirement listed in the following table:
“PDR” = Park Development Review required for new facilities
“SPAC” = Site Plan & Architectural Commission review required for new facilities
Uses Permitted in the Public Parks Zoning District
SIC # Description of Use Allowance Type Additional Regulations/
Land Use Requirement
002
Public Parks, Recreation and
Leisure Facilities and
Services
P PDR
0279 Beekeeping
Ps
The special use for
beekeeping corresponds with
Section 10.813
431
U S Postal Service
P
SPAC
481
Wireless Communication
Support Structure / Wireless
Communication Facilities in
the Public Right of Way
Cs
The special use references for
Wireless Communication
Support Structure and
Wireless Communication
Facilities, other than Support
Structure, correspond with
special uses 10.824
Wireless Communication
Facilities, other than Support
Structure
Ps
491 Electric Services Ps
The special use references
correspond with Section
10.830
492 Gas Production and
Distribution
Ps
493 Combination Utility Services Ps
494 Water Supply Ps
495 Sanitary Services Ps
5261
Christmas Tree Sales
Ps
The special use reference for
the sale of Christmas trees
corresponds with Section
10.840
543 Outdoor Growers Markets
P
5814
Eating Place
With Entertainment
P
SPAC
5815 Eating Place
Without Entertainment P SPAC
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 11/81
SIC # Description of Use Allowance Type Additional Regulations/
Land Use Requirement
5816 Outdoor Eating
Ps
Establishments with Outdoor
Eating Areas correspond with
Section 10.833
5817
Temporary Food Vendor
Ps
The special use reference for
temporary food vendor
corresponds with Section
10.840
5818 Small Food Vendor
Ps
Special Use for Small Food
Vendors correspond with
Section 10.823
6553 Cemeteries P
The special use reference for
cemeteries corresponds with
Section 10.815
703 Camps and Recreational
Vehicle Parks
P
PDR
792 Producers, Orchestras,
Entertainers P SPAC
794 Commercial Sports P SPAC
799
Misc. Amusement,
Recreational Services P SPAC
821 Elementary and Secondary
Schools P SPAC
829 Schools & Educational
Services, nec P SPAC
835 Child Day Care Services
Ps
The special use reference for
child day care services
corresponds with section
10.811
SPAC
841 Museums and Art Galleries P SPAC
842 Botanical and Zoological
Gardens P SPAC
881
Dwelling Units
Ps
The special use reference for
public and industrial zones
corresponds with Section
10.835
9221
Public Order and Safety
(Police Stations)
P SPAC
9224
Public Order and Safety
(Fire Stations)
P
SPAC
[Added Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2018- 52 July 7, 2018 (effective July 9, 2018); Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2018-133,
Dec. 6, 2018.]
10.337 (SIC 01-289) Uses Permitted in Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 12/81
A. The uses allowed within each commercial and industrial zoning district are based on the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Manual, 1987
Edition. This chapter classifies uses by Industry Group Number (3 digits) of the SIC Manual. When necessary to resolve any ambiguity in defining
a use classification as per this chapter the Industry Number (4 digit) classification contained in the SIC Manual shall be used as the acceptable
reference source.
B. There are four classifications in the following tables, that do not appear in the SIC Manual; "Business Offices", (001); "Parks, Recreation, and
Leisure Facilities" (002); "Marijuana-related businesses" (003); and "Dwelling Units" (881). "Dwelling Units" is in the Services group, but this is
not intended to suggest any relationship to the SIC classification scheme. In this context the use classification "Dwelling Units", includes housing
types that are allowed in the MFR-30 zoning district.
C. All uses have been identified by zoning district as either permitted, permitted subject to special use standards, conditional, or not permitted.
"P" = Permitted Uses.
"Ps" = Special Use (see Special Use Regulations).
"C" = Conditional uses - permitted subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit.
"Cs" = Conditional uses permitted subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit and the applicable Special Use Regulations.
"X" = Uses specifically prohibited.
"*" = Permitted when within an EA overlay district.
nec = not elsewhere classified
INDEX TO COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES
O. USES NOT CLASSIFIED
A. AGRICULTURE DIVISION
01 Agricultural Production-Crops
02 Agricultural Production-Livestock
07 Agricultural Services
B. MINING
C. CONSTRUCTION
15 General Building Contractors
16 Heavy Construction Contractors
17 Special Trade Contractors
D. MANUFACTURING DIVISION
20 Food and Kindred Products
22 Textile Mill Products
23 Apparel and Other Textile Products
24 Lumber and Wood Products
25 Furniture and Fixtures
26 Paper and Allied Products
27 Printing and Publishing
28 Chemicals and Allied Products
29 Petroleum and Coal Products
30 Rubber and Miscellaneous Plastics Products
31 Leather and Leather Products
32 Stone, Clay, and Glass Products
33 Primary Metal Industries
34 Fabricated Metal Products
35 Machinery, Except Electrical
36 Electric and Electronic Equipment
37 Transportation Equipment
38 Instruments and Related Products
39 Miscellaneous Manufacturing Industries
E. TRANSPORTATION AND PUBLIC UTILITIES DIVISION
40 Railroad Transportation
41 Local and Interurban Passenger Transit
42 Trucking and Warehousing
43 U. S. Postal Service
45 Transportation by Air
47 Transportation Services
48 Communication
49 Electric, Gas, and Sanitary Services
F. WHOLESALE TRADE
50 Wholesale Trade-Durable Goods
51 Wholesale Trade-Nondurable Goods
G. RETAIL TRADE
52 Building Materials and Garden Supplies
53 General Merchandise Stores
54 Food Stores
55 Automotive Dealers and Stations
56 Apparel and Accessory Stores
57 Furniture and Home Furnishing Stores
58 Eating and Drinking Places
59 Miscellaneous Retail
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 13/81
H. FINANCE, INSURANCE AND REAL ESTATE DIVISION
60 Banking
61 Credit Agencies Other Than Banks
62 Security, Commodity Brokers and Services
63 Insurance Carriers
64 Insurance Agents, Brokers and Service
65 Real Estate
67 Holding and Other Investment Offices
I. SERVICES
70 Hotels and Other Lodging Places
72 Personal Services
73 Business Services
75 Auto Repair, Services, and Garages
76 Miscellaneous Repair Services
78 Motion Pictures
79 Amusement and Recreation Services
80 Health Services
81 Legal Services
82 Educational Services
83 Social Services
84 Museums, Botanical, Zoological Gardens
86 Membership Organizations
87 Engineering, Accounting and Miscellaneous Professional
and Management Services
88 Dwelling Units
89 Miscellaneous Services
J. PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION
91 Executive, Legislative, and General
92 Justice, Public Order, Safety
93 Finance, Taxation and Monetary Policy
94 Administration of Human Resources
95 Administration of Environmental Quality and Housing
96 Administration of Economic Programs
97 National Security and International Affairs
SIC USE ZONING DISTRICT
O. USES NOT CLASSIFIED. This major group includes uses not covered in the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Manual, 1987 Edition.
C-S/P
C-N
C-C
C-R
C-H
I-L
I-G
I-H
001
Business Offices, nec - no
material or equipment storage
P
P
P
P
P
P
X
X
002
Public Parks, Recreation and
Leisure Facilities and services
C
C
C
C
C
C
X
X
003 Marijuana-related business
Type (as termed
in State Law) SIC Equivalent
0031 Production 013, 016
X
X
X
X
Ps
Ps
Ps
Ps
0032 Processing 205-207
X
X
X
X
Ps
Ps
Ps
Ps
0033 Wholesale 512, 516, 519 X
X
X
X
Ps
Ps
Ps
Ps
0034 Laboratory 873
Ps
X
Ps
Ps
Ps
Ps
X
X
0035 Dispensary 549, 591
X
X
Ps
Ps
Ps
X
X
X
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 14/81
C-S/P
C-N
C-C
C-R
C-H
I-L
I-G
I-H
0036 Retail 549, 591
X
X
Ps
Ps
Ps
X
X
X
004 Temporary Shelter Cs Cs Cs Cs Cs Cs Cs Cs
See section 10.839 for special use regulations on marijuana-related businesses.
See section 10.819A for special use regulations for Temporary Shetlers.
A. AGRICULTURE DIVISION
01 AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION-CROPS. This major group includes farms, orchards, greenhouses, nurseries, etc., primarily engaged in the
production of crops or plants, vines, bulbs, flower seeds, and vegetable seeds, trees (excluding forest operations), sod farms, mushroom cellars,
cranberry bogs.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
011 Cash Grains X* X* X* X* X* X* X* X*
013
Field Crops,
Except Cash
Grains
X* X* X* X* X*1 P P P
016 Vegetables and
Melons X* X* X* X* X*1 P P P
017 Fruits and Tree
Nuts X* X* X* X* X* P P P
018 Horticultural
Specialties X* X* X* X* X* P P P
019 General Farms,
Primarily Crop X* X* X* X* X* P P
P
"1" = Production allowed in the zone when conducted inside an enclosed structure.
02 AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION-LIVESTOCK. This major group includes farms, ranches primarily engaged in the keeping, grazing, or
feeding of livestock for the sale of livestock. As used herein, the term livestock refers only to cattle, sheep, and goats; also included are animal
specialties, such as horses, bees, fish in captivity.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
021
Livestock,
except Dairy
and Poultry
X X X X X X X X
024 Dairy Farms X X X X X X X X
025 Poultry and
Eggs X X X X X X X X
027 Animal
Specialties X X X X X X X X
0279 Beekeeping Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps
029
General Farms,
Primarily
Livestock
X X X X X X X X
The special use reference for beekeeping corresponds with Section 10.813, Agricultural Services and Animal Services.
07 AGRICULTURAL SERVICES. This major group includes establishments primarily engaged in performing soil preparation services, crop
services, veterinary services or other animal services, farm labor and management services and landscape and horticultural services for others
on a fee or contractual basis.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
071 Soil
Preparation
X X X X P P P P
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 15/81
Services
072 Crop
Services X X X X P P P P
074
Veterinary
Services for
livestock
X X X X Ps Ps Ps Ps
0742
Small Animal
Clinics, Non-
Livestock
C C Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps
075
Animal
Services,
Except
Veterinary
X X X X Ps/C Ps/C Ps/C Ps/C
-Dog
Grooming P P P P P X X X
076
Farm Labor
and
Management
Services
X X X X P P P P
078
Landscape
and
Horticultural
Services
X X X X P P P P
Special use section references:
Classifications 074 and 0742: See 10.814.
Classification 075: See 10.813.
B. MINING
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
101-138
Mining (The
division as a
whole)
X X X X X X X C
C. CONSTRUCTION
15 GENERAL BUILDING CONTRACTORS. This major group includes general contractors and operative builders primarily engaged in
construction.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
152
Residential
Building
Construction
X X X X P P P P
153 Operative
Builders X X X X P P P P
154
Nonresidential
Building
Construction
X X X X P P P P
16 HEAVY CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS. This major group includes general contractors engaged in heavy construction such as highways,
streets, bridges, sewers, railroads, irrigation projects and miscellaneous types of construction other than buildings.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
161
Highway and
Street
Construction
X X X X X P P P
162
Heavy
Construction,
Except Highway
X X X X X P P P
17 SPECIAL TRADE CONTRACTORS. This major group includes contractors who undertake specialized activities. This group also includes
establishments primarily engaged in miscellaneous construction activities.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 16/81
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
171 Plumbing, Heating, and Air
Conditioning
X X X X P P P P
172 Painting, Paper Hanging,
Decorating
X X X X P P P P
173 Electrical Work X X X X P P P P
174 Masonry, Stonework, Tilework,
and Plastering
X X X X P P P P
175
Carpentering and Flooring
X X X X P P P P
176 Roofing, Siding, and Sheet
Metal Work
X X X X P P P P
177 Concrete Work X X X X P P P P
178 Water Well Drilling X X X X P P P P
179
Misc. Special Trade Contractors
X X X X P P P P
D. MANUFACTURING DIVISION
20 FOOD AND KINDRED PRODUCTS. This major group includes establishments manufacturing or processing foods and beverages for human
consumption and certain related products such as meat and fish products, manufactured ice, chewing gum, and prepared foods except vegetable
and animal fats and oils.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
201 Meat Products X X X X X P P P
202 Dairy Products X X X X P P P P
203 Preserved Fruits and Vegetables X X X X X P P P
204 Grain Mill Products X X X X X P P P
205 Bakery Products X X X X P P P P
206 Sugar and Confectionary Products X X X X P P P P
207 Fats and Oils X X X X X P P P
208 Beverages X X X X X P P P
209 Misc. Foods and Kindred Products X X X X X P P P
22 TEXTILE MILL PRODUCTS. This major group includes establishments engaged in performing any of the following operations:
1) Preparation of fiber and subsequent manufacturing of yarn, thread, twine and cordage.
2) Manufacturing broad woven fabric, narrow woven fabric, knit fabric and carpets and rugs from yarn.
3) Dyeing and finishing fiber, yarn, fabric and knit apparel.
4) Coating, waterproofing, or otherwise treating fabric.
5) The integrated manufacture of knit apparel and other finished fabrics from yarn.
6) The manufacture of felt goods, lace goods, nonwoven fabrics, and miscellaneous textiles.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
221 Weaving Mills, Cotton X X X X X P P P
222 Weaving Mills, Synthetics X X X X X P P P
223 Weaving and Finishing Mills, Wool X X X X X P P P
224 Narrow Fabric Mills X X X X X P P P
225 Knitting Mills X X X X X P P P
226 Textile Finishing, Except Wool X X X X X P P P
227 Carpets and Rugs X X X X X P P P
228 Yarn and Thread Mills X X X X X P P P
229 Miscellaneous Textile Goods X X X X X P P P
23 APPAREL AND OTHER TEXTILE PRODUCTS. This major group includes establishments producing clothing and fabricating products by
cutting and sewing purchased woven or knit textile fabrics and related materials such as leather, rubberized fabrics, plastics and furs.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 17/81
CS/
P
C-N C-C C-R C-H IL
I-G I-H
231 Men's and Boys' Suits and Coats X X X X X P P P
232 Men's and Boys' Furnishings, Work Clothing, and Allied
Garments X X X X X P P P
233 Women's, Misses', and Juniors', Outerwear X X X X X P P P
234 Women's and Children'sUndergarments X X X X X P P P
235 Hats, Caps, and Millinery X X X X X P P P
236 Children's Outerwear X X X X X P P P
237 Fur Goods X X X X X P P P
238 Miscellaneous Apparel and Accessories X X X X X P P P
239 Misc. Fabricated Textile Products X X X X X P P P
24 LUMBER AND WOOD PRODUCTS. This major group includes establishments primarily engaged in timber cutting, production of lumber and
wood basic products; and the manufacturing of finished articles made entirely or mainly of wood or wood substitutes.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
241 Logging Contractors X X X X X X X P
242 Sawmills and Planing Mills X X X X X X X P
243 Millwork, Plywood & Structural Members X X X X X X X P
244 Wood Containers (manufacture) X X X X X C P P
245 Wood Buildings and Mobile Homes (manufacture) X X X X X C P P
249 Miscellaneous Wood Products (manufacture) X X X X X C P P
25 FURNITURE AND FIXTURES. This major group includes establishments engaged in manufacturing household, office, public building, and
restaurant furniture; and office and store fixtures.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
251 Household Furniture X X X X X P P P
252 Office Furniture X X X X X P P P
253 Public Building and Related Furniture X X X X X P P P
254 Partitions and Fixtures X X X X X P P P
259 Miscellaneous Furniture and Fixtures X X X X X P P P
26 PAPER AND ALLIED PRODUCTS. This major group includes the manufacturing of paper and paperboard into converted products such as
bags, boxes, and envelopes.
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
IL
IG
I-H
261 Pulp Mills X X X X X X P P
262 Paper Mills X X X X X X P P
263 Paperboard Mills X X X X X X P P
265 Paperboard Containers and Boxes X X X X X C P P
267 Converted Paper and Paperboard Products, except Containers
and Boxes X X X X X C P P
27 PRINTING AND PUBLISHING. This major group includes establishments engaged in printing by one or more of the conventional processes,
such as letter press, lithograph, screen, and those establishments which perform services for the printing trade, such as book binding,
typesetting, engraving, photo engraving, and electrotyping. This major group also includes establishments engaged in publishing newspapers,
books, and periodicals.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
271 Newspapers X X P X P P P P
272 Periodicals X X X X P P P P
273 Books X X X X P P P P
274 Miscellaneous Publishing X X X X P P P P
275 Commercial Printing X X X X P P P P
276 Manifold Business Forms X X X X P P P P
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 18/81
277 Greeting Card Publishing X X X X P P P P
278 Blankbooks and Bookbinding X X X X P P P P
279 Printing Trade Services X X X X P P P P
28 CHEMICALS AND ALLIED PRODUCTS. This major group includes establishments producing basic chemicals, and establishments
manufacturing products by predominantly chemical processes. Establishments classified in this major group manufacture general classes of
products:
1) Basic chemicals such as acids, alkalies, salts, and organic chemicals.
2) Chemical products to be used in further manufacture such as synthetic fibers, plastics, dry colors, and pigments.
3) Finished chemical products to be used for ultimate consumption, such as drugs, cosmetics, and soaps; or to be used as materials or supplies
in other industries.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
281 Industrial Inorganic Chemicals X X X X X X P P
282 Plastics Materials and Synthetics X X X X X X P P
283 Drugs X X X X X P P P
284 Soap, Cleaners, and Toilet Goods X X X X X P P P
285 Paints and Allied Products X X X X X X P P
286 Industrial Organic Chemicals X X X X X X P P
287 Agricultural Chemicals X X X X X X P P
289 Miscellaneous Chemical Products X X X X X X P P
10.337 (SIC 291-369) Uses Permitted in Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
29 PETROLEUM AND COAL PRODUCTS. This major group includes establishments primarily engaged in
petroleum refining, manufacturing paving and roofing materials, and compounding lubricating oils and
greases from purchased materials.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
291 Petroleum Refining X X X X X X X P
295 Paving and Roofing Materials x X X X X X X P
299 Miscellaneous Petroleum and Coal Products x X X X X X X P
30 RUBBER AND MISC. PLASTICS PRODUCTS. This major group includes establishments manufacturing
from natural synthetic, or reclaimed rubber, rubber products such as tires, rubber footwear, mechanical
rubber goods, heels and soles, flooring and rubber sundries.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
301 Tires and Inner Tubes X X X X X X X P
302 Rubber and Plastics Footwear X X X X X X X P
304 Rubber and Plastics Hose and Belting X X X X X X X P
305 G askets, Packing, and Sealing Devices and Rubber and
Plastics Hose and Belting X X X X X X X P
306 Fabricated Rubber Products, nec (not elsewhere
classified) X X X X X X X P
308 Misc. Plastics Products X X X X X X X P
31 LEATHER AND LEATHER PRODUCTS. This major group includes establishments engaged in the
manufacture of finished leather and artificial leather products.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
311 Leather Tanning and Finishing X X X X X X X P
313 Boot and Shoe Cut Stock and Findings X X X X X P P P
314 Footwear, Except Rubber X X X X X P P P
315 Leather Gloves and Mittens X X X X X P P P
316 Luggage X X X X X P P P
317 Handbags and Personal Leather Goods X X X X X P P P
319 Leather Goods, nec X X X X X P P P
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 19/81
32 STONE, CLAY, AND GLASS PRODUCTS. This major group includes establishments engaged in
manufacturing flat glass, and other glass products, structural clay products, pottery, pot stone, concrete and
gypsum products, etc., from materials taken principally from the earth in the form of stone, clay, and sand.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
321 Flat Glass X X X X X P P P
322 Glass and Glassware, Pressed or Blown X X X X X P P P
323 Products of Purchased Glass X X X X X P P P
324 Cement, Hydraulic X X X X X X X P
325 Structural Clay Products X X X X X P P P
326 Pottery and Related Products X X X X P P P P
327 Concrete, Gypsum, and Plaster Products X X X X X P P P
328 Cut Stone and Stone Products X X X X P P P P
329 Abrasive, Asbestos, and Misc. Nonmetallic Mineral Products X X X X X P P P
33 PRIMARY METAL INDUSTRIES. This major group includes establishments engaged in the smelting and
processing of ferrous and nonferrous metals from ore, pig, or scrap; the rolling, drawing, and alloying of
ferrous and nonferrous metals; and the manufacture of nails, spikes, and insulated wire and cable.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
331 Blast Furnace and Basic Steel Products X X X X X X P P
332 Iron and Steel Foundries X X X X X X P P
333 Primary Nonferrous Metals X X X X X X P P
334 Secondary Nonferrous Metals X X X X X X P P
335 Nonferrous Rolling and Drawing X X X X X X P P
336 Nonferrous Foundries X X X X X X P P
339 Misc. Primary Metal Products X X X X X X P P
34 FABRICATED METAL PRODUCTS. This major group includes establishments engaged in fabricating
ferrous and nonferrous metal products such as metal cans, tinware, hand tools, cutlery, general hardware,
nonelectric heating apparatus, fabricated structural metal products, metal forgings, metal stamping, ordnance
products (except vehicles and guided missiles) and a variety of metal and wire products not classified
elsewhere.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
341 Metal Cans and Shipping Containers X X X X X X P P
342 Cutlery, Hand Tools, and Hardware X X X X P P P P
343 Plumbing and Heating, Except Electric X X X X P P P P
344 Fabricated Structural Metal Products X X X X P P P P
345 Screw Machine Products, Bolts, etc. X X X X X X P P
346 Metal Forgings and Stampings X X X X X X P P
347 Coating, Engraving, and Allied Services X X X X X P P P
348 Ordnance and Accessories, Nec X X X X X X P P
349 Misc. Fabricated Metal Products X X X X X X P P
35 MACHINERY, EXCEPT ELECTRICAL. This major group includes establishments engaged in
manufacturing machinery and equipment other than electrical equipment and transportation equipment.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
351 Engines and Turbines X X X X X P P P
352 Farm and Garden Machinery X X X X X P P P
353 Construction, Mining, and Materials Handling Machinery and Equipment X X X X X P P P
354 Metalworking Machinery X X X X X P P P
355 Special Industry Machinery X X X X X P P P
356 General Industrial Machinery X X X X X P P P
357 Office and Computing Machines X X X X X P P P
358 Refrigeration and Service Machinery 359 Misc. Machinery, Except Electrical X X X X X P P P
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 20/81
36 ELECTRIC AND ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT. This major group includes establishments engaged in
manufacturing equipment for the generation, storage, transmission, transformation, and utilization of
electrical energy.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
361 Electrical Distributing Equipment X X X X X P P P
362 Electrical Industrial Apparatus X X X X X P P P
363 Household Appliances X X X X X P P P
364 Electrical Lighting and Wiring Equipment X X X X X P P P
365 Household Audio and Video Equipment and Audio Recordings X X X X X P P P
366 Communication Equipment X X X X X P P P
367 Electronic Components and Accessories X X X X X P P P
369 Misc. Electrical Equipment & Supplies X X X X X P P P
10.337 (SIC 371-497) Uses Permitted in Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
37 TRANSPORTATION EQUIPMENT. This major group includes establishments engaged in manufacturing equipment for transportation of passengers and cargo
by land, air and water.
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
I-L I-G I-H
371 Motor Vehicles
and Equipment
X X X X X P P P
372 Aircraft and Parts X X X X X P P P
373 Ship and Boat
Building and
Repairing
X X X X X P P P
374 Railroad
Equipment
X X X X X P P P
375 Motorcycles,
Bicycles, and
Parts
X X X X X P P P
376 Guided Missiles,
Space Vehicles,
Parts
X X X X X P P P
379 Misc.
Transportation
Equipment
X X X X X P P P
38 INSTRUMENTS AND RELATED PRODUCTS. This major group includes establishments engaged in manufacturing instruments for measuring, testing,
analyzing, and controlling, and their associated sensors and accessories.
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
I-L I-G I-H
381 Aeronautical and
Nautical
Systems,
Instruments, and
Equipment
X X X X X P P P
382 Laboratory
Apparatus and
Optical
Instruments
X X X X X P P P
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 21/81
384 Medical
Instruments and
Supplies
X X X X X P P P
385 Ophthalmic
Goods
X X X X X P P P
386 Photographic
Equipment
X X X X X P P P
387 Watches, Clocks,
and Watch cases
X X X X X P P P
39 MISCELLANEOUS MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES. This major group includes establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing products not classified in
any other manufacturing group. Industries in this group fall into the following categories: jewelry, musical instruments, toys, sporting goods, pens, etc.
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
I-L I-G I-H
391 Jewelry,
Silverware,
and Plated
Ware
X X X X X P P P
393 Musical
Instruments
X X X X X P P P
394 Dolls, Toys,
Games, and
Sporting and
Athletic Goods
X X X X X P P P
395 Pens, Pencils,
and Other
Artists=
Materials
X X X X X P P P
396 Costume
Jewelry and
Notions
X X X X X P P P
399 Misc.
Manufactures
X X X X X P P P
E. TRANSPORTATION AND PUBLIC UTILITIES DIVISION
40 RAILROAD TRANSPORTATION. This major group includes establishments furnishing transportation by line-haul railroad, as well as REA Express, and
switching and terminal establishments.
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
I-L I-G I-H
401 Railroads X X P P P P P P
41 LOCAL AND INTERURBAN PASSENGER TRANSIT. This major group includes establishments primarily engaged in furnishing local and suburban passenger
transportation, and establishments engaged in furnishing transportation to local scenic features.
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
I-L I-G I-H
411 Local and
Suburban
Transportation
X X P P P P P P
412 Taxicabs X X P P P P P P
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 22/81
413 Intercity and
Rural Bus
Transportation
X X P P P P P P
414 Bus Charter
Service
X X P P P P P P
415 School Buses X X X X P P P P
417 Terminal and
Service
Facilities for
Motor Vehicle
Passenger
Transportation
X X P P P P P X
42 TRUCKING AND WAREHOUSING. This major group includes establishments furnishing local or long-distance trucking, or transfer services, or those engaged
in the storage of farm products, furniture and other household goods, or commercial goods of any nature.
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
I-L I-G I-H
421 Trucking, and
Courier
Services
except Air
X X X X P P P P
422 Public
Warehousing
and Storage
X X X X P P P P
423 Trucking
Terminal
Facilities
X X X X P P P P
43 U.S. POSTAL SERVICE
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
I-L I-G I-H
431 U.S. Postal
Service
P P P P P P P P
45 TRANSPORTATION BY AIR. This major group includes establishments engaged in furnishing domestic and foreign transportation by air and also those
operating airports and flying fields and furnishing terminal services.
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
I-L I-G I-H
451 Air
Transportation,
Scheduled, and
Air Courier
Services
X X X X P P P P
452 Air
Transportation,
Nonscheduled
X X X X P P P P
458 Airports, Flying
Fields, and
Airport
Terminal
Services
X X X X P P P P
TRANSPORTATION SERVICES. This major group includes establishments furnishing services incidental to transportation, such as forwarding and packing
services, and the arrangement of passenger and freight transportation.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 23/81
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
I-L I-G I-H
472 Arrangement
of passenger
transportation
X X X X P P P P
473 Arrangement
of Freight and
Cargo
Transportation
X X X X P P P P
474 Rental of
Railroad Cars
X X X X X P P P
478 Misc.
Transportation
Services
X X X P P P P P
48 COMMUNICATION. This major group includes establishments furnishing point-to-point communication services whether by wire or radio, and whether intended
to be received aurally or visually.
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
I-L I-G I-H
481 Telephone
Communication
X X P P P P P P
Wireless
Communication
Support
Structure
Cs Cs Cs Cs Cs Cs Cs Cs
Wireless
Communication
Facilities, other
than Support
Structure
Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps
482 Telegraph
Communication
X X P P P P P P
483 Radio and
Television
Broadcasting
Stations
X X X P P P P P
484 Cable and Other
Pay TV Stations
X X X P P P P P
489 Communication
Services, nec
X X X P P P P P
The special use references for Wireless Communication Support Structure and Wireless Communication Facilities, other than Support Structure correspond with
special use Section 10.824.
49 ELECTRIC, GAS, AND SANITARY SERVICES. This major group includes establishments primarily engaged in the generation, transmission, and/or distribution
of electricity, gas, or steam.
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
I-L I-G I-H
491 Electric
Services
Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps
492 Gas
Production
and
Distribution
Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 24/81
493 Combination
Utility Services
Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps
494 Water Supply Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps
495 Sanitary
Services
Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps
496 Steam and Air
Conditioning
Supply
X X X X X P P P
497 Irrigation
Systems
X X X X X P P P
The special use references correspond with special use Section
10.830.
10.337 (SIC 501-639) Uses Permitted in Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
F. WHOLESALE TRADE
50 WHOLESALE TRADE-DURABLE GOODS. This major group includes establishments that are primarily
engaged in the wholesale distribution of durable goods.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
501 Motor Vehicles & Automotive Equipment X X X X P P P P
502 Furniture and Home Furnishings X X X X P P P P
503 Lumber and Construction Materials X X X X P P P P
504 Professional and Commercial Equipment and Supplies X X X X P P P P
505 Metals and Minerals, Except Petroleum X X X X X P P P
506 Electrical Goods X X X X P P P P
507 Hardware, Plumbing & Heating Equipment X X X X P P P P
508 Machinery, Equipment, and Supplies X X X X P P P P
509 Misc. Durable Goods X X X X P P P P
51 WHOLESALE TRADE-NONDURABLE GOODS. This major group includes Establishments primarily
engaged in the wholesale distribution of non-durable goods.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
511 Paper and Paper Products X X X X P P P P
512 Drugs, Proprietaries, and Sundries X X X X P P P P
513 Apparel, Piece Goods, and Notions X X X X P P P P
514 Groceries and Related Products X X X X P P P P
515 Farm-Product Raw Materials X X X X P P P P
516 Chemicals and Allied Products X X X X P X P P
5171 Petroleum Bulk Stations and Terminals X X X X X X P P
5172 Petroleum and Petroleum Products Wholesalers, Except
Bulk Stations and Terminals X X X X X P P P
518 Beer, Wine, and Distilled Beverages X X X X P P P P
519 Misc. Nondurable Goods X X X X P P P P
G. RETAIL TRADE
52 BUILDING MATERIALS & GARDEN SUPPLIES. This major group includes establishments primarily
engaged in the selling of lumber and other building materials. It includes lumber and other building materials
dealers selling to the general public, even if sales to contractors account for a larger portion of total sales.
Establishments primarily selling plumbing, heating and air conditioning equipment and electrical supplies are
classified in the Wholesale Trade Group.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 25/81
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
521 Lumber and other Building Materials X P P P P X X X
523 Paint, Glass, and Wallpaper Stores X P P P P P X X
525 Hardware Stores X P P P P X X X
526 Retail Nurseries and Garden Stores X P P P P X X X
5261 Christmas Tree Sales Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps
527 Mobile Home Dealers X X X X P C X X
The special use reference for the sale of Christmas trees corresponds with Section 10.840 Temporary Uses and Structures.
53 GENERAL MERCHANDISE STORES. This major group includes retail stores which sell a number of
lines of merchandise, such as dry goods, apparel and accessories, furniture and home furnishings, small
wares, hardware, and food.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
531 Department Stores X P P P P X X X
533 Variety Stores X P P P P X X X
539 Misc. General Merchandise Stores X P P P P X X X
54 FOOD STORES. This major group includes retail stores primarily engaged in selling food for home
preparation and consumption.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
541 Grocery Stores - in excess of 25,000 sq. ft. of gross floor
area X X P P P X X X
- less than or equal to 25,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area X P P P P X X X
542 Meat Markets and Freezer Provisioners X P P P P X X X
5421 Live Crab Sales Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps
543 Fruit Stores and Vegetable Markets X P P P P X X X
544 Candy, Nut, and Confectionery Stores X P P P P X X X
545 Dairy Products Stores X P P P P X X X
546 Retail Bakeries P P P P P X X X
549 Misc. Food Stores X P P P P X X X
The special use reference for the sale of live crab corresponds with Section 10.840, Temporary Uses and Structures.
55 AUTOMOTIVE DEALERS & STATIONS. This major group includes retail dealers selling new and used
automobiles, boats, recreational and utility trailers, and motorcycles including those selling new automobile
parts and accessories; and gasoline service stations.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
551 New and Used Car Dealers X X P P P P X X
552 Used Car Dealers X X P P P P X X
553 Auto and Home Supply Stores X P P P P X X X
554 Fueling Stations (including Gasoline Service Stations P P P P P P P P
555 Boat Dealers X X P P P P P X
556 Recreation & Utility Trailer Dealers X X P P P P P X
557 Motorcycle Dealers X X P P P P P X
559 Automotive Dealers, nec The special use reference for
gasoline service stations corresponds with section 10.812. X X P P P P P X
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 26/81
56 APPAREL AND ACCESSORY STORES. This major group includes retail stores primarily engaged in
selling new clothing, shoes, hats, and related personal wear and adornment.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
561 Men's & Boys' Clothing & Accessories X P P P P X X X
562 Women's Clothing Stores X P P P P X X X
563 Women's Accessory and Specialty Stores X P P P P X X X
564 Children's and Infants' Wear Stores X P P P P X X X
565 Family Clothing Stores X P P P P X X X
566 Shoe Stores X P P P P X X X
569 Misc. Apparel & Accessories X P P P P X X X
57 FURNITURE AND HOME FURNISHING STORES. This major group includes those retail stores selling
goods used for furnishing the home. Establishments selling electrical and gas appliances are included in this
group only if the major part of their sales consists of articles for home use.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
571 Furniture and Home Furnishings Stores X P P P P X X X
572 Household Appliance Stores X P P P P X X X
573 Radio, Television, Consumer Electronics, and Music Stores X P P P P X X X
58 EATING AND DRINKING PLACES. This major group includes establishments selling prepared foods and
drinks for consumption on the premises; and also lunch counters and refreshment stands selling prepared
foods and drinks for immediate consumption. Restaurants, lunch counters, and drinking places operated as a
subordinate service facility by other establishments are not included in this group unless they are operated as
leased departments by outside operators. Thus, restaurants and lunch counters operated by hotels are
classified in Services, Major Group 70; those operated by department stores in Major Group 53. Bars and
restaurants owned by and operated for members of civic, social, and fraternal associations only are classified
in Industry 8641.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
5812 Eating and Drinking Places
5814 - with entertainment X X P P P X X X
5815 - without entertainment P P P P P Ps Ps Ps
5816 - with outdoor eating Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps
5817 Temporary Food Vendors Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps X
5818 Small Food Vendors Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps X
5819 Craft Alcohol Production X X Ps Ps Ps P1 P1 P1
The special use section references for:
1See SIC Code 208 Beverages for alcohol production in I zones.
Establishments in the industrial zones: 10.822
Establishments with outdoor eating areas: 10.833
Classification 5817 (Temporary Food Vendors): Section 10.840.
Classification 5818 (Small Food Vendors): Section 10.823.
Classification 5819 (Craft Alcohol Production): Section 10.834.
59 MISCELLANEOUS RETAIL. This major group includes retail establishments not elsewhere classified.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
591 Drug Stores and Proprietary Stores P P P P P X X X
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 27/81
592 Liquor Stores X P P P P X X X
593 Used Merchandise Stores X P P P P X X X
594 Miscellaneous Shopping Goods Stores X P P P P X X X
596 Nonstore Retailers X X X X P P X X
598 Fuel Dealers X X X X P P P P
599 Retail Stores, nec X P P P P X X X
5992 Florists P P P P P X X X
5994 News Dealers & Newsstands P P P P P X X X
5995 Optical Goods Stores P P P P P X X X
H. FINANCE, INSURANCE, AND REAL ESTATE DIVISION
60 BANKING. This major group includes institutions which are engaged in deposit banking or closely related
functions.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
601 Central Reserve Depository Institutions P X P P P X X X
602 Commercial Banks P P P P P Ps X X
603 Savings Institutions P P P P P Ps X X
606 Credit Unions P P P P P Ps X X
608 Foreign Banking and Branches and Agencies of Foreign
Banks P P P P P Ps X X
609
Functions Related to Depository Banking The special use
reference for establishments in the industrial zones
correspond with special use section 10.822.
P P P P P P X X
61 CREDIT AGENCIES OTHER THAN BANKS. This major group includes establishments engaged in
extending credit in the form of loans but not engaged in deposit banking.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
611 Federal & Federally-Sponsored Credit Agencies P P P P P X X X
614 Personal Credit Institutions P P P P P P X X
615 Business Credit Institutions P P P P P P X X
616 Mortgage Bankers and Brokers P P P P P P X X
62 SECURITY, COMMODITY BROKERS & SERVICES. This major group includes establishments engaged
in the underwriting, purchase, sale, or brokerage of securities and other financial contracts on their own
account or for the account of others.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
621 Security Brokers, Dealers, and Flotation Companies P P P P P P X X
622 Commodity Contracts Brokers and Dealers P P P P P P X X
623 Security and Commodity Exchanges P P P P P P X X
628 Security and Commodity Services P P P P P P X X
63 INSURANCE CARRIERS. This major group includes insurance carriers of all types.
C-S/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
631 Life Insurance P P P P P P X X
632 Medical Service and Health Insurance P P P P P P X X
633 Fire, Marine, and Casualty Insurance P P P P P P X X
635 Surety Insurance P P P P P P X X
636 Title Insurance P P P P P P X X
637 Pension, Health, and Welfare Funds P P P P P P X X
639 Insurance Carriers, nec P P P P P P X X
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 28/81
10.337 (SIC 641-809) Uses Permitted in Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
64 INSURANCE AGENTS, BROKERS & SERVICE. This major group includes agents and brokers dealing in insurance, and also organizations offering services to insurance
companies and to policy holders.
CS/
P
C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
641 Insurance
Agents,
Brokers, &
Service
P P P P P P X X
65 REAL ESTATE. This major group includes real estate operators and owners and lessors of real property, as well as buyers, sellers, developers, agents, and brokers.
CS/
P
C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
651 Real Estate
Operators and
Lessors
P P P P P P X X
653 Real Estate
Agents and
Managers
P P P P P P X X
654 Title Abstract
Offices
P P P P P P X X
655 Subdividers
and Developers
P P P P P P X X
67 HOLDING AND OTHER INVESTMENT OFFICES. This major group includes investment trusts, investment companies, holding companies and commodity trading
companies.
CS/
P
C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
671 Holding Offices P P P P P P X X
672 Investment
Offices
P P P P P P X X
673 Trusts P P P P P P X X
679 Misc. Investing P P P P P P X X
I. SERVICES
70 HOTELS AND OTHER LODGING PLACES. This major group includes commercial and institutional establishments engaged in furnishing lodging, or lodging and meals,
and camping space and facilities on a fee basis.
CS/
P
C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
701 Hotels and
Motels
X X P P P X X X
702 Rooming and
Boarding
Houses
X X P X P X X X
703 Camps and
Recreational
Vehicle Parks
X X X P P X X X
704 Membership-
Basis
Organization
Hotels
X X P P P X X X
72 PERSONAL SERVICES. This major group includes establishments primarily engaged in providing services generally to individuals.
CS/
P
C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
721 Laundry,
Cleaning, &
Garment
Services
P P P P P X X X
722 Photographic
Studios,
Portrait
P P P P P X X X
723 Beauty Shops P P P P P X X X
724 Barber Shops P P P P P X X X
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 29/81
725 Shoe Repair
Shops and
Shoeshine
Parlors
P P P P P X X X
726 Funeral Service
and
Crematories
X X Ps Ps Ps Ps X X
729 Misc. Personal
Services
P P P P P X X X
The special use reference for funeral service and crematories corresponds with special use section 10.815.
73 BUSINESS SERVICES. This major group includes establishments primarily engaged in rendering services, not elsewhere classified, to business establishments on a fee or
contract basis.
CS/
P
C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
731 Advertising P P P P P P X X
732 Credit
Reporting and
Collection
P P P P P X X X
733 Mailing,
Reproduction,
Stenographic
P P P P P X X X
7331 Direct Mailing
Advertising
P P P P P P P P
734 Services to
Buildings
P P P P P P P P
735 Misc.
Equipment
Rental and
Leasing
X P P X P P P P
736 Personnel
Supply
Services
P P P P P P X X
737 Computer and
Data
Processing
Services
P P P P P P X X
738 Misc. Business
Services
P P P P P P P P
75 AUTO REPAIR, SERVICES, AND GARAGES. This major group includes establishments primarily engaged in furnishing automotive repair, rental, leasing and parking
services to the general public. Similar facilities owned and operated by concerns for their own use and not for the general public are treated as auxiliary establishments and
are not included in this group.
CS/
P
C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
751 Automotive
Rentals,
Without Drivers
X X P P P P X X
752 Automobile
Parking
P X P P P P P P
753 Automotive
Repair Shops
X C P P P P P P
754 Automotive
Services,
Except Repair
X C P P P P P P
76 MISCELLANEOUS REPAIR SERVICES. This major group includes establishments engaged in miscellaneous repair services.
CS/
P
C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
762 Electrical
Repair Shops
X P P P P P P P
763 Watch, Clock,
and Jewelry
Repair
P P P P P P P P
764 Reupholstery
and Furniture
Repair
X P P P P P P P
769 Misc. Repair
Shops
X P P P P P P P
78 MOTION PICTURES. This major group includes establishments providing and distributing motion pictures, exhibiting motion pictures, and furnishing services to the motion
picture industry.
CS/
P
C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 30/81
781 Motion Picture
Production &
Services
X X P P P P P P
782 Motion Picture
Distribution and
Services
X X P P P P P P
783 Motion Picture
Theaters
X X P P P X X X
784 Video Tape
Rental
P P P P P X X X
79 AMUSEMENT & RECREATION SERVICES. This major group includes establishments primarily engaged in providing amusement or entertainment on payment of a fee or
admission charge, except motion picture theatres.
CS/
P
C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
791 Dance Halls,
Studios, and
Schools
X P P P P X X X
792 Producers,
Orchestras,
Entertainers
X X P P P X X X
793 Bowling
Centers
X X P P P X X X
794 Commercial
Sports
X X P P P P P C
799 Misc.
Amusement,
Recreational
Services
X Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps X
The special use reference to Misc. Amusement, Recreational Services corresponds to special use Section 10.813.
80 HEALTH SERVICES. This major group includes establishments primarily engaged in furnishing medical, surgical, and other health services to persons.
CS/
P
C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
801 Offices of
Doctors of
Medicine
P P P P P X X X
802 Offices of
Dentists
P P P P P X X X
803 Offices of
Osteopathic
Physicians
P P P P P X X X
804 Offices of Other
Health
Practitioners
P P P P P X X X
805 Nursing and
Personal Care
Facilities
P X P P P X X X
806 Hospitals Cs X X X X X X X
807 Medical and
Dental
Laboratories
P P P P P P X X
808 Home Health
Care Services
P P P P P X X X
809 Health and
Allied Services,
nec
P P P P P X X X
- Occupational
Health Facility
P P P P P P P P
The special use reference for hospitals in the C-S/P zone corresponds with special use section 10.816 (2).
10.337 (SIC 811-972) Uses Permitted in Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
81 LEGAL SERVICES. This major group includes establishments engaged in offering legal advice or legal
services, the head or heads of which are members of the bar.
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
IL
IG
IH
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 31/81
811 Legal
Services
P P P P P X X X
82 EDUCATIONAL SERVICES. This major group includes establishments furnishing formal academic or
technical courses, correspondence schools, commercial and trade schools, and libraries, but not including
job training.
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
IL
IG
IH
821 Elementary
and
Secondary
Schools
C C C C C X X X
822 Colleges
and
Universities
P P P p P P X X
823 Libraries P P P P P P X X
824 Vocational
Schools
P P P P P P X X
829 Schools &
Educational
Services,
nec
P P P P P P X X
83 SOCIAL SERVICES. This major group includes establishments providing social services and
rehabilitation services to those persons with social or personal problems requiring special services and to the
handicapped and disadvantaged.
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
IL
IG
IH
832 Individual
and Family
Social
Services
P P P P P X X X
833 Job Training
and
Vocational
Rehabilitation
Services
P P P P P P P X
835 Child Day
Care
Services
Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps X X
836 Residential
Care (All
kinds,
including
those with
over 15
residents)
P P P P P X X X
839 Social
Services, nec
P P P P P X X X
The special use reference for child day care services corresponds with section 10.811.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 32/81
84 MUSEUMS, BOTANICAL, ZOOLOGICAL GARDENS. This major group includes establishments
primarily providing exhibits of historical, educational, or cultural interest and which are not operated
commercially. Receipts or funding of these establishments are not primarily from admission charges.
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
IL
IG
IH
841 Museums
and Art
Galleries
P P P P P X X X
842 Botanical
and
Zoological
Gardens
C C C C C C X X
86 MEMBERSHIP ORGANIZATIONS. This major group includes organizations operating on a membership
basis for the promotion of the interests of the members.
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
IL
IG
IH
861 Business
Associations
P P P P P P X X
862 Professional
Membership
Organizations
P P P P P P X X
863 Labor
Organizations
P P P P P P X X
864 Civic, Social,
and Fraternal
Associations
P P P P P P X X
865 Political
Organizations
P P P P P P X X
866 Religious
Organizations
Ps P P P P P X X
869 Membership
Organizations,
nec
P P P P P P X X
The special use reference to Religious Organizations corresponds to special use Section 10.816(2).
87 ENGINEERING, ACCOUNTING, AND MISCELLANEOUS PROFESSIONAL AND MANAGEMENT
SERVICES. This major group includes establishments engaged in performing professional and management
services.
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
IL
IG
IH
871 Engineering,
Architectural
& Surveying
Services
P P P P P P X X
872 Accounting,
Auditing &
Bookkeeping
Services
P P P P P P X X
873 Research,
Development,
P P P P P P X X
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 33/81
and Testing
Services
874 Management
and Public
Relations
Services
P P P P P P X X
88 DWELLING UNITS
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
IL
IG
IH
881 Dwelling
Units
Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps Ps
The special use regulations for commercial zones corresponds with special use section 10.837 and the
special use regulations for industrial zones corresponds with special use section 10.835. The special use
regulations for Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs) in commercial and industrial zones correspond with special
use section 10.821.
89 MISCELLANEOUS SERVICES. This major group includes establishments engaged in performing
services not elsewhere classified.
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
IL
IG
IH
899 Services,
nec
P P P P P P X X
J. PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION.
91 EXECUTIVE, LEGISLATIVE, AND GENERAL. This major group includes offices of executives, legislative
bodies, and general government offices, not elsewhere classified.
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
IL
IG
IH
911 Executive
Offices
P X P P P X X X
912 Legislative
Bodies
P X P P P X X X
913 Executive
and
Legislative
Combined
P X P P P X X X
919 General
Government,
Nec
P P P P P X X X
92 JUSTICE, PUBLIC ORDER, SAFETY. This major group includes government establishments engaged in
justice, public order and safety.
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
IL
IG
IH
921 Courts P X P P P X X X
922 Public
Order
P X P P P P P P
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 34/81
and
Safety
93 FINANCE, TAXATION & MONETARY POLICY. This major group includes government establishments
engaged in public finance, taxation and monetary policy.
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
IL
IG
IH
931 Finance,
Taxation,
&
Monetary
Policy
P X P P P X X X
94 ADMINISTRATION OF HUMAN RESOURCES. This major group includes government establishments
primarily engaged in the administration of human resource programs.
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
IL
IG
IH
941 Administration
of Educational
Programs
P P P P P P X X
943 Administration
of Public
Health
Programs
P P P P P P X X
944 Administration
of Social &
Manpower
Programs
P P P P P P X X
945 Administration
of Veterans'
Affairs
P P P P P P X X
95 ADMINISTRATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY AND HOUSING. This major group includes
government establishments engaged in the administration of environmental quality and housing programs.
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
IL
IG
IH
951 Environmental
Quality
P P P P P P X X
953 Housing and
Urban
Development
P P P P P P X X
96 ADMINISTRATION OF ECONOMIC PROGRAMS. This major group includes government establishments
primarily engaged in the administration of economic programs.
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
IL
IG
IH
961 Administration
of General
Economic
Programs
P P P P P P X X
962 Regulation, P P P P P P X X
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 35/81
Administration
of
Transportation
963 Regulation,
Administration
of Utilities
P P P P P P X X
964 Regulation of
Agricultural
Marketing
P P P P P P X X
965 Regulation
Misc.
Commercial
Sectors
P P P P P P X X
966 Space
Research and
Technology
P P P P P P P P
97 NATIONAL SECURITY AND INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS. This major group includes governmental
establishments primarily engaged in national security and international affairs.
CS/
P
CN
CC
CR
CH
IL
IG
IH
971 National
Security
P X P P P P P P
972 International
Affairs
P X P P P P X X
[Amd. Sec. 17, Ord. No. 5820, Mar. 19, 1987; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 5873, May 21, 1987; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord.
No. 6179, Sept. 1, 1988; Amd. Ord. No. 6495, Nov. 16, 1989; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 7168, Jul. 16, 1992;
Amd. Ord. No. 7266, Dec. 3, 1992; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7611, Apr. 7, 1994; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 7862,
Apr. 20, 1995; Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 8285, Feb. 6, 1997; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 8291, Feb. 20, 1997; Amd.
Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2001-166, Sept. 6, 2001; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2008-04, Jan. 3, 2008; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord.
No. 2008-227, Nov. 6, 2008; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2011-32, Mar. 3, 2011; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2011-53,
Mar. 17, 2011; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2012-32, March 1, 2012; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2012-137, Sept. 6, 2012; Amd. Sec. 2,
Ord. No. 2013-30, Feb. 21, 2013; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2013-31, Feb. 21, 2013; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2013-82, June 6, 2013; Amd. Sec. 4,
Ord. No. 2013-81, June 20, 2013; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2014-65, May 15, 2014; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2014-161, Dec. 22, 2014; Amd. Sec. 3,
Ord. No. 2015-75, July 2, 2015; Amd. Sec. 2 Ord. No. 2015-104, October 15, 2015; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2016-143, Dec. 1, 2016; Amd. Sec. 2.
Ord. No. 2016-151, Dec. 15, 2016; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2017-47, May 18, 2017; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2018-113, Sept. 20, 2018; Amd. Sec.
12, Ord. No. 2018-133, Dec. 6, 2018; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2018-132, Dec. 20, 2018.]
10.339 [Repealed Sec. 6, Ord. No. 1999-215, June 1, 2000.]
10.340 [Repealed Sec. 6, Ord. No. 1999-215, June 1, 2000.]
10.341 [Repealed Sec. 6, Ord. No. 1999-215, June 1, 2000.]
10.342 [Repealed Sec. 6, Ord. No. 1999-215, June 1, 2000.]
10.343 [Repealed Sec. 6, Ord. No. 1999-215, June 1, 2000.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 36/81
10.345 Purpose of Overlay Districts
Overlay districts impose additional or different land development regulations or procedures on certain parcels
or areas of the City. They generally coincide with a special area plan or implement a specific Comprehensive
Plan policy, such as identifying those parcels containing historic resources that are subject to specific
regulations. Overlay districts address issues not addressed by the underlying zoning district. The
boundaries of each overlay district are shown on the official zoning map of the City of Medford. See Section
10.186 regarding Exceptions to the site development standards contained in the overlay districts.
[Added, Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2011-196, Oct. 6, 2011; Amd. Sec. 144, Ord. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July
23, 2018).]
10.348 Limited Industrial, I-00
A. Purpose: To limit the number of vehicle trips at time of zone change to City industrial zones. This
is accomplished by disallowing uses that are otherwise permitted in the City industrial zones until the
appropriate transportation facility adequacy tests have been completed and necessary improvements have
been funded, completed, or shown to be no longer necessary.
B. Applicability: May overlay any industrial zone.
C. Application:
(1) Upon annexation of a parcel(s) having County industrial zoning if transportation facility adequacy
has not been proven; or
(2) To approve an industrial zone if transportation facilities have been shown to be inadequate per
Section 10.204(B)(3) or facility adequacy has not been proven.
D. Removal: The Limited Industrial Overlay may be removed per zone change procedures outlined in
Section 10.204 and when transportation facilities have been shown to be adequate or have been made
adequate to support the types of uses permitted by the underlying City industrial zone.
E. Prohibited Uses: The following uses, as listed in Section 10.337, shall not be permitted:
523 Paint Glass and Wallpaper Stores
554 Gasoline Service Stations
581 Eating and Drinking Places, excluding Temporary Food Vendors ad Small Food Vendors
60 Banking
61 Credit Agencies Other than Banks
62 Security, Commodity Brokers and Services
63 Insurance Carriers
64 Insurance Agents, Brokers, and Service
65 Real Estate
67 Holding and other Investment Offices
726 Funeral Service and Crematories
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 37/81
731 Advertising
736 Personnel Supply Services
737 Computer and Data Processing Services
751 Automotive Rentals, without drivers
794 Commercial Sports
799 Misc. Amusement, Recreational Services
807 Medical and Dental Laboratories
82 Educational Services
86 Membership Organizations
87 Engineering, Accounting, and Miscellaneous Professional and Management Services
89 Miscellaneous Services
94 Administration of Human Resources
95 Administration of Environmental Quality and Housing
[Added, Ord. No. 2005-13, Feb. 3, 2005; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2011-196, Oct. 6, 2011; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord.
No. 2016-35, March 3, 2016; Amd. Sec. 145, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.349 Airport Approach Overlay District, A-A
A. Purpose of the A-A Overlay. The purpose of this overlay district is to reduce risks to aircraft operations as
well as risks of damage or injury to persons or property on the ground near the airport. This is accomplished
by limiting land uses that could create hazardous conditions, and limiting building height and density of
development. A use in the A-A Overlay is considered compatible if the use does not create a bird attractant,
distracting light, glare, smoke, or electrical interference. Impact from airport noise is another factor to
consider in terms of compatible uses. The A-A Overlay includes an area called the Runway Protection Zone
(RPZ).
B. Location of A-A Overlay. The Airport Approach is shown on the official zoning map of the City of Medford,
and is defined by Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR, Part 77, OAR 660-013, and OAR 738-070).
C. Application of A-A Provisions. The A-A designation shall overlay a zoning district. If any conflict in the
regulation of procedure occurs between the zoning district and the A-A Overlay, the provisions of the A-A
Overlay shall govern.
D. Noise Impacts and Compatible Land Uses in the A-A Overlay. The airport’s “se-vere” noise impact area
(70 DNL and above), as illustrated in the Airport Master Plan Update, is intended to be airport property only.
The “substantial” noise impact area (65-70 DNL) is an area where residential development is incompatible
due to noise impacts. If public institutions are built within the substantial noise impact area, measures should
be taken to reduce noise levels. Most land uses are compatible in areas impacted by noise levels less than
65 DNL.
E. Permitted Uses in the A-A Overlay. Uses in the A-A Overlay are limited in order to prevent hazardous
conditions as described in subsection (A) above.
The following uses are permitted within the A-A Overlay:
(1) Uses Permitted in the underlying zoning district.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 38/81
(2) Open land uses such as cemeteries, sod farming, truck farming, other vegetable and plant crop
cultivation, landscape nursery, riding academies, picnic area, botanical
gardens, paths or recreation areas.
(3) Roadways, parking areas and storage yards located in such a manner that vehicle lights will not
make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between landing lights and vehicle lights, or result in glare or in
any other way impair visibility in the vicinity of the landing approach.
(4) Customary and usual aviation- and emergency-related activities including but not limited to
takeoffs, landings, aircraft hangars, tie-downs, construction and maintenance of airport facilities, fixedbase
operator facilities, flight instruction, law enforcement, emergency medical flights, firefighting
activities and other activities incidental to the normal operation of an airport.
F. Conditional Uses in the A-A Overlay. Any use listed as conditional in the underlying
Zone.
G. Prohibited Uses in the A-A Overlay. The following uses are prohibited within the A-A Overlay:
(1) Places of public assembly such as churches, schools, conference/convention centers,
employment/shopping centers, arenas, athletic fields, stadiums, club houses, or museums.
(2) High-density residential development.
(3) New residential development within the Runway Protection Zone.
(4) Water treatment plants, mining, water impoundments or wetland mitigation.
(5) Golf courses (unless the applicant can demonstrate that management techniques will be used to
reduce existing wild fowl attractants and avoid the creation of new wildlife attractants).
(6) Any use or building material that results in glare in the eyes of the pilots using the airport (such as
flat roofs that retain water, reflecting ponds, sloped glazing, use of glass on roofs, skylights, parking lots
not shielded with trees, high rib metal roofing with high gloss finish, east/west facing storefronts).
(7) Any use which makes it difficult for the pilots to distinguish between airport lights and other lights.
(8) Any use that would cause emissions of smoke, dust or steam that would obscure visibility within the
airport approach corridor (unless the applicant can demonstrate that mitigation measures will reduce
the potential for safety risk or incompatibility with airport operations to an insignificant level).
(9) Any use which creates electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communications
between the airport and aircraft.
(10) Any use which would create a bird strike hazard hazard (such as water treatment plants, golf
courses, sanitary landfills, water impoundments, sewage lagoons, sewage sludge disposal facilities) if
within 10,000 feet from any airport runway.
(11) Flashing, blinking signs or any lighting projected upward. Lighting shall in-corporate shielding in
their designs to reflect light away from airport surfaces.
(12) Any other use that would endanger or inter fere with the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft
intending to use the airport.
H. Height Regulations in the A-A Overlay.
Building height is limited in the A-A Overlay in order to protect airspace, and instrument approach altitudes.
No structure, construction equipment, vegetation, electrical transmission lines or any other object shall be
allowed to be constructed so as to penetrate the Approach Surface as defined in Federal Aviation
Regulations, Part 77.19.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 39/81
[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No 2016-35, March 3, 2016]
10.350 [Repealed Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2016-35, March 3, 2016]
10.351 [Repealed Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2016-35, March 3, 2016]
10.352 Airport Radar Overlay District, A-R.
1. Purpose of the A-R Overlay. The purpose of the A-R Overlay is to ensure that development within close
proximity to the radar facility does not interfere with the performance of the radar and thus affect airport
operations.
2. Location of the A-R Overlay.The Airport Radar Overlay is shown on the official zoning map of the City of
Medford.
3. Height Restriction in the A-R Overlay. No structure, construction equipment, vegetation, electrical
transmission lines or any other object shall exceed 40 feet in height.
[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 7026, Nov. 21, 1991; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2016-35, March 3, 2016.]
10.353 [Repealed Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2016-35, March 3, 2016]
10.354 [Repealed Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2016-35, March 3, 2016]
10.355 Airport Area of Concern Overlay District, A-C.
A. Purpose of the A-C: The Airport Area of Concern is intended to reduce risks to aircraft operations and
land uses within close proximity to the airport. This is accomplished by forwarding land use applications
located within the A-C to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Oregon Department of Aviation (ODA)
and/or the airport for review as referral agencies. These agencies shall submit comments to the Planning
Department if further action is necessary regarding the proposed land use.
B. Location of the A-C: The Area of Concern is a Zoning Overlay shown on the official zoning map of the
City of Medford, and is defined by Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR, Part 77, OAR 660-013, and OAR 738-
070) as being lands, waters and airspace, or portions thereof comprising the civil airport imaginary surfaces.
[Added Section 1, Ordinance No. 7065, February 6, 1992; Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2016-35, March 3, 2016.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 40/81
10.356 [Repealed Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2011-196, Oct. 6, 2011.]
Repealed
10.358 Central Business, C-B
The C-B district is representative of the core downtown business and retail area. The intent of the C-B district
is to recognize the unique and historic character of the downtown area as an asset to the community and to
provide standards and criteria necessary for its continued development and redevelopment as a vital part of
this community.
(1) Commercial and Industrial Development Standards. All of the site development standards set forth in
Article V, Section 10.721, Commercial and Industrial Site Development Standards, shall be waived in lieu of
the following site development standards:
(a) Off-street parking and loading. Except when within the parking district, development of vacant
parcels shall be subject to the parking requirements of Section 10.741, Off Street Parking and Loading
Requirements, through 10.746, General Design Requirements for Parking and Sections 10.747, Bicycle
Parking and Storage Regulations, General Provisions, through 10.751, Exceptions to Bicycle Parking
Standards.
(b) Growers' Market in Commercial Zones. A growers' market is allowed as a permitted use in the C-B
overlay. A growers' market shall be defined as an association of five (5) or more local agriculturalists
organized for the purpose of providing a single location for the sale of locally grown produce and crafts
directly to the consumer. Crafts shall be limited to those made by the vendor with a purpose or theme
interactive with agriculture, and composed of locally grown agricultural products or by-products.
(c) Sidewalk Cafes in Commercial Zones. Operation of a sidewalk cafe is allowed as a permitted use
given compliance with the following definitions and conditions:
(i) Definition of terms includes: "Community Event" - Any public or private activity authorized by
the City Council within the Central Business District. "Operate a sidewalk cafe" - Serving food or
beverage from an adjacent cafe or restaurant to patrons seated at tables located within the
sidewalk area adjacent to the cafe or restaurant. "Sidewalk" - That portion of the public right-ofway
intended for pedestrian use located between the curb line or lateral line of the roadway and
the adjacent property line.
(ii) Application for a permit to operate a sidewalk cafe shall be made at the City Planning
Department and shall include the following information: name and address of the applicant, a
drawing showing the width of the applicant's cafe or restaurant facing the sidewalk area
requested to be used, location of doorways, width of sidewalk (distance from curb face to building
face), location of trees, parking meters, bus shelter, sidewalk benches, trash receptacles, or any
other semi-permanent sidewalk obstruction. The drawing shall also include the area requested for
use as a sidewalk cafe, the table locations and the area which will be occupied by the tables and
accompanying chairs, and location and size of any features used to delineate the area, such as
portable planters, etc.
(iii) Operation of a sidewalk cafe shall comply with the following permit criteria: the area to be
considered must have sidewalks which are eight (8) feet in width or greater. There shall remain a
clear and unobstructed width of six (6) feet for pedestrians.
(iv) Operation of a sidewalk cafe shall require the following provisions for liability and insurance: a
signed statement shall be submitted with the permit application stating that the permittee shall
hold harmless the City of Medford, its officers and employees, and shall indemnify the City of
Medford, its officers and employees for any claims for damages to property or injury to persons
which may be occasioned by any activity carried on under the terms of the permit. Permittee shall
furnish and maintain such liability insurance as shall protect permittee and the City from all claims
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 41/81
for damage to property or bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operations under
the permit or in connection with it. Such insurance shall provide coverage of not less than
$200,000 for bodily injury for each person, $500,000 for each occurrence, and not less than
$50,000 for property damage for each occurrence. Such insurance shall name as additional
insured the City of Medford, its officers and employees, and the property owner, and shall further
provide that the policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior to the expiration date of the permit,
without 30 days written notice to the City. Evidence that such a policy exists shall be provided to
the Planning Department.
(v) Issuance of a sidewalk cafe permit shall comply with the following terms and conditions of the
permit itself: the permit may be suspended by the City for the duration of a special "community
event" which would make use of the public sidewalk area impractical, the permit is specifically
limited to the area shown on the permit application, the permittee shall assure that its use of the
sidewalk in no way interferes with sidewalk users or limits their free and unobstructed passage,
the sidewalk and all things placed on it shall at all times be maintained in a clean and attractive
condition, and at such times that the permittee is not utilizing the sidewalk as authorized all things
shall be removed from it. If throw-away utensils, cups, plates, etc., are used, trash containers
shall be provided on-site for use by the cafe patrons.
(vi) Once approved, the following conditions for denial, revocation or suspension of a sidewalk
cafe permit may be applied: the City Planning Director may deny or revoke the permit if it is found
that any of the provisions of this Chapter have been violated, that any necessary health permit
has been suspended, revoked, or canceled, or if the permittee does not have or maintain
insurance which is correct and effective in the minimum amounts prescribed in Section (d) above.
Whenever the Planning Director determines that there is cause to deny or revoke a permit, the
Planning Director shall mail a notice to the applicant or permit holder stating: the reasons for the
proposed denial or revocation, a brief summary of the evidence relied upon and what to do to
obtain a hearing in order to dispute the proposed decision. A person whose permit is proposed to
be denied or revoked may, within ten days after the notice is sent, request an evidentiary hearing
before the Planning Director in order to dispute the proposed decision. If no request for a hearing
is received by the Planning Director within ten days after the notice was sent, the proposed
decision shall become final. If a timely request for hearing is received, the Planning Director shall
notify the applicant or permit holder of the time and place of the hearing and shall make a final
decision after considering all the evidence presented. Notwithstanding any other provision of the
Land Development Code, the decision of the Planning Director to issue, deny or revoke a permit
under this section may not be appealed to the City Council.
(2) Residential Development Standards. All residential development standards contained in Article III, Zoning
Districts, and Article V, Site Development Standards, shall be waived in lieu of the following:
(a) Off-street parking and loading. All residential development shall be subject to the parking
requirements of 10.741, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements, through 10.746, General
Design Requirements for Parking and Sections 10.747, Bicycle Parking and Storage Regulations,
General Provisions, through 10.751, Exceptions to Bicycle Parking Standards.
(b) New residential development on vacant parcels. New residential development on vacant parcels
shall conform to the provisions of Article III, Section 10.306, Residential Land Use Classification,
through 10.314, Residential Uses, and to the site development standards for the MFR-30 zoning district
contained in Article V, Section 10.713, Duplex, through 10.715, Apartment.
(c) Residential development which results from conversion or remodel of existing structures, or new
residential construction which exceeds the residential density standard of the MFR-30 zone. Such
residential development shall be subject only to the off-street parking and loading requirements as
provided in (a) above and shall be allowed only as a conditional use pursuant to Article II, Section
10.184.
(3) Streetscape Standards. All new or reconstructed streets and streetscapes within the C-B District shall be
developed according to the following standards and as identified in the Street Materials Standards List.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 42/81
Streetscape Types There are (5) streetscape types. These Streetscape Types are designated in Figure 1.
Each streetscape type and its associated design shall comply with the standards of this section. All listed
distances shall be considered minimum width. Existing street widths may vary. Street tree designations are
included in Street Materials Standards List.
Type I, Primary Commercial Streets. Type I Streets are commercial streets that are intended as high volume
vehicular and pedestrian streets linking the Central Business District with sub-districts and other parts of the
City. The streetscape design for Type I Streets is intended to facilitate and balance pedestrian and vehicular
movement in an attractive and safe environment. The Type 1 Street includes benches, decorative street and
pedestrian lighting, tree grates, trash receptacles, banner poles, tree lighting, and concrete pavers or brick
pavers. The minimum design standards for the Type I Street are illustrated in Figures 2 and 3 below.
Type II, Secondary Commercial Streets. Type II streets are commercial streets with moderate volume of
vehicular traffic and high volume of pedestrian activity. The minimum design standards for the Type II Street
are illustrated in Figures 4 and 5. Benches and trash receptacles are installed only where space permits.
Type III, Special Design Streets. Type III streets are unique commercial streets that are intended for low
volumes of vehicular traffic and high volumes of pedestrian activity. The final design for all Type III Streets will
require individual approval from the City Council as a Transportation Facility Development review. Unique
benches, streetlights, diagonal parking, trash receptacles, and paver patterns that vary from the Street
Materials Standards List may be chosen for each Type III Street.
Type IV, Standard Commercial/Residential Streets. There are two classes of Type IV Streets, Commercial
and Residential. These are local streets intended for moderate to low volume of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic. The class determination is based on the underlying zoning. Commercial zoning requires the Type IV
Commercial Street standards as illustrated in Figures 6 and 7. Residential zoning requires the Type IV
Residential Street standards as illustrated in Figures 8 and 9. The only distinction between the two Type IV
classes is the requirement of a 5-foot sidewalk and a 5-foot planter strip for the Residential classification in
lieu of a 10-foot sidewalk required for the Commercial classification. Streetlights shall be located at street
intersections, alleys, and other places only as needed. For the Type IV Residential Street, tick marks for onstreet
parking are optional.
Within the Central Business District there are two classifications of alley streetscapes; General Alleys and
Pedestrian Alleys (i.e., Middleford Alley).
Type V, General Alleys. General Alleys shall serve as access to parking and services. The minimum
standards for General Alleys are illustrated in Figures 10 and 11.
To retain the pedestrian character of the Central Business District all alley intersections with public streets
shall use the standard approach illustrated in Figure 12. The appropriate sidewalk pattern shall extend across
the length of the approach.
Note: All driveway aprons (including for alleys and access to parking lots) within the Central Business District
shall meet the standard in Figure 12.
Type V; Alleys, Pedestrian. Certain alleys shall be improved to standards that encourage pedestrian
circulation. These Pedestrian Alleys are identified in Figure 1. Pedestrian alleys may have brick or concrete
pavers or a stamped concrete surface in lieu of asphalt. Pedestrian alleys are also encouraged to include
street furniture, pedestrian lighting, and landscaping in their design.
Corner Extensions. To enhance pedestrian movement within and throughout the Central Business District,
certain intersections are designated for corner extensions. Figures 14 and 15 illustrate the standards for full
and partial corner extensions.
Figure 13 identifies the location of full and partial corner extensions.
[Amd. Sec. 18, Ord. No. 5820, March 19, 1987; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 5873, May 21, 1987; Amd. Sec. 5,
Ord. No. 5986, Oct. 1, 1987; Amd. Ord. No. 6264, Dec. 15, 1988; Amd. Ord. No. 6748, Oct. 18, 1990; Amd.
Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7629, May 5, 1994; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7970, Oct. 5, 1995; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7991,
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 43/81
Nov. 16, 1995; Amd. Ord. No. 2003-98, March 20, 2003; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2009-207, Sept. 17, 2009;
Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2014-161, Dec. 22, 2014; Amd. Sec 12, Ord. No. 2016-35, March 3, 2016; Amd. Sec.
146, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
IMAGES FOR THIS CODE
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 44/81
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 45/81
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 46/81
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 47/81
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 48/81
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 49/81
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 50/81
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 51/81
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 52/81
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 53/81
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 54/81
(Click on an image to see a larger version)
10.360 Exclusive Agricultural, E-A
A. Purpose. The E-A overlay district is intended to provide a land use classification within an urban area
that:
(1) Allows for the preservation of agriculture and agricultural uses through zoning.
B. Criterion for Application of E-A: At the request of the property owner, the City may apply the E-A overlay
to a parcel(s) if the use on the parcel(s) is agriculture, as defined herein.
C. Criterion for Removal of E-A: The E-A overlay may be removed utilizing Type III zone change
procedures. For removal of the E-A overlay, the property owner must certify that all agriculture and
agricultural-related uses not otherwise permitted by the underlying zoning district have been terminated by
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 55/81
the date of application for removal of the E-A overlay, and shall not be considered legal nonconformities.
[Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2012-59, May 3, 2012; Amd. Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2016-35, March 3, 2016; Amd. Sec.
147, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.361 Permitted Activities and Development Standards, E-A
Development and improvements within an E-A overlay district shall be restricted to:
A. Agricultural buildings and other improvements directly related to farming.
B. Property line adjustments.
C. New construction or remodeling of one single-family dwelling and accessory dwelling unit per existing
parcel.
[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2012-59, May 3, 2012.]
10.362 Conditional Activities and Development, E-A
A. Within an E-A overlay district the following activities and development require a conditional use permit:
(1) On-site farm product sales and/or small wineries, subject to the following:
(a) In residential zoning districts, on-site farm product sales and/or small wineries are only
permitted within the Exclusive Agricultural (E-A) Overlay with an approved Conditional Use
Permit.
(b) On-site farm product sales may include outdoor sales, such as a roadside table, or in a
structure, such as a farm stand or store.
(c) Structures intended for on-site farm product sales are not permitted for occupancy as a
residence or for activity other than the sale of crops, farm products or livestock.
(d) Structures intended for a small winery are not permitted for occupancy as a residence or for
activity other than the production, shipping and distribution, wholesale and retail sales, tasting,
crushing, fermenting, blending, aging, storage, bottling, administrative functions and warehousing.
(e) The site contains or proposes a vineyard and/or farm of at least fifteen (15) contiguous acres
that grows or produces wine and/or other farm products.
(f) The farm product sales and/or small winery and associated improvements are located at least
one hundred (100) feet from any property line with parcels not having the E-A overlay.
(g) May include sales of items related to the promotion of wine and/or farm products, the sale of
which is incidental to the retail sale of wine and/or farm products.
(2) Food and/or wine tasting, vineyard and/or farm tours, educational activities, classes, wine dinners,
pumpkin patches, corn mazes, hay rides, and other similar activities conducted for the purpose of
promoting wine and/or farm products.
(3) Public or private events or gatherings, such as weddings, banquets, and concerts.
(4) A commercial kitchen for preparing food for activities (1-3) above.
B. In conjunction with the conditional activities in an E-A overlay, the following noise and sign standards
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 56/81
apply:
(1) In the case of such activities where there will be sound amplification, the property owner shall first
obtain a Special Events Permit and Neighbor Approval of Noise Permit through the City Manager’s
office.
(2) Signs in accordance with Section 10.1500, Signs in Neighborhood Commercial District, may be
permitted, excluding electronic message signs.
[Added, Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2012-59, May 3, 2012.]
10.365 Freeway
(1) Purpose of Freeway Overlay District: It is the purpose of the freeway overlay district to allow and
regulate the use of freeway signage.
(2) Applicability: A parcel qualifies for the Freeway Overlay District if it has a Commercial (CM) General
Land Use Plan (GLUP) Map designation, and either C-C, C-H, or C-R zoning.
The Overlay applies to:
(a) Those portions of parcels located within 500 feet of Interstate 5 freeway interchange ramps as measured
from the edge of the ramp pavement and as shown on the official zoning map of the City of Medford, and
(b) Those parcels that had received the Freeway Overlay as of the date this ordinance is adopted, as well as
that portion of a parcel added by the City Council as of December 1, 2011. The Overlay shall be
automatically applied to or removed from parcels at time of a GLUP amendment or zone change per
applicability requirements.
(3) Freeway Signage Regulations: Regulations regarding freeway signage can be found in Section 10.1710.
[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2011-237, Dec. 1, 2011; Amd. Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2016-35, March 3, 2016.]
10.370 Objectives of the Southeast (S-E) Overlay District
The Southeast (S-E) Overlay District is intended to:
A. Assure that land use and development occur in accordance with the Medford Comprehensive Plan –
Southeast Plan section;
B. Establish land use patterns and development design that emphasizes transportation connectivity and
promotes viability for many modes of transportation;
C. Establish a Southeast Village Center with commercial, institutional, and residential uses, and provide
standards and incentives for compact, pedestrian-oriented, mixed-use development in the Southeast Village
Center;
D. Require coordinated planning of the Southeast Plan Area, and encourage the development of
neighborhoods with a cohesive design character;
E. Establish special design and development standards for streetscapes, building orientation, setbacks,
building height, access, lot coverage and density, and the use of greenways, alleys, street trees, and
pedestrian street lighting;
F. Provide a mix of compatible housing types at planned densities, including in Planned Unit Developments
(PUDs);
G. Preserve natural waterways and other natural resources while providing routes for pedestrian and bicycle
travel;
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 57/81
H. Require approval of most development through the Planned Unit Development (PUD) regulations in order
to coordinate planning of designated areas of the Southeast Plan Area, including the Southeast Village
Center.
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2004-258, Dec. 16, 2004.]
10.371 Scope and Applicability of Southeast (S-E) Overlay District Regulations
A. Application: The S-E Overlay District applies automatically upon annexation to the City of Medford to
parcel(s) located within the Southeast Plan Area designated on the City of Medford General Land Use Plan
Map. Land use and development within the S-E Overlay District shall conform to the S-E Overlay District
regulations, in addition to all other applicable City regulations.
B. Adjustment(s): The boundaries of the S-E Overlay District may be adjusted by the City Council in
conjunction with amendments of the Southeast Plan Map according to Comprehensive Plan amendment
procedures found in Section 10.214 - 10.228.
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2004-258, Dec. 16, 2004; Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2011-196, Oct. 6, 2011; Amd. Sec.
148, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.372 General Land Use Plan Map and Southeast (S-E) Plan Map Consistency
Within the S-E Overlay District, the Medford General Land Use Plan (GLUP) Map is further refined by the
Southeast Plan Map adopted as part of the Medford Comprehensive Plan. Within the S-E Overlay District,
the Southeast Plan Map shall determine GLUP Map consistency for purposes of zoning and zone changes.
See Figure 10.372 below for the location of the Southeast Village Center, the Commercial Center (Areas 7A
and 7B), and the Commercial Center Core Area (Area 7A). The zoning district(s) with which each Southeast
Plan land use category is consistent and their permitted residential density ranges are set forth in Section
10.373.
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2004-258, Dec. 16, 2004; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2008-247, Dec. 4, 2008; Amd. Sec.
1, Ord. No. 2013-42, March 7, 2013; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2014-160, Dec. 18, 2014.]
IMAGES FOR THIS CODE
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 58/81
(Click on an image to see a larger version)
10.373 General Land Use Plan Map, Southeast Plan Map, Zoning, and Residential Density, S-E
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 59/81
A. The sub-areas, General Land Use Plan Map designations, Southeast Plan Map land use categories, zoning, and
residential densities permitted in the S-E Overlay District are provided in Table 10.373. See Figure 10.373 below for
the location of Southeast Plan Map sub-areas.
B. Special Residential Density Provisions for the S-E Overlay District.
1. Minimum permitted residential density is 5.0 units per acre in SFR-10 for the portion(s) of a development
where dwellings receive sole vehicular access from an alley.
2. Maximum permitted residential density is 36.0 units per acre in MFR-30, plus the 20% density bonus
permitted in a PUD. Within Area 7A, residential development shall conform to Section 10.378(3).
TABLE 10.373: Southeast Sub-Area, General Land Use Plan Map,
Southeast Plan Map, Zoning, and Residential Density
Sub-Area
General Land Use
Plan Map
Designation
Southeast Plan Map Land
Use
Category1
Permitted Zoning Permitted Residential
Density Range Du/Ac3
1 UR Estate Lot SFR-2 0.8 to 2.0
2, 16, 17, and 20 UR
Standard Lot
SFR-4 or SFR-6
2.5 to 6.0
6, 11, and 15 UR
Small Lot
SFR-10 with alleys2
5.0 to 10.02
SFR-10 without alleys
6.0 to 10.0
4 and 13 UM Rowhouse MFR-15
10.0 to 15.0
3, 5, 10, 12, and 14
UH
High Density
MFR-20
15.0 to 20.0
MFR-30
20.0 to 36.0
7A
Commercial
Commercial Center Core
C-C 20.0 to no limit See
10.708(c)
7B
Service
Commercial
Commercial Center –
Service/Office C-S/P
20.0 to no limit
See 10.708(c)
8 and 18 Parks and Schools School SFR-4 or SFR-6 Not Applicable
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 60/81
(UR Underlying)
9, 19, and 21 Parks and Schools
(UR Underlying)
Park SFR-4 or SFR-6 Not Applicable
See SE Plan Map Greenway Greenway Any Not Applicable
Table Footnotes:
1 Southeast Plan Map land use categories are derived from the study entitled Southeast Medford Circulation & Development Plan, August 1995, as
amended.
2 Special density provisions for SFR- 10.
3 Du/Ac = Dwelling units per acre.
[Amd, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2004-258, Dec. 16, 2004; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-247, Dec. 4, 2008; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No.
2013-42, March 7, 2013; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2014-160, Dec. 18, 2014.]
IMAGES FOR THIS CODE
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 61/81
(Click on an image to see a larger version)
10.374 Planned Unit Development and Master Plan Requirements, S-E.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 62/81
A. Planned Unit Development.
1. Requirements.
All new developments consisting of one or more acres shall require approval of a Planned Unit
Development pursuant to Sections 10.190 through 10.198 and all applicable provisions of the S-E
Overlay District. Regardless of the size of the property or number of dwellings, all zone change
applications for projects in the Commercial Center (Area 7B) shall be accompanied by a Preliminary
PUD Plan application.
2. Exemptions. The following shall not require a PUD:
a. Projects less than one acre,
b. Mixed-use residential projects of fewer than four dwellings, or
c. Projects that lie within the Southeast Plan land use areas 1, 2, 7A, 16, 17, 18, 19, or 20; or
d. Institutional uses that require a Conditional Use Permit; or
e. Projects that are otherwise exempted by the S-E Overlay District.
3. Approvals.
In approving PUD applications for projects within the S-E Overlay District, the Planning Commission
shall find that the application conforms to the S-E Overlay District standards. The Planning Commission
may grant modifications of City standards, including provisions of the S-E Overlay District, under
Section 10.192(B), except for height standards in Section 10.375(3) and the prohibited uses in Section
10.378(4).
B. Master Plan.
1. Commercial Center Core Area (Area 7A) Master Plan.
The adopted Southeast Villlage Commercial Center Core Area Master Plan governs design and
development within the area designated "7A" (Commercial Center Core Area) on the Southeast Plan
Map (see Figure 10.372). All zone changes, PUDs, other land use actions, and permits within Area 7A
shall conform to the Master Plan. The Master Plan, at a minimum, shall contain the following elements:
a. Provision for retail commercial uses on both sides of Stanford Avenue.
b. Pedestrian and bicycle circulation plan.
c. Barnett Road shall be developed to Major Arterial street standards from North Phoenix Road
east 250-feet. From 250 feet east of the intersection of North Phoenix Road and Barnett Road, to
the easterly boundary of the Commercial Center Core Area (7A), Barnett Road shall be
developed to Minor Arterial street standards.
d. Special street design standards for the main street, Stanford Avenue, that include on-street
parking, sidewalks of at least 12 feet in width on both sides of Stanford Avenue, street trees, and
no planter strips.
e. Required architectural design standards and unique architectural themes for each sector of
development. All applicants shall incorporate neo-traditional design elements into the
development.
f. Required "pedestrian friendly" design through the use of:
(1) Building facades set nearer the sidewalk.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 63/81
(2) De-emphasis of automobile access and storage; avoiding an uninterrupted expanse of
asphalt; and provision of large shade trees on the interior and perimeter of parking lots.
(3) Interesting and varied landscape designs including hardscapes.
(4) Common streetlights that are architecturally appropriate.
(5) Street furniture, such as benches, lights, raised flowerpots, drinking fountains, and public
art.
(6) Weather protection for pedestrians.
(7) Design that discourages use of fencing.
(8) At least three operating building entrances per block and at least one per building on
streets where on-street parking is permitted.
(9) All buildings along Stanford Avenue shall be two-story buildings, or have the
appearance of a two-story building.
g. Lighting plan that avoids lighting adjacent properties and the night sky. The master plan shall
require that applicants for development within Area 7A include a photometric data and illumination
plan consistent with Section 10.764 at the time development permit applications are submitted to
the City for review and approval.
h. Master signage plan that encourages monument signs, discourages retail signage that lists
tenants, and discourages rooftop lights.
i. Covered bicycle parking areas.
j. Public restrooms.
k. Usable exterior spaces and outdoor gathering and eating areas open to the public.
l. Shopping cart storage incorporated into building design to screen stored carts.
m. Separated truck delivery and circulation from customer circulation.
2. The Area 7A Master Plan is incorporated by reference as part of this Chapter for the S-E Overlay
District, and shall be as much a part of the Municipal Code as if all were fully described herein.
Development within Area 7A shall be approved by the Site Plan and Architectural Commission only if it
can be found to be consistent with the adopted Master Plan. Development within Area 7A that is not
consistent with the adopted Master Plan, regardless of size, shall be approved only when a PUD has
been approved by the Planning Commission.
A development shall be found to be consistent only if:
a.The proposed development is consistent with all Code standards unless superseded by Master
Plan Sector Design and Development standards, in which case the development shall comply
with applicable Sector Design and Development Standards.
b.Revisions are limited to the following:
i. The building envelope is not increased or decreased by more than 10% of the envelope
shown on the Master Plan.
ii. Plazas are not smaller than 90% of proposed size on Master Plan;
iii. If the location of a building is altered, it does not impair the safety of on-site pedestrian
and vehicular circulation.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 64/81
[Amd, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2004-258, Dec. 16, 2004; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2008-247, Dec. 4, 2008; Amd. Sec.
3, Ord. No. 2013-42, March 7, 2013; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2014-160, Dec. 18, 2014; Amd. Sec. 149, Ord.
No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.375 Special Lot Coverage, Building Setbacks, Building Height Standards, S-E
A. Lot Coverage.
The S-E Overlay District modifies the lot coverage standards of the underlying zones as follows.
(1) Maximum lot coverage by roofed structures is 40% for lots in the SFR-2 zone, 45% for lots in the SFR-4 and
SFR-6 zones, and 50% for lots containing single-family residences in the SFR-10 zone. These percentages may
be exceeded if the footprints of the structures on a lot do not exceed 2,000 square feet.
(2) Maximum lot coverage by structures is increased by 10% for single-family lots that contain an accessory
dwelling unit (ADU).
(3) Front porches, canopies, awnings, porticos, arcades, and similar pedestrian weather protection features, when
adjacent to a street or abutting a public plaza, as defined herein, and measuring not less than six feet in depth and
six feet in width are exempt from maximum lot coverage calculations.
(4) For commercial zones there is no restriction on lot coverage.
B. Building Setbacks.
The S-E Overlay District modifies the building setback standards of the underlying zones as follows:
(1) The minimum front yard setbacks in all residential zones are 15 feet for building walls and 20 feet for garage
entrances, except that side-loaded garages (where the garage door is perpendicular to the street) may be set back
15 feet. Front porches, canopies, awnings, porticos, arcades, patio walls (if the patio wall is constructed of stucco,
brick, stone/faux stone, or a similar finish and does not exceed 5-1/2 feet in height), and similar architectural
projections may be placed within 9 feet of the front property line, provided that they do not encroach onto any
public utility easement.
(2) The minimum rear yard setbacks for garage entrances having alley access are as follows:
(a) Twenty-four feet from the garage door to the opposite side of the alley;
(b) Four feet for a side-loaded garage (where the garage door is perpendicular to the street);
(c) Eight feet for a garage having parallel parking only or no parking between the garage entrance and the
alley.
3. Setbacks of the underlying zones are also modified by the following sections of the S-E Overlay District:
(a) Special design standards for attached housing (Section 10.376);
(b) Special design standards for Southeast Village Center (Section 10.377);
(c) Special fencing standards (Section 10.382).
(d) Standards for development in or adjacent to Greenways (Section 10.384);
(e) Standards for development abutting Arterial or Collector streets (Section 10.383).
C. Building Height.
Building height shall be measured pursuant to Section 10.705 and standards established in Article V shall apply except
as follows:
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 65/81
(1) Within Area 7A, the maximum allowable building height is 45 feet, except that the maximum building height
may be increased to 60 feet for residential development in mixed-use buildings as described in Section 10.378(3).
(2) In Area 7B, the maximum allowable building height is 45 feet, except 35 feet if within 150 feet of a
residential zoning district.
[Amd, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2004-258, Dec. 16, 2004; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2008-247, Dec. 4, 2008; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No.
2014-160, Dec. 18, 2014.]
10.376 Special Design Standards for Attached Housing, S-E
Except as provided in MLDC 10.377 for the Southeast Village Center, the following standards apply to
attached housing types (townhouses, multiple-family, duplexes, and other attached dwellings) in the S-E
Overlay District.
1. Primary Dwelling Entrances.
Primary dwelling entrances shall face a street, or face a court/courtyard, breezeway, or lobby that is visible
from and connected to the street sidewalk. For a group quarters or residential facility, such as a congregate
or retirement facility, one primary entrance must meet this requirement.
2. Garages.
Every attached dwelling unit shall be provided with at least one parking space in an enclosed garage. There
shall be recorded a restrictive covenant that runs with the land to assure that garages shall be maintained in
such a way that they can and will be used for vehicular parking in numbers they were designed to serve.
a. For group quarters (per Section 10.314(5)) or residential facility, such as a congregate or retirement
facility, at least half of the parking required pursuant to Section 10.743 for the residents shall be served
by enclosed garages.
b. Garages shall meet one of the standards in (i) through (iii) below, and shall additionally meet both
(iv) and (v) below:
i. The garage is accessed via an alley or internal drive (required for groups of two or more freestanding
garages); or
ii. Garage door(s) shall be provided and shall be flush with the front or street side building
elevation, shall not exceed 50% of the entire front or street side building elevation, and shall
be constructed of materials that are compatible with the appearance of the primary building that
the parking is intended to serve; or
iii. Garage door(s) shall be set back from the front or street side building elevation or from a
covered porch by at least six feet. To meet this standard, the front or street side building elevation
and/or porch must account for at least 30% of the length of the building facing the street.
iv. Carports and other surface parking covers are not permitted.
v. Groups of two or more freestanding garages on a single lot shall be set back from adjacent
streets by at least 20 feet. Frontage landscaping shall be provided to create a visual buffer
between group(s) of freestanding garages and adjacent streets.
[Amd, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2004-258, Dec. 16, 2004; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2008-247, Dec. 4, 2008; Amd. Sec.
5, Ord. No. 2014-160, Dec. 18, 2014.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 66/81
10.377 Special Design Standards for Southeast Village Center
The following design standards apply to the Southeast Village Center.
1. Building Orientation (Build-to Lines).
At least 50% of the length of the ground-level street-facing façade of a building must be located at the
minimum street setback line or abut a public plaza, as defined herein, that adjoins a street. No structure,
driveway, or motor vehicle parking area may be closer than the minimum street setback line, except where
provided for direct vehicle access to the street, and except for fences and patio walls under Section
10.375(2)(a) and Section 10.382.
2. Building Setbacks.
The S-E Overlay District modifies the building setback standards of the underlying zones in the Southeast
Village Center. Commercial Center Core (Area 7A) contains special setback standards provided by the
Commercial Center Core Area Master Plan.
Table 10.337-1
Building Setbacks for Southeast Village Center
Setback Standards SFR-10 MFR C-S/P
Minimum Front Yard
Building Setback 15 feet NA NA
Minimum Street
Side Yard Building
Setback
10 feet NA NA
Maximum Street or
Public Plaza
Setback
20 feet 15 feet 15 feet
3. Primary Building Entrances.
Buildings in the Southeast Village Center shall provide entrances that conform to the following standards:
a. Commercial, institutional, and the non-residential portion of mixed-use buildings shall have a primary
building entrance that either faces an adjacent street or is placed at an angle of up to 45o degrees from
an adjacent street, measured from the property line abutting the right-of-way. Buildings adjacent to, or
within 200 feet of a transit stop or station shall orient a primary building entrance to face the stop or
station.
b. When located at the intersection of two streets, the commercial, institutional, and the non-residential
portion of a mixed-use building shall do one of the following:
(1) Provide two primary building entrances, one facing each street; or
(2) Orient one primary building entrance to both streets by placing the entrance at the street
corner; or
(3) Place one primary building entrance facing one street that it is not more than 20 feet from
either street right-of-way.
c. Residential buildings, except for detached single-family residences, shall conform to the standards in
(a) and (b), or provide a pedestrian walkway for access to transit stops or stations meeting the
provisions of Sections 10.775 and 10.776. Detached single-family residences shall provide a primary
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 67/81
entrance facing one adjacent street. A primary building entrance for a residential building may face a
porch or patio that is located between the building and street.
4. Ground-Floor Windows.
Commercial, institutional, and the non-residential portion of mixed-use buildings shall provide ground-floor
windows on street-facing sides that conform to the following standards:
a. Ground-floor windows shall cover at least 50% of the horizontal length and at least 25% of the
ground floor wall area of all building facades that face a street or public plaza. This requirement does
not apply to the walls of residential units, nor to the walls of parking structures when set back at least
10 feet and screened with landscape materials in conformance with Section 10.797.
b. Required window areas must be either transparent windows that allow views into working areas or
lobbies; pedestrian entrances; or transparent display windows set into the wall. Display cases attached
to the outside wall do not qualify. The bottom of the windows must be no more than four feet above the
adjacent exterior grade. Only clear or lightly tinted glass in windows, doors, and display windows shall
be considered transparent. Transparent areas shall allow views into the structure or into display
windows from the outside.
5. Windows on Street-Facing Facades on Residential Buildings.
At least 15% of the area of each façade on all floors or stories that face a street on all residential buildings or
residential portion of a mixed use building must be windows, primary building entrance doors, porches,
balconies, and/or a similar visual or physical access way for natural surveillance of the street. Windows used
to meet this standard must allow views from the building to the street. Glass block and similar sight-obscuring
surfaces do not meet this standard. Windows in garage doors and garage walls apply toward meeting this
standard.
6. Landscaping and Pedestrian Amenities.
a. The following is the minimum amount of landscaped open space required within the Southeast
Village Center:
(1) SFR-10 zoning district: 20% of the project site area. This requirement does not apply to
detached single-family residential uses.
(2) MFR zoning district: 15% of the project site area;
(3) C-C zoning district (Area 7A): 10% of the project site area.
(4) C-S/P (Area 7B) and other zoning districts not listed above: 20% of the project site area.
b. Notwithstanding Section 10.797, all land between buildings and/or other structures and the right-ofway
shall be treated with a combination of landscaping and hard surfacing for use by pedestrians.
Subject to City review and approval, extra-wide public sidewalks may provide for pedestrian amenities
such as benches, drinking fountains, and/or other design elements (e.g., public art, planters, and
kiosks). Weather protection elements such as awnings, canopies, porticos, covered entrances,
porches, covered seating (e.g., bus waiting areas), and/or similar elements may encroach into a
required setback or the public right-of-way when approved through Site Plan and Architectural Review
or as part of a PUD.
[Amd, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2004-258, Dec. 16, 2004; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2008-247, Dec. 4, 2008; Amd. Sec.
4, Ord. No. 2013-42, March 7, 2013; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2014-160, Dec. 18, 2014.]
10.378 Special Standards for Commercial Center (Areas 7A and 7B), S-E
The S-E Overlay District modifies the provisions of the underlying zoning districts in the Commercial Center
(Areas 7A and 7B) as follows:
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 68/81
1. Outdoor Uses.
Except as provided in (a) through (c), all uses, activities, sales, merchandise, and the stockpiling and storage
of equipment and materials shall be entirely within an enclosed building. The following uses may be outside
an enclosed building:
a. Outdoor eating areas pursuant to Section 10.833 and sidewalk cafes in the public right-of-way
pursuant to Section 10.358(1)(c);
b. Temporary outdoor sales of merchandise pursuant to Section 10.831;
c. Temporary uses and structures pursuant to Section 10.840;
d. Parks, playgrounds, greenways, outdoor performing arts facilities, outdoor sports facilities, plazas,
pedestrian malls, and news racks in conformance with Chapter 6 of the Code.
2. Drive-Through Retail and Service Windows.
Drive-through retail and service windows are limited to three sites in Area 7A, one designated for a
pharmacy, one for a bank, and one for a credit union. These three uses shall conform to the following
standards and other appropriate conditions imposed by the approving authority.
a. Drive-throughs and service windows shall be architecturally integrated with all buildings.
b. Drive-throughs and service windows shall not be located on the street side of the building.
3. Residential Uses Area 7A.
Residential uses and group quarters are subject to the provisions of the Commercial Center Core Area (7A)
Master Plan, and not more than 20% of the gross floor area on a project site may consist of ground floor
residential or group quarter uses. Residential and group quarter uses may be located above a ground-floor
commercial or institutional use, subject to the building height standards provided in Section 10.375(3).
4. Prohibited Uses. Notwithstanding Section 10.337, the following uses are not permitted in the Commercial
Center (Areas 7A and 7B) and cannot be permitted through a PUD approval:
SIC No. * Commercial Center Prohibited Uses
NA Drive-through retail and service windows
except as permitted per Section 10.378(2).
551, 552, 555, 556,
557, 559, 751, 753,
754
Motor vehicle sales and repair
271 Newspaper Printing Facilities
5541 Gasoline Service Stations, Fueling
Stations, and Charging Stations
6553 Cemeteries and Mausoleums
7218 Industrial Laundries
7692 Welding Shops
7699
Agricultural Equipment Repair, Engine
Repair, Industrial Truck Repair, and Septic
Tank Services
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 69/81
7948 Outdoor Race Tracks
9223 Correctional Institutions
* The SIC numbers correspond to the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code numbers found in Section
10.337.
5. Business Size Limitations in Area 7A.
The maximum gross floor area of any one business use shall be 50,000 square feet in accordance with
Section 10.328.
6. Off-Street Motor Vehicle Parking.
a. Except for residential and group quarters uses, there shall be no requirement to supply a minimum
number of off-street motor vehicle parking spaces in Areas 7A and 7B.
b. Except for residential and group quarters uses, the number of off-street motor vehicle parking spaces
provided for each use in Area 7A shall not exceed 100% of the minimum standard for the subject use.
7. Pedestrian Amenities.
At least ten percent of any developed site area with commercial, institutional, residential, and/or mixed-use
development shall be devoted to pedestrian amenities. These may include amenities provided by the
developer on public property or right-of-way with City authorization. Pedestrian amenities may include, but
are not limited to, public and/or private plazas, outdoor seating, pocket parks, transit waiting areas and
facilities, extra-wide sidewalks (wider than minimum City standard) with street furnishings (e.g., seating,
fountain, public art, information kiosk, sidewalk vending where permitted, and similar furnishings). This ratio
may be reduced or waived for projects that provide parking structures for multiple users, subject to City
approval and recorded shared parking agreement.
8. Bicycle Parking.
The amount of bicycle parking provided within Area 7A shall be twice the amount required by Section 10.748
"Bicycle Parking Standards".
[Amd, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2004-258, Dec. 16, 2004; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2008-247, Dec. 4, 2008; Amd. Sec.
5, Ord. No. 2013-42, March 7, 2013; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2013-81, June 20, 2013; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No.
2014-160, Dec. 18, 2014.]
10.379 Streetscape, Planter Strip, and Street Tree Standards, S-E
Within the S-E Overlay District, streetscape features, planter strips, and street trees shall be improved and/or
installed as provided below.
1. Streetscape and Planter Strip Plan Required.
A Streetscape and Planter Strip Plan shall be submitted as part of an application for a Land Division,
Preliminary PUD Plan, Transportation Facility, Site Plan and Architectural Review, or Conditional Use Permit,
except when the project site has no public or private street frontage, or a Streetscape and Planter Strip Plan
has been previously approved for the site frontage. The approving authority shall approve, conditionally
approve, or disapprove the Plan after review and recommendations from City staff.
a. Plan Content. The form and number of copies of the Streetscape and Planter Strip Plan shall be as
set forth in the application materials on file in the Medford Planning Department. The Plan shall include
details regarding the proposed design of the entire area between the curb and the property line,
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 70/81
including sidewalks, landscaping, street trees, street lights, utility poles, traffic signals, and transit stops.
It shall acknowledge that an appropriately designed automatic underground irrigation system will be
provided per 10.780. The street trees indicated in the Plan shall meet the requirements in (2) through
(6) of this Section. Street lighting indicated in the Plan shall meet the requirements of Section 10.380.
The Plan shall also include streetscape features required by any adopted Neighborhood Circulation
Plan, Commercial Center Core Area Master Plan, special area plan, or other adopted plans.
b. Landscaping Installation and Continued Maintenance. Except for planter strips and medians in
Arterial streets, and for medians in Collector streets, installation and maintenance of the approved
landscaping, including street trees, shall be a continuing responsibility of the owners of the abutting
property or another responsible entity and shall be assured through CC&Rs, property owner
association agreements, or the conditions of approval for PUDs, Site Plan and Architectural Reviews,
or Conditional Use Permits.
2. Street Trees and Right-of-Way Landscaping Required.
Street trees and right-of-way landscaping shall be planted and maintained along all public or private streets
as a condition of any of the following actions.
a. As a condition of approval for any subdivision, land partition, or PUD; or,
b. As a condition of approval for any development requiring Site Plan and Architectural Review; or,
c. As part of the project when Arterial and Collector streets dedicated, or intended to be dedicated, for
public use are constructed or improved ; or,
d. As a condition for a permit to remove a street tree when replacement is required.
3. Street Tree Spacing Standards.
Street trees, where they are within or abutting residential zoning districts on the same side of the street, shall
be installed to provide not less than a 100% canopy cover over the sidewalk at the time of tree maturity.
Street trees, when they are within or abutting commercial zoning districts on the same side of the street, shall
be installed to provide not less than a 70% canopy cover over the sidewalk at tree maturity. Canopy cover
shall be based on tree maturity and growth habit data provided in the Official List of City of Medford Approved
Street Trees, a copy of which is on file in the City of Medford Parks Department. Street trees shall not be
located within 20 feet of the corner of an intersection of two streets measured at the curb line. Where trees
are required in on-site street frontage landscaping pursuant to Section 10.797, street trees located in the
right-of-way may be counted towards this requirement on a one-to-one basis at the discretion of the
approving authority.
4. Street Tree Types; Minimum Tree Size.
a. Appropriate tree species, variety and cultivars shall be selected from the City of Medford's Selected
Street Tree List, a copy of which is on file in the City of Medford Parks Department.
The approving authority shall consider tree type selections based on the following:
(1) Maximizing tree canopy size at maturity to provide maximum shading.
(2) Avoiding conflicts with utilities, street lighting, and traffic visibility.
(3) Meeting unique site aesthetic considerations.
(4) Ensuring tree type diversity within a block.
b. New street trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter of two inches measured 12 inches from the
ground.
5. Location of Street Trees.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 71/81
a. Street trees shall be planted within the planter strips located between the curb and the sidewalk, no
closer than three feet from the curb line. For those commercial areas where no planter strips are
planned, tree wells with grates shall be used, the design of which shall be as approved in the
Streetscape and Planter Strip Plan.
b. If no planter strip or tree wells exist, required street trees may be planted within the street right-ofway,
or on private property, subject to the following conditions:
(1) The street trees may be planted between the edge of the street improvements and street rightof
way line provided that the tree is no closer than three feet from the planned curb line and not
within a planned sidewalk.
(2) For any street tree planted within a public utility easement, a deed restriction shall note that
tree replacement due to utility work is the responsibility of the property owner.
(3) Any street tree planted within six feet of or inside a public street right-of-way, or in a public
utility easement, shall be planted with a City-approved root controlling design.
(4) When necessary, the street trees may be planted on private property not more than 10 feet
back from the street right-of-way line. When required street trees are planted on private property,
deed restrictions shall be recorded indicating that such trees are subject to the same City of
Medford regulations as street trees within a public right-of-way.
6. Timing for Installing Street Trees and Right-of-Way Landscaping; Security to Guarantee Installation.
a. Single-Family Residential Development. The installation of sidewalks, planting of street trees
and landscaping of planter strips in the right-of-way may be deferred for new single-family development
until dwellings are constructed. In such cases where sidewalks, street trees and landscaping are
deferred, the developer shall enter into an agreement with the City to ensure compliance according to
Sections 10.666 and 10.667. Sidewalks, street trees and landscaping of planter strips conforming with
the approved Streetscape and Planter Strip Plan shall be installed prior to issuance of Certificate of
Occupancy.
b. Multiple-Family Residential, Commercial, and Institutional Development. Street trees and planter
strip landscaping conforming with the approved Streetscape and Planter Strip Plan, Landscape Plan
and this Section shall be planted in conjunction with new multiple-family residential, commercial, and
institutional development. As a condition of PUD, Site Plan and Architectural Review, or Conditional
Use Permit approval, the developer shall enter into a written Agreement pursuant to Sections 10.666
and 10.667 to ensure compliance with this Section.
[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2004-258, Dec. 16, 2004; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2008-247, Dec. 4, 2008; Amd.
Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2010-83, Apr. 15, 2010; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2014-160, Dec. 18, 2014.]
10.380 Street Lighting Standards, S-E
1. Public Streets.
For public streets within the S-E Overlay District, street lighting and pedestrian-scale street lighting meeting
the design and improvement standards specified for the S-E Overlay District within the City of Medford Street
Lighting Standards and Specifications, a copy of which is on file in the Medford Public Works Department,
shall be installed as follows:
a. At least one streetlight shall be installed at each street intersection and at any pedestrian street
crossing other than at street intersections.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 72/81
b. Pedestrian-scale street lights shall be installed on both sides of lower-order
streets approximately every 100 feet within the planter strips, or, where planter strips are not required,
located within the street right-of-way at locations agreed upon by the Director of the Medford Public
Works Department or designee. For Collector and Arterial streets, the use and location of pedestrian
scale streetlights shall be as determined by the approving authority in the development review process.
c. Streetlights and pedestrian-scale streetlights shall be designed or shielded so as to prevent light from
being emitted above the fixture.
d. The location of streetlights and pedestrian-scale streetlights shall be coordinated with streetscape
and planter strip or street tree planting plans where required or utilized.
e. The operation and maintenance costs for the pedestrian-scale street lighting shall be charged to the
benefiting property owners through establishment of a utility fee.
2. Private Streets.
For private streets within the S-E Overlay District, street lighting and pedestrian-scale street lighting shall be
installed in accordance with (1), unless the PUD approval authorizes a modification. Legal documents shall
be submitted in a form acceptable to the City Attorney prior to recording in the official records of Jackson
County that assure that the street lighting and pedestrian-scale street lighting systems will be perpetually
maintained and operated by individual property owners, an association of property owners, or other nonpublic
entity.
[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2004-258, Dec. 16, 2004; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2014-160, Dec. 18, 2014; Amd.
Sec 1, Ord. No. 2019-15, Mar. 07, 2019.]
10.381 Special Street Design and Vehicle Access Standards, S-E
1. Design. Streets, streetscapes, and vehicle access to individual properties within the S-E Overlay District
shall be located, designed, and constructed consistent with the Code and adopted City of Medford
Engineering Standards and Specifications, except as modified by any adopted Neighborhood Circulation
Plan and, as applicable, the Commercial Center Core Master Plan. Maximum block length and perimeter
length standards found in Section 10.426.C.1 are not applicable to the S-E Overlay District.
2. Vehicle Access to Narrow Lots. Residential lots with 50 feet or less width and 50 feet or less street
frontage shall receive vehicular access from an alley or minimum access easement.
[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2004-258, Dec. 16, 2004; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2009-207, Sept. 17, 2009; Amd.
Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2012-57, May 3, 2012; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2014-160, Dec. 18, 2014.]
10.382 Special Fencing Standards, S-E
1. Fences Abutting Rights-of-Way, Front Yard.
Notwithstanding Section 10.732 and except as provided for patio walls in Section 10.375(2)(a), the maximum
wall or fence height within a front yard abutting a street right-of-way is three 3 feet, provided that the wall or
fence shall be located on private property and no closer than two feet from the sidewalk. The fence setback
area between any fencing and the sidewalk shall be landscaped, irrigated, and maintained with a
combination of perennial ground cover plants and low growing (less than three [3] feet in height) shrub
plantings.
2. Fences Abutting Rights-of-Way, Side or Rear Yard.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 73/81
Notwithstanding Section 10.732, and except as provided for patio walls in Section 10.375(2)(a) and for Major
Arterial street frontages, the maximum wall or fence height within a rear or side yard abutting a street right-ofway
is six feet, provided that the wall or fence shall be located on private property, no closer than 10 feet
from the sidewalk, and must be of a consistent design and color within a single block. Open fencing having a
picket design within a rear or side yard abutting a street right-of-way can be located within three feet of the
sidewalk, if not exceeding five and a half feet in height, provided that the wall or fence shall be located on
private property and must be of a consistent design and color within a single block. The fence setback area
between any fencing and the sidewalk shall be landscaped, irrigated, and maintained by the abutting
property owner, a property owners’ association, or other responsible entity.
3. Chain-Link Fencing Limitations.
Chain-link fencing is prohibited within the S-E Overlay District, except black dip-coated chain link fencing with
black posts and without interwoven strips is permitted adjacent to open space, schools, and parks. The
approving authority at their discretion may allow chain-link fencing in other situations or designs.
[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2004-258, Dec. 16, 2004; Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2014-160, Dec. 18, 2014.]
10.383 Standards for Development Abutting Arterial or Collector Streets, S-E
1. Purpose.
This section is intended to protect the functionality of Collector and Arterial streets, which must serve multiple
modes of traffic while meeting the need for access to neighborhoods and individual uses. This section is also
intended to promote an attractive and safe streetscape by orienting buildings toward the street for natural
surveillance, rather than orienting backyard fences to the street.
2. Vehicular Access Standards.
Direct vehicular access to a parcel shall not be provided from an Arterial or Collector street unless none of
the options in (a) through (d) are available; however, access shall be consistent with any adopted
Neighborhood Circulation Plan, and the Commercial Center Core Area Master Plan where applicable.
a. Access from a side street that is a lower-order street; or
b. Access from an alley; or
c. Access from a frontage street (commercial); or
d. Access from a shared driveway (not permitted on Arterials).
3. Through-Lots.
Notwithstanding Subsection (2) of this section and Section 10.704, the following applies to through-lots:
a. Detached or attached single-family residential through-lots are permitted only where an applicant can
demonstrate why the creation of through-lots is unavoidable due to environmental, physical,
topographical, or existing development constraints, subject to the review and approval of the approving
authority.
b. Where through-lots are authorized in any zoning district, except for single-family residential throughlots
on Major Arterial streets, an irrigated landscaped buffer shall be installed behind the back of the
sidewalk abutting the rear yard. The landscaped buffer may be in common ownership or incorporated
into extra deep lots, subject to the review and approval of the approving authority. The minimum depth
of the buffer shall be at least 10 feet, except where Section 10.382(2) permits a fence within three feet
of the sidewalk. Additional depth may be required by the approving authority when necessary to provide
visual buffering. Design, installation, and maintenance of the landscaped buffer shall be assured in a
form acceptable to the City Attorney. All required landscape improvements shall be installed or
guaranteed, in conformance with City standards, prior to issuance of building permits.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 74/81
[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2004-258, Dec. 16, 2004; Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2014-160, Dec. 18, 2014.]
10.384 Greenways, Special Design and Development Standards, S-E
Within the S-E Overlay District, development within or adjacent to the areas designated as Greenways in this
Chapter and the Comprehensive Plan shall be consistent with the following regulations, and such regulations
shall be required through the PUD and/or Site Plan and Architectural Review processes. For those areas
within an adopted riparian corridor, the regulations of Section 10.920 through 10.928 shall take precedence.
A. Location and Extent of Greenway Designation.
Within the S-E Overlay District, the general location of Greenways shall be depicted on both the General
Land Use Plan Map and the Southeast Circulation Plan Map, Appendix A, of the Comprehensive Plan
Neighborhood Element provided that a more precise location shall be established as follows:
1. Major Greenways. The Greenway designation shall extend not less than 50 feet from the top of the
bank on each side of the channel along Larson Creek, North Fork Larson Creek, and in the Village
Center. The top of the bank shall be as defined in Section 10.012. These greenways are identified as
Major Greenways in the Southeast Circulation Plan of the Comprehensive Plan.
2. Minor Greenways. For Greenways that are not located along Larson Creek, north Fork Larson
Creek, or in the Village Center, the Greenway designation shall extend as indicated in the Southeast
Circulation Plan of the Comprehensive Plan. These greenways are identified as Minor Greenways in
the Southeast Circulation Plan of the Comprehensive Plan. The Greenway designation shall extend
not less than 20 feet from the centerline of the drainageways. For Minor Greenways not located along
natural surface drainage features, the designation shall be 40 feet in width consistent with Figure 5 of
the Southeast Medford Plan Area Neighborhood Circulation Plan.
3. The size and location of Greenways may be altered by the City when needed to comply with other
City, state and federal regulations.
B. Permitted Uses.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 10.306 through 10.337, and subject to any other provisions of this
Code and law, the only uses permitted within areas designated as Greenways shall be:
1. Streets, roads, bridges, and paths where necessary for access or crossings, provided these uses are
designed and constructed to minimize intrusion into the riparian area.
2. Drainage facilities, utilities, and irrigation pumps.
3. Water-related and water-dependent uses.
4. Interpretive and educational displays, and overlooks, including benches and outdoor furniture.
5. Replacement of existing structures with structures in the same location that do not disturb additional
riparian area.
6. Other uses and activities permitted in the underlying zoning district, unless prohibited by state or
federal regulations, as may be approved as part of a PUD, provided that the City may install or permit
the installation of any use or activity permitted in the underlying zoning district without PUD approval.
C. Greenway Improvements.
1. Improvement Standards.
Greenways shall be improved according to the following standards:
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 75/81
a. Except for the Greenway in the Village Center, and as may otherwise be approved as part of a
PUD, Greenways shall consist of native vegetation, and shall not be improved except as
permitted or required in this Code and in the Southeast Circulation Plan of the Comprehensive
Plan, and provided that:
(1) Additional canopy trees of a size, species, and variety approved by the City may be
installed to augment the natural landscape and stabilize the banks of waterways.
(2) Enhancement of the native vegetation is encouraged. Noxious weeds or nonnative
vegetation may be removed if replaced with native plant species as approved by the City
and appropriate state and federal agencies.
(3) Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the preservation or enhancement of
wetlands as may be required by any public agency having jurisdiction over wetlands
consistent with the laws of the City, state, and federal governments.
b. Improved access for the equipment needed for maintenance of storm drainage facilities and for
bicycle and pedestrian circulation shall be provided within or abutting each Greenway in a location
determined by the City to have the least impact on the vegetation in the riparian area. Said
access shall be constructed to the standards of the City. Where acceptable access for the
maintenance of storm drainage facilities and bicycle and pedestrian circulation is provided along a
planned or existing street adjacent to a Greenway, the access requirement within the Greenway
may be waived.
c. Greenways shall be improved at the time adjacent land is developed.
d. Where feasible, streets shall be collinear and adjacent to Greenways.
2. Responsibility for Greenway Improvements.
Required improvements in Greenways shall serve two principal purposes as explained in the Medford
Comprehensive Plan: 1) for storm drainage based on the Comprehensive Medford Area Drainage
Master Plan (1996); or 2) for pedestrian and bicycle circulation. Pedestrian and bicycle circulation are
essential to the success of the transit-oriented development. The Southeast Circulation Plan denotes
the principal purpose for the required improvements in each Greenway. The responsibility for installing
Greenway improvements to the standards in this Section shall be based on the following:
a. Greenway Improvements for Storm Drainage. Open space for stormwater quality and detention
facilities required by Section 10.486 and Section 10.729 may be provided in Greenways rather
than on-site. The installation of improvements that provide required access to storm drainage
facilities in Greenways based on the Southeast Circulation Plan and the Comprehensive Medford
Area Drainage Master Plan (1996) shall be by, and at the sole expense of, the owners of the land
adjacent to either side of the Greenway, or segment thereof, unless otherwise approved by the
City. Consistent with the adopted Greenway design plan in the Southeast Circulation Plan, the
City shall approve, on a case-by-case basis, the location of a surfaced path required to provide
access for storm drainage maintenance, and any other required or proposed improvements. The
City may require all or any part of the Greenway to be dedicated for public use and/or ownership
following the installation of the required improvements. However, the City, in its sole discretion,
may permit the dedication of easements in lieu of fee-simple land dedication.
b. Greenway Improvements Exclusively for Pedestrian and Bicycle Circulation. The installation of
a surfaced path in Greenways, other than those for storm drainage, shall be by and at the sole
expense of the City unless otherwise agreed upon. Consistent with the adopted Greenway
design plan in the Southeast Circulation Plan, the City shall approve, on a case-by-case basis,
the location of a surfaced path required to provide pedestrian and bicycle circulation, and any
other required improvements. All or part of Greenways improved exclusively for pedestrian and
bicycle circulation may be acquired by the City through dedication or purchase of the land in feesimple
or through the acquisition of easements.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 76/81
c. Extent of Greenway Improvements. Pursuant to this Section, the portion of each Greenway
required to be improved by a property owner at the time of development shall be that portion of
Greenway contiguous to the property to be developed. Where a Greenway passes through a
parcel, the owner, pursuant to Section 10.384(C)(2)(a), shall be required to dedicate and improve
the entire Greenway segment passing through his/her parcel.
d. Section 10.668 (Limitation of Exactions) shall be considered in relation to the above
requirements.
3. Maintenance of Greenway Improvements.
Greenway improvements dedicated to the City for any purpose, whether in fee-simple or as easements,
shall be maintained by the City. However, the City may relinquish the maintenance of any Greenway
improvements to an association of owners established pursuant to Section 10.192(C).
D. Commercial Center (7A and 7B).
1. Greenway Improvements. Unless prohibited by other City, state or federal regulations, in the Village
Center Greenway, undesirable shrubs, trees, and noxious vegetation may be removed, and ornamental
vegetation installed to supplement the remaining native vegetation. Prior to commencing alteration of
vegetation within the Greenway area, a landscape restoration plan shall be prepared for review and
approval by the City in conjunction with an application for associated Development Permit, if any, or by
the Medford Parks Department if not associated with a Development Permit application. The
landscape plan shall demonstrate that an equivalent or better amount of stream corridor shading will
result upon maturity of the replacement vegetation elements and that the selected plant varieties will
survive given the site conditions.
2. Creekside Development. The development of land adjoining the Greenway within the Village
Center shall conform with the following requirements, unless waived or modified as part of the
Commercial Center Core Area Master Plan or a PUD approval:
a. Pedestrian Walkway Connections. A pedestrian walkway as required in Sections 10.772
through 10.776 shall link the principal building of each creekside use or activity to the multi-use
path within the Greenway, if on the same side of the waterway as the path.
b. Pedestrian Walkway Lighting. All pedestrian walkway connections to the multi-use Greenway
path shall be lighted with the type of fixtures and meeting the definition of "pedestrian scale
lighting" in Section 10.012.
c. Landscaping Between Creekside Development and Greenway. Undeveloped land between
each creekside building, use, or activity and the Greenway shall be landscaped in a manner
compatible with the native vegetation, and irrigated with an automatic underground system. Such
landscaping shall be designed to produce areas of high surveillance to reduce the potential for
vandalism and criminal mischief. Landscaping to achieve high surveillance includes grass and
ground cover, shrubs less than two and one-half (2½) feet in height, and deciduous trees that
produce canopies having the lowest branches more than six feet from the ground. Such
landscaping shall not conflict with or violate state and federal regulations related to the
preservation of wetlands or riparian areas.
[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2004-258, Dec. 16, 2004; Amd. Ord. No. 2006-92, Apr. 20, 2006; Amd. Sec. 9,
Ord. No. 2008-247, Dec. 4, 2008; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2013-42, March 7, 2013; Amd. Sec. 13, Ord. No.
2014-160, Dec. 18, 2014; Amd. Sec. 150, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.385 School and Park Siting Standards, S-E
1. Purpose.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 77/81
The purpose of requiring public school and park sites to abut streets instead of the backs of lots is to support
natural surveillance of public spaces for crime prevention, and to provide adequate public access to parks
and schools. The standard ensures at least a minimal amount of visibility into the site for security, and the
potential for a limited amount of on-street parking.
2. Schools and Parks location standard.
Public school and park sites shall abut streets instead of the backs of lots. This standard is met when a
school or park site has frontage onto at least one public street for a distance of not less than 100 feet. The
standard does not apply to private schools, parks, or open spaces.
[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2004-258, Dec. 16, 2004; Amd. Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2014-160, Dec. 18, 2014.]
10.401 Historic Preservation Overlay, Purpose
The Medford Historic Preservation Overlay is a zoning designation that may be applied to properties, public or private,
within the City. It is the purpose of the Historic Preservation Overlay to pro tect, enhance, perpetuate, and improve those
buildings, structures, objects, sites, and districts that are of local, regional, statewide, or national historic significance.
The Historic Preservation Overlay is a critical element of Medford’s residential and commercial revitalization strategy,
and a keystone in the broader economic and community development strategy.
More specifically, the Historic Preservation Overlay is intended to:
(1) Affect and accomplish the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and improvement of such buildings,
structures, objects, sites, and districts that represent elements of Medford’s cultural, social, economic, political, or
architectural history;
(2) Safeguard Medford’s historic, aesthetic, and cultural heritage as embodied in such buildings, structures,
objects, sites, and districts;
(3) Complement the National Historic Preservation Act and National Register of Historic Places;
(4) Encourage private owners and public citizens to understand the value of such buildings, structures, objects,
sites, and districts, thus creating incentives for preservation;
(5) Foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past;
(6) Protect and enhance Medford’s visitor and tourist attractions, and support and stimulate business and industry;
(7) Promote the use of such buildings, structures, objects, sites, and districts for the education, pleasure, and
public welfare of the residents of Medford;
(8) Further the provisions of Statewide Planning Goal 5 (to protect natural resources and conserve scenic and
historic areas and open spaces); and,
(9) Implement the Medford Comprehensive Plan.
[Replaced, Section 10, Ord. No. 2006-199, Sept. 7, 2006.]
10.402 Historic Preservation, Definitions
When used in this Code in reference to historic resources, the following terms shall have the meanings as herein
ascribed:
Demolish. To raze, destroy, dismantle, deface, or in any other manner cause partial or total ruin of buildings, structures,
objects, or sites in designated historic areas.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 78/81
Designation. A decision declaring that an historic resource is of local, regional, statewide, or national significance, and
that such resource is to be placed within the Historic Preservation Overlay, and, therefore, including it in the inventory
of historic areas within the City.
Exterior. Any portion of the outside of buildings, structures, objects, or sites in designated historic areas, including
signage.
Exterior alteration. Any modification of, addition to, or removal from the visible exterior elements of buildings,
structures, objects, or sites in designated historic areas.
Historic areas. Lands with buildings, structures, objects, sites, or districts that have local, regional, statewide, or
national historic significance.
Historic resources. Buildings, structures, objects, sites, or districts that have a relationship to events or conditions of the
human past.
Historic resources of statewide significance. Buildings, structures, objects, sites, or districts listed in the National
Register of Historic Places, or located within National Register historic districts.
Historic significance. Having historic significance shall mean that the historic resource:
(1) Is associated with a person, group, organization, or event that made a significant contribution to, or is
illustrative of the broad patterns of cultural, social, political, economic, or industrial history of the city, region,
state, or nation; or,
(2) Retains sufficient original design, craft work, or material in its original setting to serve as an example of a
particular architectural period, building type, or style having design or artistic quality; or,
(3) Is a rare or unique surviving example of a development type, architectural style, or structural type significant
to the city’s history; or,
(4) Significantly contributes to the historic character, identity, and continuity of the street, neighborhood or city,
or is a visual landmark; or,
(5) Represents a noteworthy work of a developer, architect, builder, or engineer noted in the history or
architecture of the region; or,
(6) Significantly contributes to the character and identity of a grouping (ensemble) of resources which, together,
share a distinct and intact historic identity.
Local historic resource. Buildings, structures, objects, sites, or districts not of statewide significance, but designated by
the Medford Landmarks and Historic Preservation Commission to be within the Historic Preservation Overlay.
Maintenance. Repair, cleaning, restoration, or other action necessary to counteract aging, wear, and/or use of a
structure, building, object, or site, except that the maintenance activity must not involve a change in the design, material,
color, or outward appearance of any exterior component, except such that results from the cleaning or renewal of an
exterior surface.
[Replaced, Section 11, Ord. No. 2006-199, Sept. 7, 2006.]
10.403 Historic Preservation Overlay, Designation
The Historic Preservation Overlay shall apply as follows:
(1) To all historic areas on the adopted “1-A List” in the Medford Comprehensive Plan.
(2) To all Medford historic areas and historic districts listed on the National Register of Historic Places as of the
effective date of this ordinance, and thereafter, on the date the property is listed.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 79/81
(3) To all historic areas and historic districts listed on the National Register of Historic Places as of the effective
date of annexation to the City, if the property was listed prior to annexation.
(4) The extent of the Historic Preservation Overlay may be changed pursuant to the review process for Type
III Historic Review applications, to include or exclude any area, parcel, or portion thereof that was not included
pursuant to paragraphs (1), (2), or (3). Decisions to change the extent of the Historic Preservation Overlay shall
adhere to the criteria set forth in Section 10.188(C)(1).
(5) Removal of Historic Preservation Overlay shall adhere to the criteria set forth in Section 10.405.
[Replaced, Section 12, Ord. No. 2006-199, Sept. 7, 2006; Amd. Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2011-196, Oct. 6, 2011; Amd. Sec.
151, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.404 Significant Historic Resource Designation, Refusal
If the owner of a property proposed for designation as a significant historic resource that is not listed on the National
Register of Historic Places, nor within a National Register historic district, submits in writing a refusal to consent to
such designation, the designation process for that property shall be terminated.
[Replaced, Section 13, Ord. No. 2006-199, Sept. 7, 2006.]
10.405 Historic Preservation Overlay Designation, Removal
(1) The Historic Preservation Overlay designation shall be automatically removed when an historic resource not in an
historic district is destroyed by fire or natural event.
(2) Upon written request for removal by the owner of a property designated as a significant historic resource that is not
listed on the National Register of Historic Places, nor within a National Register historic district, the City shall remove
said property from the Historic Preservation Overlay.
[Replaced, Section 14, Ord. No. 2006-199, Sept. 7, 2006.]
10.406 Historic Preservation Overlay, Exterior Alteration or New Construction
No person may alter any building, structure, object, or site in an Historic Preservation Overlay in such a manner as to
affect its exterior appearance, nor may any new structure be constructed, unless said exterior alteration or new
construction has been approved through the process for Type III Historic Review applications or Minor Historic Review.
(1) Any exterior alteration except those related to signage or exterior color shall conform with The Secretary of
the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior
component of a structure or site that does not involve a change in design, material, color or outward appearance of
such features.
(3) When a Local Historic Resource designation or consideration of such designation has been removed from a
building, structure, object, or site at the request of the property owner pursuant to Section 10.404 or Section
10.405 (2), the Medford Building Safety Department shall not issue a permit for exterior alteration within 120
days from the date the request for removal of the historic resource designation was received by the City.
[Replaced, Section 15, Ord. No. 2006-199, Sept. 7, 2006; Amd. Sec. 152, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective
July 23, 2018).]
10.407 Historic Preservation Overlay, Demolition or Relocation
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 80/81
No person may demolish or relocate all or part of any building, structure, object, or site in an Historic Preservation
Overlay unless said demolition or relocation has been reviewed through the process for Type III Historic Review
applications; except in the following instances:
(1) Where the Medford Building Safety Director or designee has ordered the removal or demolition of any
building, structure, or object determined to be an immediate danger to life, health, or property. Nothing in this
Section shall be construed as making it unlawful for any person to comply with such an order.
(2) Demolition, or relocation to a non-historic area, of a detached non-habitable accessory structure not larger
than 300 square feet, unless the accessory structure is an attribute that contributes to the historic value of an
historic resource or district.
(3) Demolition, or relocation to a non-historic area, of buildings, structures, or objects in historic districts that are
classified as non-historic or noncontributing in the survey conducted to support the creation of the district.
If a Local Historic Resource designation has been removed from a property at the owner’s written request, the Medford
Building Safety Department shall not issue a permit for demolition or relocation within 120 days from the date the
request for removal was received by the City, except in the instances described in (1) through (3).
If an application is made for a permit to demolish or relocate all or part of a building, structure, object, or site within an
Historic Preservation Overlay, the Medford Building Safety Director shall, within seven days of the date of application,
notify the Planning Director. The Planning Director shall notify the applicant of the requirements for Historic Review.
Proposed demolition or relocation in an Historic Preservation Overlay shall be subject to the applicable portions of this
Code whether or not a demolition or relocation permit has been applied for.
[Replaced, Section 16, Ord. No. 2006-199, Sept. 7, 2006; Amd. Sec. 153, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective
July 23, 2018).]
10.408 [Repealed, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2014-63, May 15, 2014.]
[Replaced, Section 17, Ord. No. 2006-199, Sept. 7, 2006; Repealed, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2014-63, May 15, 2014.]
10.409 Purpose of Administrative Mapping Categories
Administrative mapping categories are for the purpose of tracking and mapping parcels that have unique
conditions associated with them, and are not zoning districts. These mapping categories are shown on the
official zoning map of the City of Medford.
[Replaced, Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2011-196, Oct. 6, 2011.]
10.410 Downtown Parking
A. Purpose: For tracking and mapping of parcels within the Downtown Parking District.
B. Applicability: Medford Municipal Code Section 6.200 provides a description of the boundaries of
the Downtown Parking District.
C. Inclusion or Removal: Inclusion in or removal from the Downtown Parking District is by the Medford City
Council.
[Replaced, Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2011-196, Oct. 6, 2011; Amd. Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2016-35, March 3, 2016.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 81/81
10.411 Limited Service
A. Purpose: For tracking and mapping of the parcel(s) within Limited Service (LS) area(s) as shown on the
Medford General Land Use Plan (GLUP) Map.
B. Applicability: The Public Facilities Element and the General Land Use Plan Element of the Medford
Comprehensive Plan provide information about areas within the Urban Growth Boundary that are not
presently serviced with adequate public facilities or other services required for development to urban
densities.
C. Inclusion or Removal: Inclusion in or removal of the Limited Service area on the Medford General Land
Use Plan (GLUP) Map is according to Comprehensive Plan Amendment procedures outlined in Sections
10.214-10.228.
[Replaced, Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2011-196, Oct. 6, 2011; Amd. Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2016-35, March 3, 2016; Amd.
Sec. 154, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.412 Planned Unit Development Administrative Mapping Category, P-D
A. Purpose: For tracking and mapping of parcels that have received Preliminary Planned Unit Development
(PUD) Plan approval as set forth in Section 10.192.
B. Removal: Upon expiration of a Preliminary PUD Plan or if a PUD is terminated according to procedures
outlined in Section 10.198(B).
[Added, Sec. 17, Ord. No. 2011-196, Oct. 6, 2011; Amd. Sec. 155, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018
(effective July 23, 2018).]
10.413 Restricted Zoning Administrative Mapping Category, R-Z
A. Purpose: For tracking and mapping of parcels that have received a zone change with conditions of
approval or stipulations as set forth in Section 10.204(B)(3)(C) or a General Land Use Plan (GLUP) Map
amendment with conditions of approval or stipulations. The applicable conditions or stipulations are recorded
by deed restriction or covenant, and may also be viewed at the Medford Planning Department.
B. Removal: Upon satisfaction of the conditions of approval or stipulations per Section 10.204(C).
[Added, Sec. 18, Ord. No. 2011-196, Oct. 6, 2011; Amd. Sec. 156, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018
(effective July 23, 2018).]
10.414 Airport Fence Line
A. Purpose: For mapping of airport property that is not intended for public use.
B. Applicability: Airport accessory structures to be located within the secured fence area shall be exempt
from development permit per Section 10.200(C)(2)(g).
[Added Sec. 17, Ord. No. 2016-35, March 3, 2016; Amd Sec. 157, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018
(effective July 23, 2018)]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 1/49
10 Article 4-Public Improvement Standards and Criteria (10.421 to 10.668)
10.421 General Development Design Standards and Criteria
The developer shall design and improve all required public right-of-way elements, including streets,
bicycle lanes, sidewalks, planter strips, street lights, alleys, storm drains, sanitary sewers,
waterlines, accessways and public easements which are a part of the development, and those offsite
public improvements necessary to serve the development consistent with the Comprehensive
Plan or any specific plan thereof, and such other public improvements as required by this chapter in
accord with the standards and criteria set forth herein and shall thereafter warrant the materials and
workmanship of said improvements for a period of one (1) year from the date of completion. Such
improvements as set forth herein shall be considered necessary for the general use of the property
owner(s) of the development, the local neighborhood and the city's traffic and drainage needs
including without limitation grading and surfacing of streets and accessways, installation of facilities
to supply domestic water, construction of storm and sanitary drainage and treatment facilities, all
other improvement work as hereafter set forth. All improvement work shall be at the sole cost and
expense of the developer unless otherwise specifically provided herein.
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 7629, May 5, 1994; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2009-207, Sept. 17, 2009.]
10.422 Surveys and Monuments
In making the survey for the development, the surveyor shall set permanent monuments of a type
approved by the city surveyor at all exterior boundary corners and angle points except where such
monuments already exist in their proper position, at all street intersections on centerlines or offsets,
at the beginning and end of all property line curves, or as otherwise directed by the city surveyor. In
the case of intersecting curbed streets, monuments shall be placed at the point of inter section of the
centerlines where possible. All monuments shall be subject to inspection and approval by the city
surveyor before approval of the final plat, unless otherwise provided by ORS. Without limiting the
generality of any other provision of this chapter, any monuments required under the provisions of
this section which are disturbed or destroyed shall be replaced before final inspection of the streets
or other easements.
10.425 Street Access and Dedication Requirements
Prior to the issuance of a development permit, land shown on any development proposal and
intended for vehicular use shall have access to a paved street. Land intended for vehicular and
accessway use by the general public shall be offered for dedication.
[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 7629, May 5, 1994; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2009-207, Sept. 17, 2009.]
10.426 Street Circulation Design and Connectivity
These standards are intended to assure that development will ultimately result in complete blocks
bound by a network of public streets, and/or private streets constructed to City Standards open to
public use, and/or interior access roads open to public use. As it applies to this section, an Interior
Access Road shall mean the following:
A public access easement on private property which facilitates through public vehicular and
pedestrian access. The Interior Access Road public easement shall, at a minimum, consist of the
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 2/49
following improvement:
1. A two-way vehicular access drive aisle having minimum aisle width of twenty (20) feet bounded
with raised curb. The access drive shall remain clear and unencumbered from any parking stall
taking direct vehicular access from the drive aisle. However, the drive aisle may intersect with other
drive aisles within a parking lot.
2. The vehicular access drive shall be bound at minimum on one side, but preferably both sides,
with a pedestrian pathway running parallel to the access drive, consisting of concrete, patterned
concrete or brick pavers. The pedestrian pathway may be either attached or detached from the
curb and have a minimum width of five (5) feet. Where the pedestrian path crosses intersecting
vehicular drive aisles, the pathway paving material shall extend across such areas to demarcate the
pedestrian crossing.
A. Street Arrangement Suitability.
The approving authority shall approve or disapprove street arrangement. In determining the
suitability of the proposed street arrangement, the approving authority shall take into consideration:
1. Adopted neighborhood circulation plans where provided; and
2. Safe, logical and convenient access to adjoining property consistent with existing and
planned land uses; and
3. Efficient, safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation along parallel and
connecting streets; and
4. Compatibility with existing natural features such as topography and trees; and
5. City or state access management standards applicable to the site.
B. Street Connectivity and Formation of Blocks Required.
1. Block layouts shall substantially conform to adopted neighborhood circulation plans for the
project area if applicable. Street arrangement and location may depart from the adopted plan if
the project will result in a comparable level of overall connectivity. Projects that depart from the
neighborhood circulation plan shall conform to planned higher order streets adopted in the City
of Medford Transportation System Plan.
2. Proposed streets, alleys and accessways shall connect to other streets within a
development and to existing and planned streets outside the development, when not precluded
by factors in Section 10.426 C.2 below. When a development proposes a cul-de-sac,
minimum access easement or flag lot to address such factors, the provisions of Section 10.450
apply.
3. Proposed streets or street extensions shall be located to provide direct access to existing
or planned transit stops and other neighborhood activity centers such as schools, office parks,
shopping areas, and parks.
4. Streets shall be constructed or extended in projections that maintain their function, provide
accessibility, and continue an orderly pattern of streets and blocks.
C. Maximum Block Length and Block Perimeter Length.
1. Block lengths and block perimeter lengths shall not exceed the following dimensions as
measured from centerline to centerline of through intersecting streets, except as provided in
Subsections 10.426 C.2.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 3/49
MAXIMUM BLOCK LENGTH AND PERIMETER LENGTH
Table 10.426-1
Zone or District Block Length Block Perimeter
Length
a. Residential Zones 660’ 2,100’
b. Central Business Overlay District 600’ 1,800’
c. Transit Oriented Districts
(Except SE Plan Area) 600’ 1,800’
d. Neighborhood, Community, and
Heavy Commercial Zones; and
Service Commercial-Professional
Office Zones
720’ 2,880’
e. Regional Commercial and
Industrial Zones
940’ 3,760’
2. The approving authority may find that proposed blocks that exceed the maximum block
and/or perimeter standards are acceptable when it is demonstrated by the findings that one or
more of the constraints, conditions or uses listed below exists on, or adjacent to the site:
a. Topographic constraints, including presence of slopes of 10% or more located within
the boundary of a block area that would be required by subsection 10,426 C.1.,
b. Environmental constraints including the presence of a wetland or other body of water,
c. The area needed for a proposed Large Industrial Site, as identified and defined in the
Medford Comprehensive Plan Economic Element, requires a block larger than provided
by section 10.426 C.1.e. above. In such circumstances, the maximum block length for
such a Large Industrial Site shall not exceed 1,150 feet, or a maximum perimeter block
length of 4,600 feet,
d. Proximity to state highways, interstate freeways, railroads, airports, significant
unbuildable areas or similar barriers that make street extensions in one or more
directions impractical,
e. The subject site is in SFR-2 zoning district,
f. Future development on adjoining property or reserve acreage can feasibly satisfy the
block or perimeter standards,
g. The proposed use is a public or private school, college or other large institution,
h. The proposed use is a public or private convention center, community center or
arena,
i. The proposed use is a public community service facility, essential public utility, a
public or private park, or other outdoor recreational facility.
j. When strict compliance with other provisions of the Medford Land Development Code
produce conflict with provisions in this section.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 4/49
3. Block lengths are permitted to exceed the maximum by up to 20% where the maximum
block or perimeter standards would require one or more additional street connections in order
to comply with both the block length or perimeter standards while satisfying the street and
block layout requirements of 10.426 A or B or D,
4. When block perimeters exceed the standards in accordance with the10.426 C.2. above, or
due to City or State access management plans, the land division plat or site plan shall provide
blocks divided by one or more public accessways, in conformance with Sections 10.464
through 10.466.
D. Minimum Distance Between Intersections.
Streets intersecting other streets shall be directly opposite each other, or offset by at least 200 feet,
except when the approving authority finds that utilizing an offset of less than 200 feet is necessary to
economically develop the property with the use for which it is zoned, or an existing offset of less than
200 feet is not practical to correct.
[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 7629, May 5, 1994; Amd Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2012-57, May 3, 2012.]
10.427 Street Classification System
(A) Purpose. This chapter establishes a street classification system, as determined in the
Transportation System Plan (TSP), applicable to all streets within the City and used to determine
right-of-way improvement design standards. It is the intent of the street classification system to:
(1) Promote the safety and convenience of vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle traffic;
(2) Protect the safety of neighborhood residents;
(3) Protect the residential character of neighborhoods by limiting traffic volume, speed, noise
and fumes; and,
(4) Encourage the efficient use of land.
(B) Applicability. All existing and proposed streets within the City shall be identified by
classification as follows below. The classification of higher-order streets shall be determined by the
Functional Classification Map in the City of Medford Transportation System Plan (TSP, as amended
.Street Functional Classification Plan Map, as amended. All streets (existing or proposed) intended
to be within the City of Medford’s jurisdiction shall adhere to the street classifications identified below
unless alternative standards are provided by an adopted Zoning Overlay, Neighborhood Circulation
Plan, the legacy street standards as established per 10.427(D-E) or other special area plan(s),
including, but not limited to, plans contained in the Comprehensive Plan. The classification of lowerorder
streets shall be consistent with any adopted Neighborhood Circulation Plan or other special
area plan, and based upon adjacent zoning, and, in the case of residential streets, the number of
dwelling units utilizing the street for vehicular access.
Street Classification
Highway
County, or state facility
Higher-Order Street System
Arterial, Regional, Major or Minor
Collector, Major, or Minor
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 5/49
Lower-Order Street System – Commercial/Industrial
Commercial
Industrial
Lower-Order Street System - Residential
Standard Residential
Minor Residential
Residential Lane
Non-Street Alternatives
Minimum Access Easement
Alley
(C) Street Classification and Cross-Section Development. Consistent with the recommendation
by the City Engineer, the approving authority shall have the discretion to impose a condition
requiring a specific cross-section for a particular development/land use review as it relates to the
Medford Land Development Code, Comprehensive Plan, an adopted Neighborhood Circulation
Plan, a Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA) and/or safety concerns. Cross-sections are contained
in each subsection as identified in 10.428, 10.429, 10.430, 10.430A, and 10.430B. Each street shall
contain, unless a legacy street and/or precluded by State or Federal law, access for pedestrian,
bicycle, and automobile travel.
(D) Legacy Streets and Street Classification. Existing streets that are improved and do not meet
the identified cross section as outlined in Sections 10.428 – 10.430B shall be known as legacy
streets. Context-sensitive design of legacy streets shall be required as a condition of land use
review/development. Streets with curb and gutter and/or approved through a Transportation Facility
Development review process (Type IV land use review) may be considered a legacy street. Unless
specified in an adopted Zoning Overlay, Neighborhood Circulation Plan or other special area plan(s),
the legacy street standards of 10.427 (D-E) shall apply to all streets that meet the below standards.
(E) Developing Legacy Streets and Land Use Reviews. The following standards are applicable
to land use action(s) which include the development of a legacy street as defined in 10.012
Definitions, Specific.
(1) City Engineer Review. Proposed conditions of approval for land use actions which contain
legacy streets shall be subject to review and recommendation by the City Engineer. The applicant
shall be required to have a conference with the City Engineer prior to submitting land use
applications containing legacy streets; the City Engineer shall produce a memorandum summarizing
the meeting and legacy street standards that would apply to the land use application and this
memorandum shall be submitted as an exhibit with the land use application. If a deviation from the
City Engineer’s recommendation is requested by the applicant, the applicant shall provide written
findings addressing the criteria below:
(a) The requested deviation will allow the project to achieve an equivalent or higher
quality roadway when compared to the City Engineer’s recommendation.
(b) The requested deviation must provide adequate facilities for pedestrians,
bicyclists, and motorists.
(c) The requested deviation will not reduce roadway safety for any user when
compared to the City Engineer’s recommendations.
(d) The site contains unique or unusual circumstances not typically found
elsewhere in the City that would result in undue hardship on the owner.
(e) It is not sufficient proof to show a greater profit will result.
(2) When the City Engineer is reviewing a land use application which includes a legacy street, the
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 6/49
following standards shall apply:
(a) If facilities for all modes of travel exist on an improved street but are narrower than the
current standard; then no street improvements or right-of-way dedication shall be required. Sidewalk
reconstruction and right-of-way dedication shall be required if needed to meet ADA requirements
along the frontage of the development.
(b) If the street is improved but is missing auto travel lanes, then right-of-way dedication
sufficient to accommodate missing lanes shall be required at the time of development. No physical
improvements of less than a full block length (See table 10.426-1) shall be required as it relates to
10.427(E)(2)(b).
(c) If the street is improved but is missing the center-turn-lane, then right-of-way dedication
sufficient to accommodate turn lanes shall be required for properties within 200 feet of an
intersection of a collector or arterial. The 200 feet is measured from the subject property to the inside
edge of the intersection right-of-way. If the property is farther than 200 feet from a collector or arterial
intersection, no right-of-way shall be required. No physical improvements shall be required as it
relates to 10.427(E)(2)(c). The 200 foot measurement may be modified at the discretion of the City
Engineer with sufficient justification.
(d) If the street is improved but does not contain a planter strip or sidewalk, then a sidewalk and
planter strip shall be installed by the applicant. The planter strip width may be reduced or
eliminated to fit the area context and surrounding roadways if sufficient findings justify such
modifications. Right-of-way dedication shall be reduced to the back of sidewalk.
(e) If the street is improved but does not contain bike facilities, then alternatives in the order of
priority listed below shall be required. Right-of-way dedication shall be determined by the City
Engineer, consistent with the alternatives identified below. When an alternative is applicable, rightof-
way dedication shall be reduced to the back of sidewalk or shared use path. The applicability of
10.427(E)(5) shall be determined as identified below:
(i) Alternative routes via local streets or off-street paths identified in the Transportation System
Plan (TSP) shall be used.
(ii) Right-of-way dedication shall be consistent with bicycle facility plans identified in the TSP.
(A.) When a 14 foot sidewalk (used as a shared-use path) is identified as a bicycle facility
alternative, the width may be reduced to no less than 10 feet if there are existing structures or utility
infrastructure which limits the width.
(f) If the street is mostly improved and between two higher order street intersections, then
unimproved sections may be built to match the abutting cross section, at the City Engineer’s
discretion. Right-of-way dedication, or the lack thereof, shall be provided in accordance with the
existing built cross-section.
(g) If the existing street or alley is predominantly surrounded by developed properties, then
cross-sectional elements and/or right-of-way dedication may be reduced in width or eliminated, to
avoid existing structures and/or development at the City Engineer’s discretion, in the priority order
listed below:
(i) Planter strip width reduction
(ii) Planter strip elimination
(iii) Parking lane elimination
(iv) Bike lane buffer area reduction or elimination
(v) Bike Lane narrowing or elimination
(vi) Center turn lane elimination (except at higher-order intersections)
(vii) Lane or alley narrowing
(viii) Center turn lane elimination at higher-order intersections
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8013, Jan. 4, 1996; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2009-207, Sept. 17, 2009, Amd.
Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2019-35, May 16, 2019.]
10.428 Higher-Order Street Classification System
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 7/49
All higher-order (major) streets within the City are classified in one of the following categories:
(A) Regional Arterial and Major Arterial Description. The Regional Arterial and Major Arterial
classifications are primarily used for roadways with high traffic volumes and regional connections.
Regional Arterials have the same cross-section as Major Arterials, but are intended to have greater
access control to facilitate the movement of regional traffic. Both these classifications correspond to
the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) Other Principal Arterial classification. Arterials are
higher-order facilities that are generally intended to connect to several collector roadways or provide
links to higher order interstate or highway facilities. One-hundred feet of right-of-way is required for
Major Arterials to allow construction of a five-lane roadway section, bicycle facilities, and detached
sidewalks with a planter strip.
If a new regional or major arterial is built, the cross section with separated bicycle facilities under (1)
below shall be used. For existing regional and major arterials, the use of this cross section shall be
evaluated first before considering other cross sections. An applicant shall justify to the approving
authority why the use of either of the other two cross sections is being requested.
Where right-of-way is constrained on existing roadways, flexibility may be provided to allow
modifications, consistent with the Legacy Street standards in 10.427. The width of the planter strip
is measured from the face of curb to the edge of the sidewalk. Additionally, the median lane can be
reduced to six feet if a 2-foot wide raised median is built and is compatible with the area context and
surrounding roadways as determined by the City Engineer.
Examples of Regional Arterials in the City of Medford include North Phoenix Road and Foothill
Road. Examples of Major Arterials include roads such as McAndrews Road and Barnett Road.
Regional, Major Arterial Cross-Sections. The following are the major/regional arterial crosssections:
(1) Regional Arterial, Major Arterial, with Separated Bicycle Lanes. For use along regional and/or
major arterial roadways when new and/or unimproved.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 8/49
(2) Regional Arterial, Major Arterial, with Buffered Bicycle Lanes. For use along regional and/or
major arterial roadways at the approving authority’s discretion.
(3) Regional Arterial, Major Arterial, with Standard Bicycle Lanes. For use along regional and/or
major arterial roadways with right-of-way constraints and with approving authority approval.
(B) Minor Arterial Description. Minor Arterials generally serve slightly lower traffic volumes than
Major Arterials. Access to minor arterial streets is very limited. Where right-of-way is
constrained on existing roadways, flexibility may be provided to allow modifications, consistent with
the Legacy Street standards in 10.427. The width of the planter strip is measured from the face of
curb to the edge of the sidewalk. Street designs, including sidewalk width, planter strip use, and
lane widths, may be adjusted through an adopted plan or modified code standards to create a “mainstreet”
like atmosphere in locations such as downtown or transit-oriented districts.
Examples of Minor Arterials in the City of Medford include West Main Street and Kings Highway.
Minor Arterial Cross-Sections. The following are the minor arterial cross-sections:
(1) Minor Arterial, with Separated Bicycle Lanes. For use along minor arterial roadways, when new
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 9/49
and/or unimproved.
(2) Minor Arterial, with Buffered Bicycle Lanes. For use along minor arterial roadways at the
approving authority’s discretion.
(3) Minor Arterial, with Standard Bicycle Lanes. For use along minor arterial roadways with rightof-
way constraints and with approving authority approval.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 10/49
(C) Major Collector Description. The Major Collector classification is used for streets that link
arterial and lower-order streets and serve moderate traffic volumes. Collectors serve both mobility
and access functions with a three-lane roadway section, bicycle lanes, and detached sidewalks with
a landscaped planter strip. Within this classification on-street parking is not provided. Where rightof-
way is constrained on existing roadways, flexibility may be provided to allow modifications,
consistent with the Legacy Street standards in 10.427. The width of the planter strip is measured
from the face of curb to the front edge of the sidewalk. Street designs, including sidewalk width,
planter strip use, and lane widths, may be adjusted through an adopted plan or modified code
standards to create a “main-street” like atmosphere in locations such as downtown or transitoriented
districts. If designated as an Evacuation Route, per the Functional Classification Map in the
adopted TSP, no raised median shall be constructed in the center turn lane.
Examples of Major Collectors in the City of Medford include Lozier Lane, Hillcrest Road, Siskiyou
Boulevard, Black Oak Drive, and Springbrook Road.
Major Collector Cross-Sections. The following are the major collector cross-sections:
(1) Major Collector, with Buffered Bicycle Lanes. For use along major collector roadways when new
and/or unimproved.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 11/49
(2) Major Collector, with Standard Bicycle Lanes. For use along major collector roadways at the
approving authority’s discretion.
(D) Minor Collector Description. Minor Collectors serve relatively low traffic volumes and place a
greater emphasis on access rather than traffic flow as compared to major collectors. Most Minor
Collectors run through neighborhoods and link residential streets to higher-order collectors and
arterials. This classification includes a similar paved width to major collectors but includes on-street
parking and no center turn lane. Where right-of-way is constrained on existing roadways, flexibility
may be provided to allow modifications, consistent with the Legacy Street standards in 10.427. The
width of the planter strip is measured from the face of curb to the front edge of the sidewalk. Street
designs, including sidewalk width, planter strip use, and lane widths, may be adjusted through an
adopted plan or modified code standards to create a “main-street” like atmosphere in locations such
as downtown or transit-oriented districts.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 12/49
Special Note:
(i) Parking is not eligible for SDC credits, and is constructed at the developer’s expense;
and
(ii) The range in pavement width accounts for the possibility of no on-street parking. When
no on-street parking is constructed, right-of-way widths shall be adjusted.
Examples of Minor Collectors in the City of Medford include Oregon Avenue, Dakota Avenue, Holly
Street and S. Oakdale Avenue.
Minor Collector Cross-Section. The following is the minor collector cross-section:
(1) Minor Collector with Standard Bicycle Lanes. For use along minor collector roadways when new
and/or unimproved.
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8013, Jan. 4, 1996; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2002-233, Dec. 19, 2002; Amd. Sec. 8,
Ord. No. 2009-207, Sept. 17, 2009; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2019-35, May 16, 2019.]
10.429 Lower-Order - Commercial/Industrial Street Classification System
(1) Commercial Street. A lower-order street that is within or abutting a commercial zoning district.
Commercial streets are intended to provide frontage and direct access for commercial uses. The
commercial street cross-section includes one (1) travel lane and an on-street parking lane in each
direction, with sidewalks and planter strips. The width of the planter strip is measured from the face
of curb to the front edge of the sidewalk. Sidewalk width and planter strip use may be adjusted
through an adopted plan or code standards to create a "main street" like atmosphere.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 13/49
(2) Industrial Street. A lower-order street that is within or abutting an industrial zoning district.
Industrial streets are intended to provide frontage and direct access for industrial uses. The
industrial street cross-section includes one (1) travel lane and an on-street parking lane in each
direction with a center turn lane, sidewalks, and planter strips. The width of the planter strip is
measured from the face of curb to the front edge of the sidewalk.
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord No. 2002-233, Dec. 19, 2002; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2009-207, Sept. 17, 2009;
Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2019-35, May 16, 2019.]
10.430 Lower-Order - Residential Street Classification System
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 14/49
Residential streets conduct local traffic to collector and arterial streets at relatively low traffic
volumes and speeds and provide important direct land access to individual parcels. There are three
(3) categories of residential streets as follows:
(A) Standard Residential Street Description. Standard residential street classification is a local
street that prioritizes access over traffic flow and generally serves less than 2,500 vehicles per day.
The standard residential street classification is the highest of the residential roadway classifications,
connecting neighborhoods to collector roadways. This designation provides one travel lane and onstreet
parking in each direction with a sidewalk and planter strip on both sides. Typical volumes and
speeds on Standard Residential streets are low enough to accommodate shared use of travel lanes
between bicyclists and motorists. Six inches of right-of-way is to be provided behind the sidewalks to
accommodate property survey monumentation. The width of the planter strip is measured from the
face of curb to the front edge of the sidewalk.
Standard Residential Street Cross-Sections.
(1) Standard Residential Street. For use along standard residential roadways.
(B) Minor Residential Street Description. A street which provides direct access to immediately
adjacent residentially zoned land, provides neighborhood street connectivity and which serves up to
one hundred (100) dwelling units. On-street parking is provided on both sides of the street. Design
requirements for a minor residential street include two travel lanes with sidewalks and planter strips
on both sides. The width of the planter strip is measured from the face of curb to the edge of the
sidewalk. Those minor residential streets that are not through streets shall terminate in a standard
cul-de-sac that complies with Section 10.450. In order to ensure that there is at least twenty (20)
feet of unobstructed clearance for fire apparatus, the applicant shall choose from one of the
following design options:
(1) Clustered, offset (staggered) driveways (for an example see 10.430(C)), and fire hydrants
located at intersections with the maximum fire hydrant spacing along the street of 250-feet shall be
provided. The Fire Department shall approve the design of offset/staggered driveways.
(2) All dwellings that front and take access from minor residential streets shall be equipped with a
residential (NFPA 13D) fire sprinkler system and fire hydrants located at intersections with the
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 15/49
maximum fire hydrant spacing along the street of 500-feet.
(3) Total paved width of 33-feet with five-and-a-half (5 ½) foot planter strips.
Minor Residential Street Cross-Sections.
(1) Minor Residential Street. For use along minor residential roadways.
(C) Minor Residential Street Driveway Clustering/Staggering. To ensure a minimum 20 foot
clearance for access of a fire apparatus (i.e. fire-truck), along minor residential streets, and allow for
the ability to have a setup area in an emergency event, driveways shall be clustered and/or
staggered. The image below represents how clustering/staggering can be accomplished. Lots 1
and 2, 3 and 4, 5 and 6, 8 and 9, and 10 and 11 are clustered together. The clustered driveways are
offset on the opposite side of the street; in other words, driveways shall not be directly across from
one another.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 16/49
(D) Residential Lane Description. Residential Lanes are the lowest order of the local residential
facilities. These roads can serve a maximum of 8 residences and extend no more than 450 feet.
Those residential lanes that are not through streets shall terminate in a standard cul-de-sac that
complies with Section 10.450. Six inches of right-of-way is to be provided behind the sidewalks or
curb if no sidewalk is present. The right-of-way width provides for future sidewalks and landscape
strips on both sides of the roadway. Sidewalks shall be provided on the parking side of the street,
and planter strips are not required.
Special Note:
(i) An additional two feet of right-of-way is required for drainage behind the curb with no sidewalk
when the road is on the outside border of a development. The additional two feet are not required
when the street is internal to the development and there is a Public Utility Easement (PUE) behind
the curb.
Residential Lane Cross-Sections.
(1) Residential Lane. For use along residential lane roadways.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 17/49
[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 6131, June 2, 1988; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 7629, May 5, 1994; Amd. Ord.
No. 8232, Nov. 7, 1996; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2002-233, Dec. 19, 2002; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No.
2009-207, Sept. 17, 2009; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2019-35, May 16, 2019.]
10.430 (A)Non-Street Alternatives
(A) Minimum Access Easements, General. A Minimum Access Easement is an easement
containing a shared driveway having the sole function of providing direct access to immediately
adjacent residentially zoned land. There are two types of Minimum Access Easements - Minor and
Major. Minimum Access Easements differ from residential lanes and public streets in that they are
privately maintained.
Special Note:
(i) Public Utility Easements (PUE), when required, may be underneath the pavement of
a
minimum access easement.
The associated descriptions and cross-sections can be seen below.
(1) Minor Minimum Access Easement. A Minor Minimum Access Easement is an easement
containing a shared driveway upon which a minimum of two (2) and maximum of three (3) dwelling
units (not including Accessory Dwelling Units-ADU’s) take access. A Minor Minimum Access
Easement must meet the minimum driveway turnaround standards in Section 10.746(11). Minor
Minimum Access Easements are permitted subject to Section 10.450. A Minor Minimum Access
Easement does not have sidewalks or planter strips. No parking is permitted on a Minor Minimum
Access Easement. A Minor Minimum Access Easement is considered a street for purposes of
meeting lot frontage requirements, and for setback purposes. Therefore, a Minor Minimum Access
Easement creates street side yards and corner lots. A Minor Minimum Access Easement does not
create a through lot.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 18/49
(2) Major Minimum Access Easement. An easement containing a shared driveway having the sole
function of providing direct access to immediately adjacent residentially zoned land, and upon which
a minimum of four (4) and maximum of eight (8) dwelling units (not including Accessory Dwelling
Units-ADU’s) take access. A major minimum access easement must meet the minimum driveway
turnaround standards in Section 10.746(11). Parking is allowed on one side of a major minimum
access easement except in dedicated fire department turn-around areas. Major Minimum Access
Easements are permitted subject to Section 10.450. A Major Minimum Access Easement is
considered a street for purposes of meeting lot frontage requirements, and for setback purposes.
Therefore, a major minimum access easement creates street side yards and corner lots. A Major
Minimum Access Easement does not create a through lot.
(B) Alley.
(1) Private alley: A private right-of-way, that is not a street, designed for primary or secondary
means of access to abutting property, and which may or may not provide passage through blocks
from street to street. Parcels abutting a private alley must also front on a street as defined herein,
but not necessarily take primary motor vehicle access from a street.
(2) Public alley: A public right-of-way, that is not a street, designed for primary or secondary means
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 19/49
of access to abutting property, and with passage from street to street. Parcels abutting an alley
must also front on a street as defined herein, but not necessarily take primary motor vehicle access
from a street.
(3) Standards: Alleys shall have a minimum width of twenty feet (20’), with a curb radius of not less
than fifteen feet (15’) at an intersection with a street. Parking within an alley is only permitted
subject to a permit issued for service vehicles pursuant to Section 6.340. If an existing alley is
unpaved and a property owner wants to develop their property and use the alley for access, and this
results in an increase in the average daily trips (ADTs) in the alley, then the property owner shall
pave the alley from their property to the nearest paved intersecting street.
[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 6131, June 2, 1988; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 8013, Jan. 4, 1996; Amd. Sec.
4, Ord. No. 2002-233, Dec. 19, 2002; Replaced, Sec. 11, Ord. No., 2009-207, Sept. 17, 2009; Amd.
Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2019-35, May 16, 2019.]
10.430 (B) Standards Applicable to All Streets
Table IV-1 sets forth general standards for all types of City streets. The application of these
standards is set forth above.
Table IV-1
Medford Street Cross-Sections Dimensions
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 20/49
[Added, Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2009-207, Sept. 17, 2009; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2019-35, May 16, 2019.]
10.431 Street Improvement
All new street improvements required as a condition of development shall be improved to the
standards set forth in this chapter unless otherwise specified herein or excepted as per Section
10.186. For purposes of this section, the term new street shall be defined as an unimproved street
or existing street which does not have curb and gutter and/or meet the cross-sections per 10.428,
10.429, 10.430, 10.430A, and 10.430B.
(A) Street Improvements and Transit Facilities.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 21/49
(1) A pedestrian pad may be required in the right-of-way at bus stops to ensure ADA compliance. A
pedestrian pad is at minimum a four-foot (4’) wide area between the bus stop and curb where a bus
ramp would be deployed. Planter strips may be interrupted in areas with a high level of pedestrian
activity (such as Downtown or in transit-oriented districts, per the TSP) to provide up to fifteen (15)
feet of walking area, including a “furniture zone” for utilities, benches, trees, and other streetscape
components.
(B) Street Improvements and Dedications for City-Owned Parkland.
(1) Street improvements and right-of-way dedications shall be found by the Planning Commission to
be reasonably associated with impacts caused by the park necessary for service to the park.
(2) The requirements for street utility improvements, associated with a land division for City-owned
parkland, may be deferred to the time of a Park Development Review application. A final plat of the
land division may proceed in advance of such required improvements. Any lots created that are not
intended for park purposes shall comply with the dedication and improvement provisions.
(C) Street Improvements and Turn Bays.
(1) Raised medians shall be installed with turn bays as necessary. Traffic analysis shall be
conducted to determine the need for turn bays and required vehicle storage length.
[Amd Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2018-52 June 7, 2018 (effective July 9, 2018); Amd. Sec. 158, Ord. No.
2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018); Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2019-35, May 16, 2019.]
10.432 Street Improvement, Deferred
(1) Criteria for Deferral. Subject to the criteria and standards set forth in this section, the
improvement of existing streets, alleys, or unimproved rights-of-way may be deferred by the Public
Works Director or designee to such time as a complete street segment can be improved to City
standards. For purposes of this section, a street segment shall be considered as the length of a
street between street inter¬sections on the same side of the street as the project site. Street
improvements may only be deferred when the project site complies with the following criteria:
(a) Commercial, Industrial, and Residential street improvements may be deferred if:
(i) More than 50% of the block between street (not including alley) intersections on which the project
site fronts is unimproved (street improvements required within subdivisions and Planned Unit
Developments shall not be deferred); or,
(ii) There are site conditions confirmed by the City Engineer that justify the deferral.
(b) Arterial and Collector street improvements shall not be deferred under this section.
(2) Financial Deposit. When street improvements are deferred, the developer shall deposit with the
City of Medford a financial deposit acceptable to the City in the amount of 125 percent of the City
Engineer’s estimate of the costs for the deferred street improvements, in lieu of the developer
constructing the street improvements. This financial deposit shall be deposited with the City prior to
the recordation of the Final Plat for land partitions, or prior to submittal of building permit applications
for other approved projects. (Effective Dec. 1, 2013.)
Said financial deposit shall be held until one of the following conditions has been met:
(a) The required street improvements have been constructed by the developer or property owner, at
which time, the deposit may be returned to the developer or property owner in whole or in part; or,
(b) The required street improvements have been constructed as part of a Local Improvement
District, in which case, the deposit shall be applied to the proportional share of the property owner’s
obligation; or,
(c) The project site’s Local Improvement District assessment is less than the amount of the deposit
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 22/49
required as a condition of the deferral, in which case, the difference between the two amounts shall
be refunded to the developer.
(3) Construction Performed by Developer or Property Owner. If the developer or property owner
elects to construct the required street improvements prior to the formation of a Local Improvement
District, s/he shall be responsible for performance of the work identified in the conditions set forth in
the applicable Final Order from the approving authority and for obtaining contractors therefor.
(a) The developer or property owner shall cause satisfactory plans and specifications for the
improvements to be prepared, and shall submit said plans and specifications to the City Public
Works Department for approval prior to commencement of the work. Such work shall be done in
accordance with the City standards in effect at the time the improvement plans are submitted for
approval.
The City Engineer shall review the construction documents, and notify the applicant in writing of any
additional requirements for installation of street improvements. If the applicant disagrees with the
requirements for installation of street improvements as provided in this section, s/he shall, within 30
days of the date the notice from the City Engineer was mailed, request a review of the requirements
by the City Council. The decision of the City Council shall be binding upon both the City and the
applicant.
(b) The developer or owner shall make payments required by the City, including, but not limited to,
engineering deposits, permit fees and inspection fees. Prior to approval of street improvement plans
by the City, the applicant may be required to execute and deliver to the City, a performance bond in
an amount and form acceptable to the City, to be released by the City in whole or in part upon the
City's final acceptance of the work performed. The developer or owner shall notify the City Public
Works Department at least 48 hours prior to the start of construction.
(4) Construction as Local Improvement District. The financial deposit shall be applied to the
property owner’s proportional share of the resulting final assessment for the subject property for a
future Local Improvement District for street improvements along the property frontage or other
locations for which the deposit was made. Should the subject property’s resulting assessment be
less than the deposit amount required as a condition of the deferral, the difference between the two
amounts shall be refunded to the party which paid the deposit. At the time the City decides to make
the deferred street improvements, permission to enter onto the property of the owner is granted to
the City or its contractor as may be necessary to construct such improvements.
(5) Construction Performed by City. The financial deposit shall be applied as a proportional share
toward a project which completes the deferred improvements, in whole or in part, if the project is
constructed with City funds or resources. If the subject property’s proportional share of the
improvement project is less than the amount of the deposit, the difference shall be refunded to the
party which paid the deposit.
(6) Tracking of Payments. Deposit accounts for the financial deposit shall be maintained by the
City, and shall identify the developer, the property owner, the map and tax lot number of the parent
parcel being developed and for which the payment is being received, and the date and amount of
the payment.
(7) Existing Deferred Improvement Agreements. Deferred Improvement Agreements that were
recorded prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance shall continue to be in effect, and said
agreements shall continue to run with the land.
(a) If the owner of the property subject to a Deferred Improvement Agreement elects to construct
the deferred improvements, s/he shall be responsible for performance of the work identified in said
agreement and for obtaining contractors therefore. The property owner shall cause satisfactory
plans and specifications for the improvements to be prepared, and shall submit said plans and
specifications to the City Public Works Department for approval prior to commencement of the work.
Such work shall be done in accordance with the City standards in effect at the time the improvement
plans are submitted for approval. The City Engineer shall review the construction documents, and
notify the applicant in writing of any additional requirements for installation of street improvements.
If the property owner disagrees with the requirements set forth for installation of improvements as
provided in this section, s/he shall, within 30 days of the date the notice from the City Engineer was
mailed, request a review of the requirements by the City Council. The decision of the City Council
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 23/49
shall be binding upon both the City and the property owner.
(b) The property owner shall make payments required by the City including, but not limited to,
engineering deposits, permit fees and inspection fees. Prior to approval of improvement plans by
the City, the property owner may be required to execute and deliver to the City, a performance bond
in an amount and form acceptable to the City, to be released by the City in whole or in part upon the
City’s final acceptance of the work performed. The property owner shall notify the City Public Works
Department at least 48 hours prior to the start of work.
(c) Recordation of a Deferred Improvement Agreement shall be equivalent to a petition required
under Section 29 of the Medford Charter. If the property owner does not complete the
improvements under provisions (7)(a) above, the City may do the work as a local improvement
project following the procedures established by ordinance for such projects and assess the costs
against the property specially benefited. Permission to enter onto the property of the owner is
granted to the City or its contractor as may be necessary to construct such improvements.
When the City Engineer determines that the reason(s) for the street improvement deferment no
longer exist(s), s/he shall notify affected property owners in writing. The notice shall be mailed to the
current owner or owners of the land as shown on the latest adopted county assessment roll. All or
any portion of said improvements may be required at a specified time. Each affected owner shall
participate on a proportional share basis of the cost of installation of the improvements.
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5955, Aug. 20, 1987; Amd. Ord. No. 6030, Dec. 3, 1987; Amd. Ord. No.
2005-274, Dec. 1, 2005; Amd. Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2013-131, Sept. 5, 2013.]
10.433 [Repealed, Sec. 51, Ord. No. 7659, June 2, 1994.]
10.434 [Repealed, Sec. 51, Ord. No. 7659, June 2, 1994.]
10.435 [Repealed, Sec. 51, Ord. No. 7659, June 2, 1994.]
10.436 [Repealed, Sec. 51, Ord. No. 7659, June 2, 1994.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 24/49
10.437 [Repealed, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2012-57, May 3, 2012.]
Repealed
10.438 Frontage Street
A frontage street, either public or private, may be required for commercial and industrial
developments adjacent to an arterial street, highway, or freeway. Frontage streets which are
incapable of being extended a minimum length of six hundred feet shall not be approved unless a
frontage street of less length is the only means of properly developing the property for the use for
which it is zoned. Where a frontage street intersects with another street, the location of said
intersection shall be as per the City Traffic Engineer.
10.439 Dead-end Streets, Adjoining Acreage and Reserve Strips
Unless otherwise approved by the approving agency, no dead-end street shall be longer than four
hundred and fifty feet measured from the centerline of the nearest intersecting street (unless a
length in excess of four hundred and fifty feet is, in the opinion of the approving agency, the only
feasible method of developing the property for the use for which it is zoned). Where the development
adjoins vacant acreage, any street as may be extended in the event of the development of the said
adjoining acreage, shall be provided through to within one foot of the boundary line of the tract, and
the remaining one foot reserve strip shall be granted in fee to the City.
Upon approved dedication of the extension of the affected street, the one-foot reserve strip shall
automatically be dedicated to the public use as a part of said street without any further action by the
City. The preceding sentence shall apply retroactively to all previously created reserve strips and
street extensions.
[Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 5986, Oct. 1, 1987.]
10.440 Side or Rear Lots on Major Streets
Where the side or rear of any residential or industrial lot or lots border any collector or arterial, the
developer shall be required to execute, prior to issuance of a development permit, a relinquishment
of right of ingress and egress to the side or rear of such lot or lots across the existing or proposed
right-of-way line of such collector or arterial. Such relinquishment shall prohibit said ingress and
egress without the subsequent resolution of the City Council.
10.441 Reserve Strips
Except as otherwise provided herein, reserve strips controlling the access to public streets will not
be approved unless such strips are placed completely within the exclusive control of the City.
10.442 Streets Along Exterior Boundaries of Land Divisions
Except as hereinafter provided, when the property line of the proposed development is adjacent to
an existing public street then the exterior public improvement limit of the development shall be
twelve (12) feet beyond the centerline of such bordering street. The developer shall dedicate all
property which is required for the right-of-way of such bordering street and shall improve such street
as required by this chapter. Any property between the exterior improvement limit of the development
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 25/49
and the interior proposed right-of-way line which is owned by or under the jurisdiction of another
local agency shall be improved as a street and offered for dedication as per that local agency. The
developer shall dedicate or irrevocably offer to dedicate, and shall improve as a street, all property
within the development intended for public street purposes.
Whenever any new perimeter street within the proposed development is intended to be a part of the
ultimate width of an arterial, it shall be offered for dedication and improved to such width as may be
provided by a precise plan line or any special plan of the City. If the plan lines for such streets have
not been established by a precise plan, then the same shall be dedicated and improved to one half
of the width as shown for arterials in Tables IV-1 and IV-2 plus twelve (12) feet beyond centerline.
Whenever the developer elects to construct any new street of the proposed development (as
distinguished from an existing street) which will lie along and adjacent to any boundary of the
development, it shall be offered for dedication and be improved to its full width as provided for that
type of street in Tables IV-1 and IV-2 hereof. If the street is other than an arterial or collector, the
developer may apply to the City for the formation of a Reimbursement District in accordance with
Sections 3.900 through 3.913 of the Medford Code, whereby future developers of property abutting
this required improvement will be required to pay a pro rata share of the cost of said full street as a
condition of future development or development approval of such abutting property.
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2008-197, Sept. 18, 2008.]
10.443 Half Streets
Upon written request by the developer at the time of development permit application, half streets
plus eight (8) feet may be approved where essential to the reasonable development of a parcel
when in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations, and subject to the approving
agency's findings that it will be practical to require dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is developed; the other half of the street shall be platted within the adjacent tract.
10.444 Intersection Angles
All streets within or abutting a development shall intersect one another at an angle as near to a right
angle as is practicable in each specific case unless otherwise necessitated by topographical
conditions or other existing structural conditions.
10.445 Street Intersection Curb Radius Standards
(1) Intersections of streets with fewer than four (4) moving lanes of traffic for each street shall have a
corner radius at the right-of-way line of not less than fifteen (15) feet. Intersections of streets which
have, or are planned to have, four (4) or more moving traffic lanes for each street shall have a
corner radius at the property line of not less than thirty (30) feet. The City Engineer may approve
exceptions up to five (5) feet less in order to match existing conditions or provide desired design
controls.
(2) The minimum curb radius for various street classes when intersecting an Arterial or Collector
street shall be as follows:
Minimum Access Easement - None
Private Alleys - 15 feet*
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 26/49
Public Alleys - 15 feet*
Residential - 25 feet
Commercial - 30 feet
Industrial - 30 feet
Collector - 35 feet
Arterial - 35 feet
*Only on arterials and collectors
(3) Curb radii for certain intersections designated for corner extensions in the Central Business
District (CBD) overlay zoning district shall be consistent with Section 10.358 (3), Figures 13, 14 and
15.
(4) The minimum curb radius for lower order street classes intersecting one another shall be 20 feet.
(5) The Public Works Director or designee may approve a variance from the minimum curb radius
requirements upon demonstration by the applicant that the safety of motorists, cyclists, and
pedestrians, both on–site and off–site, will be equal to or enhanced by variance of such
requirements, and that the proposed design is in accordance with normally accepted engineering
practices set forth in AASHTO publication "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets",
current edition.
[Replaced, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2008-70, Apr. 17, 2008; Amd. Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2009-207, Sept. 17,
2009.]
10.446 [Repealed, Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2012-57, May 3, 2012.]
Repealed
10.447 [Repealed. Ord. No. 1999-111, July 22, 1999.]
10.448 Curve Radii
Centerline radii shall not be less than three hundred feet on arterials and collector streets and not
less than 100 feet on all other types of streets. Lesser radii may be used where, in the opinion of the
City Engineer, the same is necessary and safe by reason of the circumstances surrounding each
particular case.
10.449 [Repealed Sec. 6, Ord .No. 7629, May 5, 1994.]
10.450 Cul-de-sacs, Minimum Access Easements and Flag Lots
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 27/49
(1) Cul-de-sacs, minimum access easements and flag lots shall only be permitted when the
approving authority finds that any of the following conditions exist:
(a) One or more of the following conditions prevent a street connection: excess slope (15%) or
more), presence of a wetland or other body of water which cannot be bridged or crossed,
existing development on adjacent property, presence of a freeway or railroad.
(b) It is not possible to create a street pattern which meets the design requirements for streets.
(c) An accessway is provided consistent with the standards for accessways in Section 10.464
through Section 10.466.
(2) If a cul-de-sac is necessary, then the following standards shall apply: (a) Cul-de-sac streets shall
be as short as possible and shall not exceed 450 feet in length. (b) Cul-de-sac streets shall have a
vehicle turnaround area with a minimum right-of-way radius of forty-five (45) feet and a minimum
paved section radius of thirty-seven (37) feet.
(3) If a flag lot is necessary, then the following standards shall apply:
(a) The access drive, or flag pole, shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet.
(b) The minimum lot frontage for a flag lot shall be twenty (20) feet.
(c) The required front yard setback shall be measured from the lot frontage property line.
(d) The minimum driveway throat width shall be determined as per Section 10.550.
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6372, June 1, 1989; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 7629, May 5, 1994; Amd. Sec.
15, Ord. No. 2009-207, Sept. 17, 2009.]
10.451 Additional Right-of-Way and Street Improvements
Whenever an improved arterial or collector street are abutting or within a development and do not
meet current City Standards, additional right-of-way and improvements, as per 10.427, shall be
required as a condition to the issuance of a development permit, unless otherwise occupied by
structures in which case only a partial dedication will be required.
[Amd. Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2009-207, Sept. 17, 2009; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2019-35, May 16, 2019.]
10.452 [Repealed, Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2012-57, May 3, 2012.]
Repealed
10.453 [Repealed, Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2012-57, May 3, 2012.]
Repealed
10.454 Neighborhood Circulation Plan, Adoption
Neighborhood circulation plans developed for areas of the City and urbanizable area shall be
adopted as amendments to the Medford Comprehensive Plan and Medford Street Functional
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 28/49
Classification Plan Map. Such neighborhood circulation plans shall identify the functional
classification and location of existing and planned streets and alleys and applicable objectives and
policies, if any, as well as planned circulation for pedestrians, bicyclists, and transit users.
Transportation system design standards shall be applied as per this code, unless alternative
standards are provided by the adopted neighborhood circulation plan.
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2004-259, Dec. 16, 2004.]
10.455 Neighborhood Circulation Plan, Revision
Significant changes to an adopted neighborhood circulation plan shall be adopted by the City
Council in the manner set forth in this code for Major Comprehensive Plan amendments.
[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2004-259, Dec. 16, 2004.]
10.457 Street Naming and Street Signs
This section applies to the naming of proposed streets that occurs in conjunction with the applicable
development proposal review. The purpose of the street naming procedures is to ensure use of
clear and unique street names so that emergency personnel may find the streets without being
hindered by similar or confusing names. Approval of street names is not a land use decision.
A. Each proposed street shown on a development proposal shall be named thereon, and the name
given it shall be approved by the Medford Planning Department.
B. The criteria in Section 10.458(B) shall be utilized in determining the acceptability of the proposed
street names.
C. Prior to the issuance of the development permit, the developer shall pay a street sign fee as
required to equip all necessary street intersections with sign posts, street name signs and traffic
signs per the standards and specifications established by the City of Medford and/or the Department
of Motor Vehicles of the State of Oregon.
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2012-15, Jan. 19, 2012.]
10.458 Street Renaming, Public and Private
This section applies to the change of name of an existing street or alley, or to the naming of an
already-existing but unnamed street or alley. The purpose of the street renaming procedures is to
ensure use of clear and unique street names so that emergency personnel may find the streets
without being hindered by similar or confusing names. Approval of street names is not a land use
decision.
A. Procedures, Street Renaming, Public and Private.
(1) Public Streets. A public street renaming application shall be processed using Type
IV procedures with the City Council being the approving authority. The decision of the City Council is
final. A certified copy of the approving ordinance and exhibits shall be filed with the County
Recorder, Assessor, and Surveyor for the name change to become effective.
(2) Private Streets or Driveways. A private street or driveway renaming application shall be
processed according to Type II land use review procedures a Type II, with the Planning Director
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 29/49
being the approving authority. The decision of the Planning Director may be appealed to
the Planning Commission per Section 10.140.
B. Approval Criteria, Street Renaming, Public and Private.
The approving authority shall not approve any street name unless it finds that the proposed name is
consistent with the following criteria:
(1 ) Proposed names shall not be the same or similar to any other street name in Jackson
County;
(2) The proposed street name must not sound the same, although spelled differently (a
homonym), as any other street name in Jackson County;
(3) The proposed street name must be simple to pronounce;
(4) The proposed street name shall not contain Cardinal directions (north, south, east, west)
(5) The proposed street name shall not contain offensive or derogatory terms;
(6) The proposed street name shall not contain punctuation or special characters;
(7) When a street makes a directional change of approximately 90 degrees or more, the street
name shall change;
(8) Street names shall continue across intersections and roundabouts;
(9) A street may not loop around in such a way that it creates two intersections with one other
street, unless the street name at one intersection is different; and,
(10) The proposed street name must have a suffix from Table 10.458-(1), Permitted Medford
Street Suffixes below.
Table 10.458-(1)
Permitted Medford Street Suffixes
Suffix Abbreviation Description
Avenue AVE Street that is continuous and not limited to a single
subdivision
Boulevard BLVD Street with a landscaped median dividing the right-ofway
Circle CIR Permanently dead-end street terminating in a cul-de-sac
Court CT Permanently dead-end street or termination in a cul-desac,
not longer than 660 feet in length
Drive DR Curvilinear Street
Lane LN Lower-Order Street
Parkway PKWY Higher-Order Street with a Median
Place PL
Permanently Dead-End Street, Termination in a Cul-desac,
or Short Through Street, Not Longer than 450 Feet
in Length
Road RD Higher-Order Street
Street ST Common or Default Suffix
Way WAY Curvilinear Street
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 30/49
C. Application, Street Renaming, Public and Private.
Street renaming applications shall be submitted to the Medford Planning Department on applications
forms supplied by the Planning Department.
(1) Public Streets. The application for public street renaming shall require the following:
(a) Signed application form
(b) Jackson County Assessor’s map(s) showing entire length of subject street;
(c) Typed mailing labels for:
(i) Property owners with property abutting subject street; and
(ii) Property owners with property that has an address, or may have an address in
the future, on subject street.
(d) Application fee in amount established by City Council paid upon application
submittal.
(e) Street sign fee in amount as required to replace all necessary street signs per the
standards and specifications established by the City of Medford and/or the Department of
Motor Vehicles of the State of Oregon.
(2) Private Streets. The application for private street renaming shall require the following:
(a) All items listed in section 10.458 (C)(1).
(b) Signatures of all affected property owners.
(c) If the application is approved, a signed and recorded copy of a Declaration of Private
Street/Driveway form must be provided to the Medford Planning Department for the
name change to become effective.
[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2012-15, Jan. 19, 2012; Amd. Sec. 159, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018
(effective July 23, 2018).]
10.460 Traffic Impact Analysis
A Traffic Impact Analysis specifically identifies the generation, distribution, and assignment of traffic
to and from a proposed development. The purpose is to identify the traffic impacts that a proposed
development will have on the existing and future street network. It determines all improvements or
mitigation measures necessary to maintain adequate LOS at study area intersections and ensure
safe pedestrian and vehicular ingress to and egress from the transportation system.
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2001-155, Aug. 16, 2001.]
10.461 Applicability
(1) The level of detail and scope of a traffic impact analysis (TIA) will vary with the size, complexity,
and location of the proposed application. Prior to any TIA, the applicant shall submit sufficient
information to the City for the Public Works Department to issue a scoping letter. If stipulations to
reduce traffic are requested by an applicant, it must first be shown by means of an analysis that an
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 31/49
unconditional approval is not possible without some form of mitigation to maintain an adequate LOS.
This will determine whether a stipulation is necessary.
(2) Extent of Study Area:
The study area shall be defined by the Public Works Department in the scoping letter and shall
address at least the following areas:
(a) All proposed site access points;
(b) Any intersection where the proposed development can be expected to contribute 25 or
more trips during the analysis peak period. Impacts of less than 25 peak period trips are not
substantial and will not be included in the study area. This volume may be adjusted, at the
discretion of the Public Works Department, for safety or unusual situations; and
(c) Any intersections directly adjacent to the subject property. The Public Works Department
may, at its discretion, waive the study of certain intersections when it is concluded that the
impacts are not substantial.
(3) When required:
If a proposed application has the potential of generating more than 250 net average daily trips (ADT)
or the Public Works Department has concerns due to operations or accident history, a TIA will be
required to evaluate development impacts to the transportation system. The Public Works
Department may waive a TIA if it is concluded that the impacts are not substantial.
(4) Submittals: Provide two copies of the TIA for Public Works Department to review.
(5) Elements of Analysis: A TIA shall be prepared by a Traffic Engineer or Civil Engineer licensed to
practice in the State of Oregon with special training and experience in traffic engineering. The TIA
shall be a thorough review of the effects a proposed use will have on the transportation system. The
study area shall include all streets and intersections in the analysis, as defined in subsection (2)
above. Traffic generated from a proposed site will be distributed throughout the transportation
system using existing count data or the current transportation model used by the City. Any alternate
distribution method must be based on data acceptable to the Public Works Department. The
following checklist outlines what a TIA shall contain. Incomplete reports shall be returned to the
applicant for completion without review:
(a) The scoping letter as provided by the Public Works Department;
(b) The Final TIA shall be signed and stamped by a Professional Civil or Traffic Engineer
registered in the State of Oregon;
(c) An executive summary, discussing the development, the major findings of the analysis, and
the mitigation measures proposed;
(d) A vicinity map of the proposed site and study area;
(e) Project characteristics such as zoning, potential trip generations (unless stipulated to less
than potential), proposed access(s), and other pertinent factors;
(f) Street characteristics within the study area including functional classification, number of
travel lanes, lane width, shoulder treatment, bicycle path corridors, and traffic control at
intersections;
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 32/49
(g) Description of existing transportation conditions including transit accessibility, accident
history, pedestrian facilities, bicycle facilities, traffic signals, and overall traffic operations and
circulation;
(h) Peak period turning movement counts of at least two-hour minimums at study area
intersections, less than 2 years old. These counts shall be adjusted to the design year of the
project and consider seasonal traffic adjustments when required by the scoping letter;
(i) A “Figure” showing existing peak period (AM, noon, or PM, whichever is largest) turning
movement volumes at study area intersections, as shown in Example 1. Approved applications
obtained from the City that have not built out but will impact study area intersections shall be
included as pipeline traffic. An appropriate adjustment factor shall be applied to existing count
data if counts were taken during the off-peak season;
(j) Potential “Project” trip generation using the most current edition of the ITE Trip Generation,
as required by the Public Works Department at the time of scoping. Variations of trip rates will
require the approval of the Public Works Department. Such approval will require submission of
adequate supporting data prior to first submittal of the TIA;
(k) A “Figure” illustrating project turning movement volumes at study area intersections for
peak periods, as shown in Example 2. Adjustments made for pass-by traffic volumes shall
follow the methodology outlined in the latest edition of the ITE Trip Generation, and shall not
exceed 25% unless approved by the Public Works Director;
(l) A “Figure” illustrating the combined traffic of existing, background, and project turning
movement volumes at study area intersections for peak periods, as shown in Example 3;
(m) Level of Service (LOS) analysis at study area intersections under the following conditions:
(A) Existing plus pipeline traffic
(B) Existing plus pipeline traffic and project traffic A table shall be prepared which
illustrates all LOS results. The table shall show LOS conditions with corresponding
vehicle delays for signalized intersections and the critical movement at unsignalized
intersections. If the proposed use is scheduled to be completed in phases, a LOS
analysis shall be prepared for each phase;
(n) A mitigation plan if impacts to the study area reduce level of service (LOS) below
minimums. Mitigation measures may include stipulations and/or construction of necessary
transportation improvements. Mitigation measures shall be required to the extent that the
transportation facilities, under City jurisdiction, operate at an acceptable level of service (LOS)
with the addition of project traffic; and
(o) Intersections under jurisdiction of another agency, but still within the City limits, shall be
evaluated by either the City’s criteria or the other jurisdiction’s criteria, or both, whichever is
considered applicable by the Public Works Department. If the TIA is not consistent with the
scoping letter (including any amendments) then the TIA will be returned to the applicant
without review.
(6) Analysis criteria:
(a) All trip distributions into and out of the transportation system must reflect existing traffic
count data for consistency or follow the current transportation model used by the City. If
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 33/49
alternate splits are used to distribute traffic then justification must be provided and approved by
the Public Works Department prior to first submittal of the TIA.
(b) If progression analysis is being evaluated or queuing between intersections is a concern,
the peak period used in the analysis must be the same for every intersection along the street
and reflect that of the most critical intersection being evaluated. If a common peak period is not
requested by the Public Works Department, then the actual peak period of every intersection
shall be used.
(c) Counts performed must be a minimum of two hours and include the peak period for
analysis purposes. All documentation shall be included in the TIA.
(d) All supporting count data, LOS analyses, pass-by deductions, growth rates, traffic
distributions, or other engineering assumptions must be clearly defined and attached to the TIA
when submitted in report form to the City for review.
(e) All LOS analyses shall follow operational procedures per the current Highway Capacity
Manual. Ideal saturation flow rates greater than 1800 vehicles per hour per lane should not be
used unless otherwise measured in the project vicinity. Queue lengths shall be calculated at
the 95th percentile where feasible. Actual peak hour factors should be used for each
movement or lane grouping in the analysis. The peak hour factor shall be 1.0.
(f) Signal timing used in capacity or progression analysis shall follow City timing plans and
account for pedestrian crossing times, unless otherwise noted in the scoping letter.
(g) Arrival Type 3 (random arrivals) shall be used unless a coordinated plan is in place during
the peak period.
[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2001-155, Aug. 16, 2001; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2014-161, Dec. 22, 2014;
Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2014-161, Dec. 22, 2014.]
10.462 Maintenance of level of Service D
Whenever level of service (LOS) is determined to be below the targets listed for arterials or
collectors, development is not permitted unless the developer makes the roadway or other
improvements necessary to main¬tain level of service. Level of service criteria shall be based on the
latest edition of the Highway Capacity Manual (Federal Transportation Research Board) for the
motorized vehicle mode. The following are the level of service standards for intersections in the City
of Medford:
Level of Service Minimum Intersection
D Citywide (unless otherwise listed)
E Barnett Road & Highland Drive
South Pacific Highway (Hwy. 99) & Stewart Avenue
[Amd. Sec. 17, Ord. No. 2009-207, Sept. 17, 2009, Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2019-35, May 16, 2019.]
10.463 Traffic Control Devices and Traffic Signal Spacing
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 34/49
(1) Whenever, as the result of additional traffic generated by a proposed development, the City
Traffic Engineer determines the need for a traffic signal or regulatory sign, such determination being
based on the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control, 1979 Edition, the recommendation of the City
Traffic Engineer shall be included as a staff recommendation to the approving agency (Planning
Commission). If approved by the approving agency (Planning Commission) the developer shall be
responsible for installing said devices and signs [or participation on a pro-rata basis in a local
improvement district].
(2) The minimum center–of–intersection to center–of–intersection spacing for new traffic signals
shall be 1,320 feet for arterial streets, and 1,000 feet for collector streets.
When part of a Type III land use review, the Public Works Director or designee shall forward a
recommendation on minimum traffic signal spacing standards to the approving authority. The
recommendation shall be based on the progression analysis described below.
When not part of a Type III land use review, the Director of Public Works or designee may approve a
variance from this minimum spacing requirement. Variance from the minimum signal spacing shall
require a progression analysis that shows peak hour speeds are no less than five miles per hour
below the posted speed(s). A Registered Engineer or Registered Traffic Engineer within the State of
Oregon shall conduct the analysis, and all work shall be scoped by the Public Works Department
prior to commencing a study and shall be consistent with section 10.461.
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-70, Apr. 17, 2008; Amd. Sec. 160, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018
(effective July 23, 2018).]
10.464 Accessways
The purpose of an accessway is to provide safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle access
within and from new subdivisions, planned unit developments, shopping centers and industrial parks
to nearby residential areas, transit stops and neighborhood activity centers such as schools, parks
and shopping. A well connected street network is the primary means of providing this access.
Accessways are reserved for situations where street connections are infeasible or inappropriate.
(1) Accessways shall be provided for cul-de-sacs, long blocks or dead-end streets except when the
approving authority determines based on evidence in the record, that construction of a separate
accessway is infeasible or inappropriate. Such evidence may consist of the following:
(a) when other federal, state or local requirements prevent construction of an accessway,
(b) when the nature of abutting existing development makes construction of an accessway
impractical,
(c) when the accessway would cross a natural area with significant natural habitat and
construction would be incompatible with protection of natural values,
(d) when the accessway would cross land designated for flood control or flood hazard and the
accessway is incompatible with the designated use,
(e) when the accessway would cross topography where slopes exceed 30% or where path
grade would exceed 12% slope except when construction of a crossing structure is found to be
feasible; or (f) when a cul-de-sac or dead-end street abuts rural resource land in farm use at
an urban growth boundary, except where the adjoining land is designated as an urban reserve
area.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 35/49
[Added, Section 10, Ord. No. 7629, May 5, 1994.]
10.465 Accessway Routing
Accessways shall be located to provide a reasonably direct connection between pedestrian
destinations. A reasonably direct connection is a route which minimizes out-of-direction travel for
most of the people who use the walkway/bikeway considering terrain, safety and destinations.
[Added, Section 11, Ord. No. 7629, May 5, 1994.]
10.466 Accessway Design
Accessways shall include at least a 12-foot wide right-of-way and an 8-foot wide paved surface. The
paving shall be consistent with Section 9.550 of the City Code. For security reasons, accessways
shall be as short as possible and, when possible, straight enough to allow one end of the accessway
to be seen from the other.
Accessways shall be lighted either by street lights on adjacent streets or pedestrian scale lighting
along the accessway. Lighting shall not shine onto adjacent residential properties. Pedestrian scale
lights shall conform to the standards and specifications established and maintained by the City of
Medford Parks and Recreation Department.
Removable bollards shall be installed at each entrance and exit to the walkway to prevent motor
vehicles from using the walkway.
[Added, Sec. 12, Ord. No. 7629, May 5, 1994.]
10.471 Public Utility Easements
At the time of development review, public utility easements ten feet in width shall be provided
adjoining all lot lines abutting a street, or as otherwise required by the City of Medford.
[Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2004-259, Dec. 16, 2004.]
10.472 [Repealed, Sec. 18, Ord. No. 2009-207, Sept. 17, 2009.]
10.473 Slope Easements
The approving agency may require a perpetual unobstructed easement adjacent to a public right-ofway
where the slope of the land is such that earth movements could damage a public right-of-way
where the natural vegetative cover shall not be disturbed.
10.474 Open Space Easements
The approving authority may require a perpetual conservation easement over riparian corridors,
wetland protection areas, flood plains, or other areas of unique natural condition.
[Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 1999-215, June 1, 2000.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 36/49
10.475 General Public Easements
An unobstructed easement shall be provided across property outside the right-of-way and with
satisfactory access to the street in the following situations:
(1) When topography or other conditions make inclusion of storm drainage facilities, sanitary
sewers, or water lines impractical within the street right-of-way. When a proposed drainage
system will carry water across private land outside the development, appropriate drainage
rights must be secured.
(2) For access to maintain storm drainage facilities in certain waterways as identified in the
Medford Comprehensive Storm Drainage Master Plan. Such easement shall have an improved
surface constructed to city standards by the developer.
[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 1999-215, June 1, 2000.]
10.481 Improvement Standards Adopted
Except as otherwise set forth in this chapter the Standard Specifications for public works
construction by Oregon Chapter, American Public Works Association, City of Medford standards,
The Rogue Valley Stormwater Quality Design Manual, and the Medford Water Commission
Standards for Design and Constructing Water Facilities, all of which standards are hereby
incorporated herein by reference, are hereby adopted as minimum design and improvement
standards for all streets, sidewalks, driveways, storm drain facilities, street lighting, water facilities,
and other development improvements in the city of Medford. In the event that there be any conflict
between the standards and specifications set forth in said above referenced pamphlets and any of
the standards of specifications specifically contained elsewhere in this code, the latter shall prevail.
[Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2009-240, Nov. 5, 2009.]
10.482 Public Improvement Plan Requirements
A. Prior to the issuance of a development permit and prior to commencement of improvement
work, plans and specifications for all public improvements shall be prepared by a
professional engineer registered in the State of Oregon in accordance with the design and
improvement standards of this Code, and shall be submitted to and reviewed by the City Engineer,
except water system plans, which shall be submitted to and reviewed by the Medford Water
Commission.
B. All public improvements shall be constructed and completed under the inspection of and with the
approval of the City Engineer.
C. Without limiting the foregoing, and using City data, public improvement plans shall include typical
cross sections and proposed finished grades of all streets, together with a profile showing the
relationship between finished grade and existing ground elevations, and the lengths, sizes, grades,
and type of all pipes, culverts, and other structures.
D. Public improvement plans and specifications shall contain performance data reviewed by the
developer's engineer demonstrating compliance with all design requirements of this Code. City and
Water Commission personnel who check and/or approve public improvement plans and
specifications are authorized to accept such performance data at face value without independently
verifying the accuracy thereof.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 37/49
[Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2009-240, Nov. 5, 2009.]
10.485 Storm Drainage Requirements.
A. Subterranean storm drains shall be designed and installed by the developer to adequately and
safely drain all storm waters of a development and all surface waters reaching, or reasonably
calculated to reach, said development from areas outside of its boundaries, and to ultimately drain
the same to an approved watercourse.
B. Drainage to a watercourse shall be either by the direct discharge into the same or by connection
with adjacent existing storm drains already discharging into a water course and of a capacity
sufficient, in the opinion of the City Engineer, to adequately and safely carry all of such additional
drainage.
C. When a proposed development may adversely impact a storm drainage system, the City
Engineer may recommend to the approving authority that the developer have prepared by a
registered engineer, a Storm Drainage Plan for review and approval prior to final action on the plan
authorization. (Effective Dec. 1, 2013.)
D. The storm drain system shall consist of mains of not less than twelve (12) inches in diameter,
together with such manholes, catch basins, laterals, water quality and flow control facilities, and
other structures, and at such grades as required by the City Engineer to conform to good drainage
requirements for the area and for the topography of the development to prevent standing waters or
flooding within and outside of its boundaries.
[Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2009-240, Nov. 5, 2009; Amd. Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2013-131, Sept. 5, 2013.]
10.486 Stormwater Quality and Detention Facilities, Public Streets
A. Purpose. It is the City’s policy to maintain the natural hydrology and preserve water quality by
mitigating the direct impacts of new development and preserving the environmental benefits of
natural water bodies.
B. Applicability. Stormwater quality and detention facilities for developments containing publicly
maintained streets shall provide stormwater detention in accordance with the following:
(1) Stormwater detention facilities shall be required when constructing streets and associated
surfaces containing 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface.
(2) Stormwater detention facilities shall be required when widening or improvement of existing
streets involves reconstructing the existing street section. Widening that involves adding only
additional width to meet City standards shall not require stormwater detention facilities.
C. Construction and Maintenance Standards.
(1) Stormwater quality and detention facilities shall be constructed in conformance with Section
10.481, Improvement Standards Adopted.
(2) Stormwater detention facilities that receive stormwater runoff from a publicly maintained
street shall be a publicly maintained facility.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 38/49
(3) Stormwater detention facilities that do not receive stormwater runoff from a publicly
maintained street shall:
(a) Be privately maintained; and
(b) Be constructed on private property; and
(c) Have an Operation and Maintenance Plan approved by the City prior to construction
of the facility.
(4) Stormwater quality and detention facilities for single-family residential subdivisions, PUDs,
and other residential land divisions which have publicly maintained streets shall combine the
drainage from the public streets and the private lots in a combined system. The combined
system shall be publicly maintained; however, this system may be privately maintained
provided a Declaration of Covenants for the Operation and Maintenance of Stormwater
Facilities and an Operation and Maintenance Agreement, in a form acceptable to the Public
Works Department and the City Attorney, is signed and recorded by the responsible parties.
(5) For commercial, multiple-family, and industrial developments, each lot or parcel shall
provide a separate, private stormwater quality and detention facility at the time of building
permit. The detention for drainage from the public right-of-way in these developments shall be
in a separate facility, shall be constructed at the time of the street construction, and shall be
maintained by the public.
(6) Developments greater than five (5) acres in size shall set aside a minimum of two percent
(2%) of the gross area as open space to be developed as open ponds or other similar
stormwater treatment facilities, which shall be landscaped in conformance with Appendix A of
the current adopted version of the Rogue Valley Stormwater Quality Design Manual.
(7) Water quality and detention facilities for developments less than five (5) acres in size are
encouraged to be developed as open ponds or other similar stormwater detention facilities, but
may utilize underground treatment and detention.
[Added, Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2009-240, Nov. 5, 2009.]
10.487 Drainage into Adjacent Drains
Whenever a developer proposes to drain the development's storm and surface waters in accord with
Section 10.485, Storm Water and Sewage, to a watercourse by means of connection with and use of
existing drains at his own cost and expense outside of said development and if such adjacent drains
and facilities have been dedicated to the public, the developer shall be required to pay a reasonable
charge to the City for the connection and use of such outside public drainage system. Such cost
shall in no event exceed the estimated cost to the developer of constructing independent exterior
drainage facilities to adequately carry such waters from the development to the nearest accessible
natural watercourse.
10.488 Oversize Storm Drains and/or Sanitary Sewers, SDC Credits
Whenever, in the determination of the approving agency, it is necessary that oversize conveyance
facilities for storm drainage and/or sanitary sewers be installed by the developer which can or will be
used for the immediate or future benefit of property not within the development, the developer shall
be required to install such facilities in addition to the infrastructure requirements for the subject
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 39/49
development, and the developer may be eligible for credits under Section 3.891 (Storm Drain SDC
Credits), or Section 3.835(2) (Sanitary Sewer SDC Credits) of the Medford Code.
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-197, Sept. 18, 2008.]
10.490 Sanitary Sewers
The developer shall connect said development and each of the lots thereof to the existing sanitary
sewer facilities in the area by the installation of such additional mains and laterals as are necessary
to adequately serve the same by sanitary sewers. Development using sewage disposal systems
other than sanitary sewers will not be permitted.
10.492 Sanitary Sewer Design
All sanitary sewer facilities shall be of a total gravity systems design installed in public or private
street right-of-way or public easement to grades, standards, location, lengths and sizes, as approved
by the Department of Environmental Quality and the City Engineer.
10.493 Off-site Sanitary Sewer and Storm Drain Reimbursement
Whenever it is necessary that off-site sanitary sewer and/or storm drain conveyance facilities be
installed by the developer which can or will be used for the benefit, immediate or future, of property
not in the development, the developer shall be required to install such facilities in addition to his own
on-site improvements, and may then apply to the City for formation of a Reimbursement District in
accordance with Sections 3.900 through 3.913 of the Medford Code for recovery of all or part of the
excess costs of the off-site sanitary sewer and/or storm drain facilities.
[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2008-197, Sept. 18, 2008.]
10.495 Street Lighting and Pedestrian-Scale Street Lighting.
Street lighting shall be required of new development having frontage on a public or private street,
and shall be furnished and installed by the developer in accordance with the standards in either
Subsections (A) or (B). The street lighting and pedestrian scale street lighting requirements of the
Southeast Overlay District shall be as specified in 10.380. Except as otherwise provided in this
Section, the City shall assume ownership and payment of on-going electrical energy costs for new
street lights and pedestrian scale street lights within public street rights-of-way upon acceptance of
the lights by the City.
A. Standard Street Lighting Requirements.
Except as otherwise provided in 10.495, the design and improvement standards for street lighting
and pedestrian-scale street lighting are as described in the “City of Medford Street Lighting
Standards and Specifications”, a copy of which is on file in the Public Works Department and hereby
adopted.
1) Quantity and Spacing
Street lights shall be installed at least every 220 feet except in the following situations:
(a) Cul-de-sacs shall have at least one (1) street light regardless of length.
(b) Industrial streets as defined herein shall have at least one (1) street light at each
street intersection.
(c) Developments having 200 or more feet of frontage on an existing street shall have at
least one (1) street light for the first 200 feet plus one (1) street light per each 220 feet of
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 40/49
additional frontage.
(d) Developments having less than 200 feet of frontage on an existing street shall enter
into a Deferred Improvement Agreement for future street light installation.
2) Illuminance
Street lighting shall meet the following illuminance standards. The illuminance values,
expressed in footcandles as defined herein, represent roadway average maintained values.
Illuminance Standards Measured in Footcandles
Street Classification Commercially Zoned Areas All Other Areas
Arterial 2.0 1.4
Collector 1.2 0.9
All Other Classifications 0.9 0.6
3) Shielding
Street lights and pedestrian-scale street lights shall be designed or shielded so as to prevent
light from being emitted above the fixture.
4) Street Trees
The location of street lights and pedestrian-scale street lights shall be coordinated with street
tree planting plans where required or utilized.
B. Non-Standard and Private Street Lighting and Pedestrian Scale Street Lighting Requirements.
The approving authority may authorize the use of non-standard or private street lighting, including
pedestrian scale street lighting, where such lighting is equal to or better than the standards of
10.495(A) as determined by the Director of the Medford Public Works Department or his/her
designee.
1) Public Streets
For public streets, street lighting and pedestrian-scale street lighting that differs from the
standard street lighting requirements may be installed on streets other than collectors and
arterials, in accordance with the following:
(a) At least one street light shall be installed at each street intersection and at any
pedestrian street crossing other than at street intersections; and,
(b) Street lights or pedestrian-scale street lights shall be installed to maintain an
illuminance of 0.6 footcandles on pedestrian walkways or sidewalks used by the public.
(c) If located within the right of way, the operation and maintenance costs of the
pedestrian-scale street lighting shall be charged to the benefiting property owners
through establishment of a utility fee or Local Improvement District. If located outside the
right of way, legal documents shall be submitted in a form acceptable to the City Attorney
prior to recording in the official records of Jackson County that assure that the lighting
system will be perpetually maintained and operated by individual property owners, an
association of property owners, or other entity.
2) Private Streets
For private streets, legal documents shall be submitted in a form acceptable to the City
Attorney prior to recording in the official records of Jackson County that assure that lighting
systems on private streets will be perpetually maintained and operated by individual property
owners, an association of property owners, or other entity. Street lighting and pedestrian-scale
street lighting that differs from the standards may be installed if the Planned Unit Development
(PUD) approval authorizes the modification.
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6014, Nov. 5, 1987; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2002-94, June 20, 2002.]
10.500 Sidewalks
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 41/49
Sidewalks shall be required of all developments including single-family residences along both sides
of all streets except minimum access easements which do not require sidewalks and residential
lanes where sidewalks are required on one side of the street.
[Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 7629, May 5, 1994; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 8013, Jan. 4, 1996; Amd. Sec. 19,
Ord. No. 2009-207, Sept. 17, 2009.]
10.501 Sidewalk Specifications
Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the following specifications:
(1) Concrete. Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete with a compressive strength of not less
than 3,000 pounds per square inch, using not less than 500 pounds of cement per cubic yard of
concrete, and with a maximum slump of four (4) inches. In cold weather, calcium chloride may be
added by dissolving in the mixing water an amount not exceeding two percent (2%) of the weight of
the cement in the concrete mix.
(2) Other material. Other materials such as bricks or flagstone may be used for aesthetic effects
where approved by the approving authority or as otherwise provided in Section 10.358, Central
Business District. Such material will have flat surfaces suitably finished for sidewalk use. Materials
submitted shall be comparable in strength to concrete and shall be placed with suitable mortar to
provide a permanent, maintenance-free sidewalk. (Effective Dec. 1, 2013.)
(3) Construction. Sidewalks shall be constructed according to the structural specifications prescribed
by the City Engineer. A sidewalk shall be nominally four (4) inches thick, except where a sidewalk
crosses a driveway it shall be nominally six (6) inches thick. A sidewalk shall slope one-quarter
(1/4) inch per foot toward the curb. The edge of the sidewalk nearest the curb shall be at an
elevation equal to the rate of one-quarter (1/4) inch per foot above the curb. Where a residential
building site fronts on an unimproved residential street the requirement to improve sidewalks may be
waived if the development qualifies for deferral of street frontage improvements as per Section
10.432, Street Improvement, Deferred.
(4) Width. Sidewalks shall be five (5) feet in width except in the C-B district of the city where
sidewalks shall be as per Section 10.358 of this code and shall extend from the property line to the
curb. Required sidewalk width does not include curb width. All planning, design and construction
documents shall clearly state that at least five (5) feet of the sidewalk is to be clear of obstructions
such as sign posts, utility and signal poles, mailboxes, parking meters, fire hydrants, trees, and other
street furniture.
(5) Alignment. Sidewalks on arterial and major collector streets shall be set back a minimum of ten
(10) feet from the back of the face of curb (See the street diagrams for arterial and collector streets
above) unless curvelinear as provided below.
Sidewalks on all other streets shall be located a minimum of eight (8) feet from the back of curb
unless curvelinear as provided below. If there are existing sidewalks on the same side of the street
in the same block, then the sidewalk location shall be determined by the approving authority.
The approving authority may approve curvelinear or meandering sidewalks for aesthetic purposes or
for other reasons such as topography or to avoid existing trees. Where approved, such sidewalks
shall tie to adjacent property lines in such a manner as to allow standard sidewalk construction on
that property. (Effective Dec. 1, 2013.)
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 42/49
(6) Repair. All projects subject to Site Plan and Architectural Review shall be required, as a condition
of approval, to repair all frontage sidewalks as determined by the Engineering Department. When
attached as a condition of approval of a Site Plan and Architectural Review application the sidewalk
maintenance procedures set forth in Chapter 3, Section 3.025, Notice on Hearing of City Repair of
Sidewalks, through 3.035, Notice of Sidewalk Repair, are hereby superseded.
(7) Permit for Sidewalk Work. Before beginning the construction, reconstruction, or repair of a
sidewalk the developer shall apply to the city engineer for a permit. If the sidewalk conforms to the
provisions of this section the city engineer shall establish the grade of the sidewalk, if not already
established, and issue the permit upon payment of a permit fee established and periodically
amended by ordinance of the City Council.
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 7970, Oct. 5, 1995; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 8013, Jan. 4, 1996; Amd. Sec. 2,
Ord. No. 2003-164, Aug. 7, 2003, effective Aug. 7, 2003; Amd. Sec. 20, Ord. No. 2009-207, Sept.
17, 2009; Amd. Sec. 17, Ord. No. 2013-131, Sept. 5, 2013.]
10.502 [Repealed, Sec. 21, Ord. No. 2009-207, Sept. 17, 2009.]
10.550 Access Standards
(1) Driveway Throat Width Standards.
Driveways that connect to a public right-of-way shall be constructed according to the standards in
Tables 10.550-1 and 10.550-2. See Figure 10.550-1 for driveway throat, flare and radius definitions.
For the purposes of this section, Minimum Access Easements and Alleys shall be considered
driveways.
Table 10.550-1 - Driveway Throat Widths
Street
Classification Land Use on Parcel to be Served by the Driveway*
Local (All streets
other than
Collectors or
Arterials.)
SFR MFR COMMERCIAL INDUSTRIAL
Less than 500
ADT***
12 to 18 ft.**** 18 to 24 ft.
24 to 30 ft. 24 to 30 ft.
500 to 1,000 ADT*** 24 to 30* ft. 24 to 36 ft.
Greater than 1,000
ADT*** 24 to 36* ft. 24 to 36 ft.
Collector SFR MFR COMMERCIAL INDUSTRIAL
Less than 500
ADT*** 12 to 24 ft.
(Shared Approach
Only)
18 to 36 ft.
18 to 24 ft. 24 to 36 ft.**
500 to 1,000 ADT*** 18 to 36 ft.** 24 to 36 ft.**
Greater than 1,000
ADT*** 18 to 36 ft.** 24 to 36 ft.**
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 43/49
Arterial SFR MFR COMMERCIAL INDUSTRIAL
Less than 500
ADT***
No direct access
unless no alternative
exists, then 12 to 20 ft.
(Shared Approach
Only)
No direct access
unless no alternative
exists, then 18 to 36 ft.
18 to 24 ft. 24 to 30 ft.
500 to 1,000 ADT*** 18 to 30 ft. 24 to 36 ft.
Greater than 1,000
ADT*** 18 to 36 ft. 24 to 36 ft.
*Institutional uses shall be considered commercial uses for the purposes of this subsection.
**Driveway throat widths greater than 24 feet shall be granted only for full movement approaches
that warrant a left turn lane.
***ADT = Average Daily Trips using the proposed driveway, determined from the latest version of the
Institute of Transportation Engineering handbook based on the expected ultimate use of the site.
****May be up to 24' with approval of Public Works Director or Designee.
(2) Driveway Radius Standards
Table 10.550-2 Driveway Radius Standards
Street
Classification
Land Use on Parcel to be Served by the Driveway*
SFR MFR COMMERCIAL INDUSTRIAL
Local Curb Cut
<6 units:
curb cut
>6 units: 15
ft. radius
Curb cut or
20 ft. radius
Curb cut or
20 ft. radius
Collector Shared Access Curb cut 20 ft. radius 20 ft. radius 25 ft. radius
Arterial No direct access unless no
alternative exists, then 15 ft. radius 25 ft. radius 25 ft. radius 25 ft. radius
*Institutional uses shall be considered commercial uses for the purposes of this subsection.
Curb Cut = Dropped Curb with Portland Concrete Cement driveway apron per current City of
Medford Standard Drawings
Radius = At-grade driveway approach with 6 - inch curbs per current City of Medford Standard
Drawings
Figure 10.550-1 - Driveway Throat, Flare and Radius Definitions - SEE BELOW
(3) Driveway Spacing and Locational Standards
a. Arterial and Collector Streets
(1) Driveway spacing and Location. No driveway access to an Arterial or Collector
Street shall be allowed for any parcel that abuts the right-of-way of a lower order street or
has legal right of access to any street via any abutting parcel(s).
No driveway access shall be allowed to an Arterial Street within 150 feet of the nearest
right-of-way line of an intersection street.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 44/49
Driveways shall be placed adjacent to the property line of a contiguous parcel if possible
to do so and meet driveway spacing requirements of this section.
No driveway access to an Arterial or Collector Street shall be located closer than allowed
by the standards in Table 10.550-3, measured from the center of driveway to center of
driveway.
Table 10.550-3 Minimum Driveway Spacing Standards
(Center-to-Center) Arterial and Collector Streets
SPEED LIMIT (MPH) 25 30 35 40 45
DRIVEWAY SPACING 145 ft. 195 ft. 250 ft. 315 ft. 385 ft.
(2) Number of Driveways for each Separately Owned Tract. Within the requirements set
forth in a. (1) above, driveway access to an Arterial Street shall be limited to one
driveway for each tract of property owned.
For purposes of this section, parcels that are contiguous under the same ownership or
part of the same application for development shall be considered to be one tract of
property.
(3) Cross-Access Easement Required. Any parcel or tract granted driveway access to
an Arterial or Collector Street shall grant cross-access easements to all contiguous
parcels or tracts that do not abut a street of a lower order than an Arterial or Collector
Street. Site design must accommodate future use of such accesses.
Use of shared driveways on multiple parcels or tracts and cross-access easements shall
be required when site and traffic conditions, including projections of future traffic volumes
and movements, indicate that such requirements will preserve the capacity and safety of
the transportation system.
(4) Management of the Transportation System. Granting of driveway access to a public
right-of-way is not a guarantee that future improvements designed to improve safety and
capacity will not be constructed in the public right-of-way. Medians, turning movement
restrictions, signs, signals, and striping may be installed by the City or others with the
approval of the Public Works Director or Designee, to preserve and enhance the function
of the transportation system.
b. Local Streets
A minimum distance of three (3) feet shall be maintained between the closest portions of
adjacent driveway flares as measured along the curb on local streets, except where existing
conditions dictate otherwise. Cul-de-sacs are exempt from these standards.
The closest edge of a driveway shall be a minimum of 35 feet from any intersecting local
streets measured along the curb to the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street. If
the parcel does not have sufficient width to meet this requirement, the driveway shall be
located adjacent to the property line farthest from the intersecting street, and no authorization
for larger driveway width shall be granted.
c. Alternative Access Spacing and Location
The standards set forth in Sections 10.550 (3) (a) and (b) above are the City's basic access
standards. The City also recognizes the unique situations and/or complex projects may
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 45/49
warrant alternative driveway spacing and locations.
(1) Approval of Alternative Access Locations: When part of a Type III land use review,
the Public Works Director or designee shall forward a recommendation on alternative
access spacing and locations to the approving authority. When not part of a Type III land
use review, the Public Works Director or designee may authorize an administrative
adjustment to the access spacing and location standards in 10.550 (3) (a) and/or (b)
above under one or both of the following circumstances:
i. The adjustment will align the requested driveway with a driveway across the
street and the Public Works Director's (or designee) professional opinion is that this
configuration will improve safety and/or operations.
ii. Where no proposed access location can satisfy all the standards in Section
10.550 (3) (a) and/or (b), the driveway may be located in the location that best
meets the City's access management standards in the professional opinion of
Public Works Director (or designee).
(2) Redevelopment: Redevelopment as used in this section means that a parcel(s) has
existing legal access and physical improvement and the property owner is seeking Type
III use review for new development permits. In the case of redevelopment, the approving
authority may require the provision of cross-access easements and geometric/physical
improvements to any and all accesses in accordance with current standards.
Redevelopment applications shall propose changes to the number and/or centerline
location(s) of existing driveway(s), and shall demonstrate that the proposed changes will
bring the parcel into, or at a minimum, closer to compliance with existing standards.
(3) Area Plans: Access spacing and location may be evaluated as part of a special area
plan. The approving authority may adopt specific standards through a special area plan
such as a neighborhood plan and/or master plan. Where such plans are adopted, any
conflict between the special area plan access and location standards and the standards
in Section 10.550 (3) (a) and/or (b) above shall be resolved in favor of the special area
plan provisions.
(4) New Development: At an applicant's request, the approving authority will evaluate
alternative access spacing and location on a project basis in conjunction with Type III
land use review. Evaluation of alternative access location and spacing for projects shall
be based upon a Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA) prepared by a professional
engineer licensed in the State of Oregon with expertise in transportation. The Public
Works Director (or designee) will provide a scope of work for the TIA and will issue a
report to the approving authority stating his/her professional opinion as to the technical
adequacy of the TIA and whether it demonstrates compliance with the criteria for access
spacing and location for the project. The TIA will consider motorists, cyclists and
pedestrians. The approving authority will evaluate the project's access spacing and
location, in one of the following ways:
i. If the conclusions of the TIA and the professional opinion of the Public Works
Director (or designee) concur that the safety and operations of the project's
proposed access spacing and location will, at the time of development, be equal to
or better than application of the standards in 10.550 (3) (a) and/or (b) above for all
studied facilities, the approving authority will accept the access spacing and
location proposed at the time of project review.
If the Public Works Director's professional opinion is not consistent with the
conclusions of the TIA, the approving authority will review the competing testimony
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 46/49
by the professional engineers with expertise in transportation and will approve,
modify, or deny the proposed alternative access design; or
ii. If the conclusions of the TIA and the professional opinion of the Public Works
Director (or designee), concur that the safety and operations of the project's
proposed access spacing and location will, at the time of development, be equal to
or better than application of the standards in 10.550 (3) (a) and/or (b) above for the
transportation system as a whole, the approving authority may accept the access
spacing and location proposed at the time of the major project review provided all
facilities will still meet basic transportation engineering safety requirements; or
iii. If the conclusions of the TIA find that the safety of the project's proposed access
location and spacing will, at the time of development, meet basic transportation
engineering safety requirements and the approving authority concludes that the
proposed access spacing and location will significantly advance one or more of the
Goals and/or Policies of the Comprehensive Plan, the approving authority may
accept the access spacing and location proposed at the time of project review.
[Replaced, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2008-70, Apr. 17, 2008; Amd. Sec. 22, Ord. No. 2009-207, Sept. 17,
2009; Amd. Sec. 161, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
IMAGES FOR THIS CODE
(Click on an image to see a larger version)
10.555 Underground Utilities
All public utility systems and service facilities, including without limitation all electrical and telephone
distribution or transmission facilities, and also all cable television distribution or transmission facilities
installed in and for the purpose of providing service to the development shall be located in a public
utility easement with a junction box for each lot of the development designed to carry the service
drops underground to each serviced building or structure. The developer shall pay any necessary
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 47/49
cost or make other arrangements with each of the public utility companies involved for the
installation of the underground facilities and for the relocation of existing overhead facilities on the
property, and in conformance with the respective operating company's rules and regulations then on
file with and approved by the public utilities commission. Excepting from the foregoing are the
following:
(a) Transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes, meter cabinets and concealed ducts may
be situated above ground if they are solely for the purpose of providing service within the
development and area used solely in connection with the underground transmission or
distribution lines; and
(b) Poles supporting electricity transmission lines, and the electricity transmission lines
supported by such poles, may be situated above the surface of the ground if the voltage
carried by such lines exceed 12KV and such lines are not connected to any distribution line
situated within the development and do not in any way serve any part of the development; and
(c) Poles supporting street lights, and the electrical lines within said poles, may be situated
above the surface of the ground. [Added - Sec. 19, Ord. No. 5820, Mar. 19, 1987.]
10.651 [Repealed, Ord. No. 7016, Nov. 7, 1991.]
10.652 [Repealed, Ord. No. 7016, Nov. 7, 1991.]
10.653 [Repealed, Ord. No. 7016, Nov. 7, 1991.]
10.654 [Repealed, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 6232, Nov. 3, 1988.]
10.655 [Repealed, Ord. No. 7016, Nov. 7, 1991.]
10.656 [Repealed, Ord No. 7016, Nov. 7, 1991.]
10.666 Improvement Agreements
If all of the required public improvements, as specified in the conditions of a land use approval, have
not been satisfactorily completed before the application is filed for Final Plat, or building permit, the
developer may enter into a written agreement (provided by the City) with the City in a form
acceptable to the City Attorney specifying that within one (1) year (or such other period of time as
agreed upon by the parties) all public improvement work shall be completed in accord with this code
and the applicable approved improvement plans and specifications and that said developer shall
warrant the materials and workmanship of said improvements in good condition and repair for an
additional period of one (1) year from date of satisfactory completion and notification of same by the
City.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 48/49
Said agreement shall in substance provide:
(1) That if the developer shall fail to complete said public improvements in accord with the
terms of the agreement, the City may complete the same and recover full cost and expense
thereof from the developer;
(2) For the inspection of all public improvements by the City Engineer and the reimbursement
to the City of all costs of inspection;
(3) For the indemnification of the City, its councilmembers, officers, boards, commissioners and
employees from claims of any nature arising or resulting from the performance of any acts
required by the City to be done in accord therewith;
(4) As a consideration for the foregoing and any other provisions of said agreement, the City
agrees to accept the said public improvements including any easements in which they lie at
such time as the developer has fully complied with all the terms of said agreement and has
satisfactorily completed his one (1) year warranty period.
In addition to the foregoing, said agreement may contain such other and further terms, covenants,
conditions or provisions as the parties agree upon.
[Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2010-83, Apr. 15, 2010; Amd. Sec. 162, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018
(effective July 23, 2018).]
10.667 Security for Public Improvements
A. Security: The developer shall file with the agreement in Section 10.666, to secure full and faithful
performance thereof, one (1) or a combination of the following:
(1) A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the State
of Oregon, or
(2) Cash, or
(3) An irrevocable letter of credit, or assignment of deposit or loan disbursement agreement
from a bank or savings and loan association, redeemable at a location within the State of
Oregon. Any security that is not redeemable within Medford city limits shall include assurance
that it is redeemable by US Mail, delivery service, or electronic means, including but not limited
to, fax or e-mail. The security shall be in an amount approved by the City Engineer as
sufficient to cover the cost of the improvements, engineering, inspection and incidental
expenses, and must be approved by the City Attorney as to form. Such security arrangements
may provide for reduction of the amount in increments as improvements are completed and
approved by the City Engineer. However, the number of reductions or disbursements and the
amount of retainage required shall be at the discretion of the City Engineer.
Upon satisfactory completion of all improvements and acceptance thereof by the City, the amount of
the security shall be reduced to twenty percent (20%) of the original sum and shall remain in effect
until all deficiencies in construction and maintenance discovered and brought to the attention of the
developer and surety during the one (1) year warranty period have been corrected to the satisfaction
of the City Engineer.
Whenever a failure to perform under said agreement has not been corrected to the satisfaction of
the City Engineer within thirty (30) days after notice by mail to the developer and surety at the
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 49/49
addresses given in the security agreement, the City may thereafter, without further notice, declare
the security forfeited and cause all required construction, maintenance or repair to be done.
B. Security Alternative: In lieu of Section (A) above, to secure the installation of only sidewalks,
street trees and/or landscaping in park strips on lower order streets in single-family residential
development, the developer may enter into an agreement (provided by the City) which specifies that
in lieu of financial security provided in Section (A) herein, the Certificate of Occupancy shall not be
issued until the required sidewalks, street trees and/or landscaping in park strips are installed to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer. The Building Official is authorized to withhold Certificate of
Occupancy on such terms as contained in the agreement.
[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2010-83, Apr. 15, 2010; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2015-75, July 2, 2015.]
10.668 Limitation of Exactions
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter 10, an applicant for a development permit shall
not be required, as a condition of granting the application, to dedicate land for public use or provide
public improvements unless:
(1) the record shows that there is an essential nexus between the exaction and a legitimate
government purpose and that there is a rough proportionality between the burden of the
exaction on the developer and the burden of the development on public facilities and services
so that the exaction will not result in a taking of private property for public use, or
(2) a mechanism exists and funds are available to fairly compensate the applicant for the
excess burden of the exaction to the extent that it would be a taking. Provided, however, that
this section does not prohibit unconditional denial of an application where adequate public
facilities and services are not available to serve the proposed development, so long as there
are other economically viable uses of the land which are allowed by the Chapter and by the
existing zoning and which can be adequately served.
[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8257, Dec. 19, 1996.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 1/144
10 Article 5-Site Development Standards (10.700 to 10.933)
10.700 Lot Design Standards
Article V sets forth site development standards which are intended to: 1) mitigate those adverse
impacts to the community resulting from traffic, noise, glare, odor, drainage, and other typical byproducts
of development; 2) assure visual and functional compatibility between adjacent land uses;
3) assure that development meets a level of site design that promotes the safety and convenience of
the general public; and 4) establish aesthetic design standards.
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8207, Oct, 3, 1996.]
Lot design standards shall be as set forth in this Article. The arrangement of lots shall be such that
there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing
building permits to build on all lots in compliance with the requirements of this Code. To maximize
the potential for solar energy access, each lot should be oriented along a north-south axis. Building
orientation can vary up to 30 degrees from this north-south axis. The side property lines for a lot
shall be within 30 degrees of perpendicular to the street upon which the lot has frontage, except on a
curved street where the side property lines shall be within 30 degrees of radial to the curve.
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2001-205, Oct. 18, 2001.]
10.701 [Repealed, Sec. 20, Ord. No. 5820, Mar. 19, 1987.]
10.702 Lot Area and Dimensions
Each lot shall have an area, width, frontage, and depth consistent with that prescribed in this Article
for the housing type, or commercial or industrial district in which the development, or the portion
thereof, is situated, except in the following situations:
(1) Within a planned unit development , a condominium project, as defined by ORS 100.005,
or a pad lot development, as defined herein, the approving authority (Planning Commission)
may permit tax lots and common areas to be of an area, width, frontage, or depth different
from such prescribed minimum or maximum lot area or dimensions.
(2) For a condominium project, as defined by ORS 100.005, the minimum lot area and
dimensions shall apply to the parent parcel only.
(3) A new residential lot may exceed the maximum lot area only under the following
circumstances:
(a) When an existing residence and associated yard area, containing improvements and
established landscaping, occupy a larger area; or,
(b) When a portion of the lot is unbuildable for a reason beyond the control of the
developer (i.e., due to creeks, oversized easements, etc.), the additional acreage, or
fraction thereof, may not exceed the amount of unbuildable area.
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7696, July 21, 1994; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996; Amd. Sec. 3,
Ord. No. 2006-279, Dec. 7, 2006.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 2/144
10.703 Pad Lot Development
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section to provide a process for the creation of tax lots within a
common area for non-residential uses. This Section is not intended to provide relief from the strict
standards elsewhere established in this Code.
B. Development Standards.
(1) All lot-lines created within the common area shall be located along a common or exterior
building wall, or within four (4) feet of an exterior building wall, unless the approving authority
(Planning Commission) allows a greater distance for special purposes.
(2) The parent parcel shall meet the site development standards established in Section 10.721.
(3) All pad lot developments shall obtain Site Plan and Architectural Review approval prior to
the tentative plat application being accepted for review by the Planning Commission.
(4) A pad lot development shall be identified as such on both the tentative and final plats, and
on the site plan submitted for the project. At the time of recording of the final plat, Covenants,
Conditions, and Restrictions (CC&Rs) shall be approved by the City and recorded. The
recorded CC&Rs shall provide:
(a) That the owners are jointly and severally responsible for the continued maintenance
and repair of the common elements of the development, such as common portions of
buildings, parking areas, access, landscaping, etc., and share equitable in the cost of
such upkeep.
(b) An association for the purpose of governing the operation of the common interests.
(c) Maintenance access easements on individual lots where necessary for the purpose of
property maintenance and repair.
(d) The specific rights of, or limitations on, individual lot owners to modify any portion of a
building or lot, including the provision that no common elements be modified without the
consent of the association.
[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2005-97, June 2, 2005; Amd.
Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2006-279, Dec. 7, 2006.]
10.704 Through Lots
A through lot contains both a front and rear lot line abutting a street. Through lots shall be permitted
in all zones when one of the abutting streets is a collector or arterial street. The property owner shall
designate one frontage as the front yard and the other shall be the street side yard. Those yards
shall be subject to required yard standards in Sections 10.710 - 10.723.
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2002-146, Aug. 15, 2002; Amd.
Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2014-161, Dec. 22, 2014.]
10.705 Building Height and Side-Yard Determination
A. Calculation. Building height shall be determined by measuring the vertical distance from the
average contact ground level at the front wall of the building to the highest point of the roof surface
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 3/144
for flat roofs; and to the average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, mansard, and
gambrel roofs.
B. Exemptions - Building height limitations shall not apply to:
(1) Chimneys, church spires, belfries, cupolas, flag poles, antennas, support structures and
antennas for amateur radio operations (as per ORS 221.295), and other similar projections
that are accessory to the permitted use.
(2) Wireless communication transmission towers which are subject to the Special Use
Standards contained in Section 10.824.
(3) Public utility service facilities, which are subject to the Special Use Standards contained in
Section 10.830.
C. Determining Side-Yards for Detached Single-Family, Duplex Dwellings, and Townhomes..
1) Side-yards are calculated using the building height measured at the adjacent contact
ground level at the outside edges of the front wall of the building. The side-yard is measured
from property line to the nearest vertical structural element (i.e. wall or post) of any area under
roof cover.
2) The side-yard is based on the following building heights:
Table 10.705-1
Building Height Range: Required Yard:
0 – 18 feet 4 feet
19 – 22 feet 6 feet
23 –26 feet 8 feet
27 – 30 feet 10 feet
31+ feet 12 feet
Note: Height is rounded to the nearest whole number (up for numbers 0.5 and greater, and
down for numbers less than 0.5)
Note: Minimum required yards allow for a maximum one-foot eave overhang. Required yards
for buildings with an eave overhang greater than one foot shall be increased in direct
correlation. (See Section 10.707).
(Illustration at bottom of page)
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8349, May 1, 1997; Amd Sec. 2,
Ord. No. 1998-146, June 18, 1998; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2012-137, Sept. 6, 2012; Amd. Sec. 3,
Ord. No. 2013-30, Feb. 22, 2013; Amd. Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2018-133, Dec. 6, 2018.]
IMAGES FOR THIS CODE
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 4/144
(Click on an image to see a larger version)
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 5/144
10.706 Maximum Coverage Calculation
The maximum lot coverage shall be determined by multiplying the lot area by the zoning district
coverage factor (the percent of the lot area that may be covered by structures):
Formula: MC = LA(cf)
Where:
MC = Maximum coverage (in square feet)
LA = Lot area (in square feet)
cf = Coverage factor
[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996.]
10.707 Exceptions to Yard Requirements
ILLUSTRATION AT BOTTOM OF PAGE
A. General Exceptions. The following projections shall be permitted within the required yard area:
(1) Cornices, eaves, fireplaces, canopies, mechanical (heating and cooling equipment - not
located in a residential zone), or other similar architectural features may extend a maximum of
one foot into a required yard. In residential zones, mechanical (heating and cooling
equipment) is exempt from the yard requirements but shall meet Building Code standards.
(2) Open uncovered accessory structures such as fire escapes, porches, balconies, or outside
stairways may extend a maximum of one foot into the required side and rear yard and a
maximum of five feet into a required front yard. Porches, decks or stoops which are open and
uncovered and not exceeding 18 inches in height may be located within 18 inches of any lot
line.
(3) Within the commercial districts awnings shall be allowed to extend a maximum of six feet
into the required front yard.
(4) Established Neighborhoods: On a parcel where the abutting lots, adjoining the same
street, contain legally constructed buildings whose setbacks are equal to or less than that
required by the underlying zone, the front yard setback may be reduced to a distance equal to
the average setback of the abutting parcels. If one of the adjoining lots is vacant, the minimum
setback of the underlying zone shall be utilized to determine the average.
B. Exceptions for Zero Lot-Line Dwellings. A zero lot-line detached single-family dwelling on an
individual lot may deviate from the required side yard building setback by being located on one side
property line. Such a dwelling shall be permitted only when conforming with the following
requirements:
(1) The adjoining lot abutting the zero side yard setback shall be, at the time of initial
construction, under the same ownership; or the zero lot-line dwelling shall be within a land
division specifically developed for zero lot-line dwellings, thereby ensuring that the zero
setback will not adversely impact adjoining property owners.
(2) Windows in a zero lot-line dwelling shall not be located in any building wall situated on a
lot- line.
(3) A maintenance easement at least four feet in width shall be recorded on the adjoining lot
abutting the zero side yard setback.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 6/144
(4) The side yard building setback from the lot-line located opposite of the zero lot-line shall be
10 feet. Zero lot-line dwellings shall conform with all other site development standards
specified herein.
[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2012-137, Sept. 6, 2012; Amd.
Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2016-61, May 19, 2016.]
IMAGES FOR THIS CODE
(Click on an image to see a larger version)
10.708 Residential Density
The minimum and maximum number of dwelling units permitted shall be determined by multiplying
the project’s gross acreage, less non-development areas (NDAs), by the zoning district minimum and
maximum density factor, consistent with A, B, and C below.
A. Definitions.
When used in this Chapter in reference to the residential density calculations, the following terms shall have
the meaning as herein assigned:
(1) Dwelling Unit (DU). The number of dwelling units permitted. Minimum and Maximum density is
rounded to the nearest whole number (up for numbers 0.5 and greater, and down for numbers less than
0.5).
(2) Gross Area (GA). The total area of all lots within a project’s boundaries. If the project is adjacent
to an existing public street, the boundaries of the project shall be extended to the centerline of the rightof-
way, and that area within the right-of-way included in the gross area, as illustrated in Section 10.012.
(3) Non-Development Areas (NDAs). Those areas that may be removed from the density calculation, at
the discretion of the developer.
(a) Reserve acreage. That portion of the project site which is not intended to be part of the
development and can be separately developed at a later time.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 7/144
(b) Natural Unbuildable Areas. Those natural areas unsuitable for building [e.g., wetlands,
slopes over 30 percent, and creeks (from top-of-bank to top-of-bank)]. Does not include manmade
non-buildable areas such as setbacks.
(c) Oversize Residential Lots. Lots with an existing house and yard, that exceed the maximum
lot area as allowed in Section 10.702(3)(a).
(d) Stormwater Detention and Treatment Facilities, including access to the facility.
(4) Minimum Density Factor (min. df). Minimum number of dwelling units per gross acre allowed for
the zoning district, as defined in Sections 10.710 – 10.714.
(5) Maximum Density Factor (max. df.) Maximum number of dwelling units per gross acre allowed for
the zoning district, as defined in Sections 10.710 – 10.714.
B. Calculations.
The minimum and maximum number of dwelling units permitted shall be determined by multiplying the
project’s gross area, less NDAs (at the option of the developer), by the zoning district minimum and maximum
density factor.
(1) Examples:
(a) Minimum Density Calculation. The project site lies within the SFR-4 district and contains
six gross acres (GA). The developer intends to retain two acres of reserved acreage (NDA). The
minimum number of dwelling units and/or lots permitted is calculated as follows: (GA-NDA)min.
df. = (6-2)2.5 = 10
(b) Maximum Density Calculation. The project site contains six gross acres (GA) of land within
the SFR-4 district. The developer intends to retain two acres of reserved acreage (NDA). The
maximum number of dwelling units permitted is calculated as follows: (GA-NDA)max. df. = (6-2)4
= 16
C. General Exceptions to Residential Density Calculations.
(1) Multiple-Family Dwelling Units in Commercial Zoning Districts, Except Neighborhood
Commercial (C-N). The minimum density factor shall be the same as the MFR-30 zoning district, found
in Sections 10.710 – 10.713; there is no maximum density restriction.
(2) Mixed-Use Buildings. For mixed-use buildings as defined herein, in commercial zoning districts
(save for C-N), there shall be no minimum or maximum number of dwelling units required. In the
Neighborhood Commercial (C-N) zoning district, dwelling units must be located in a mixed-use
building and conform to Section 10.837.
(3) Congregate Living Facilities. For units in a congregate living facility that do not contain full
kitchen or cooking facilities, each unit may be counted as 0.7 of a dwelling unit for purposes of
calculating density. The living unit shall be counted as a full dwelling unit for purposes of calculating
the parking requirement.
(4) Parcels Under One (1) Gross Acre. For parcels under one gross acre in size, the minimum density
may be reduced by one unit without applying for an Exception.
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7612, April 7, 1994; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No.
2001-205; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2004-259, Dec. 16, 2004; Amd. Ord. No. 2009-108, June 4, 2009; Amd.
Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2009-240, Nov. 5, 2009; Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2012-137, Sept. 6, 2012; Amd. Sec. 14,
Ord. No. 2018-133, Dec. 6, 2018.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 8/144
10.709 Residential Site Development Standards by Housing Type
The following sections set forth the standards for the development of each permitted housing type by
zoning district.
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996.]
10.710 Detached Single-Family Dwellings
The following standards apply to the development of detached single-family dwellings within the
various residential districts. A manufactured home is considered a detached single-family dwelling
only if the requirements of Article V, Section 10.900 are met. See Article III, Sections 10.308 through
10.312 for detailed descriptions of each residential zoning district and density factors, and Section
10.314 for conditional, special, and permitted uses.
DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS
One detached dwelling unit per lot.

Development Standards
Standard 
SFR-00
SFR-2
SFR-4
SFR-6
SFR-10
Density
Factor Range
0.8 to 2.0
dwelling units
per gross
acre
2.5 to 4.0
dwelling
units
per gross
acre
4.0 to 6.0
dwelling units
per gross
acre
6.0 to 10.0
dwelling units
per gross acre
Minimum lot area
(Square Feet)
14,000 
6,500 
4,500 
3,600 
Maximum
Coverage Factor
(See 10.706)
40%
40% of lot
area
50% of lot area can
exceed 50% when
the building footprint
is not more than
2,000 sq. ft.
50%
Minimum Interior
Lot Width
NA
80 feet
60 feet
50 feet
40 feet
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 9/144
DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS
One detached dwelling unit per lot.
Development
Standards
SFR-00
SFR-2
SFR-4
SFR-6
SFR-10
Minimum Corner
Lot Width
NA
90 feet
70 feet
60 feet
50 feet
Minimum Lot
Depth
NA
90 feet
can count only half of an adjoining alley toward the lot depth
Minimum Lot
Frontage
NA
30 feet
EXCEPT Flag Lots which shall be 20 feet
Minimum Front
Yard Building
Setback
15 feet
EXCEPT the garage shall be a minimum of 20 feet. If the garage door is
perpendicular to the street then the minimum setback to the side wall of the
garage is 15 feet. (See Garage Setback Diagram).
Minimum Street
Side Yard
Building Setback
10 feet
EXCEPT 20 feet for vehicular entrances to garages or carports
Minimum Side
Yard Building
Setback
4 feet for 0–18 feet building height
6 feet for 19–22 feet building height
8 feet for 23–26 feet building height
10 feet for 27– 30 feet building height
12 feet for 31 feet or taller building height
Minimum Rear
Yard Building
Setback
The rear yard is equal to the greater of the side yard setbacks calculated in
§10.705(C), and not less than 4 feet. EXCEPTION: If the rear property line
abuts a collector or arterial street, or the parcel is a through lot, then the
setback is a minimum of 10 feet.
Maximum Height
(See 10.705)
35 feet
Bufferyard
Setback
8 feet from bufferyard to any doors on a dwelling unit
A detached single-family dwelling as a stand alone use is permitted in the Multiple-Family
Residential (MFR) zoning districts ONLY if the lot is nonconforming as to minimum lot area, width,
or depth. A detached single-family dwelling is permitted in the Industrial zones as caretakers
residence per Section 10.835.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 10/144
DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS
One detached dwelling unit per lot.
Development
Standards
SFR-00
SFR-2
SFR-4
SFR-6
SFR-10
The terms used herein, such as lot width, lot depth, front yard, etc., are defined in Article I,
Section 10.012.
[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 7037, Dec. 5, 1991; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7428, July 15, 1993; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 7612,
Apr. 7, 1994; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7776, Dec. 1, 1994; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 7940, Aug. 3, 1995; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord.
No. 8013, Jan. 4, 1996; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 98-56, March 19, 1998; Amd.
Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2001-205, Oct. 18, 2001; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2003-258, Sept. 18, 2003; Amd. Ord. No. 2006-65,
Mar. 16, 2006; Amd. Sec. 23, Ord. No. 2009-207, Sept. 17, 2009; Amd. Sec 3, Ord. No. 2016-61, May 19, 2016; Amd.
Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2018-133, Dec. 6, 2018.]
IMAGES FOR THIS CODE
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 11/144
(Click on an image to see a larger version)
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 12/144
10.711 [Repealed Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996.]
10.712 Townhouse Dwellings
The following standards apply to the development of townhouse (rowhouse) dwellings within various
residential districts. See Article III, Sections 10.308 through 10.312 for detailed descriptions of each
residential zoning district and density factors, and Section 10.314 for conditional, special, and
permitted uses.
In addition to the site development standards specified herein, townhouse development shall be
identified as such on both the tentative and final plats for the project. Except when the tentative plat
is in conjunction with a PUD, the tentative plat shall be accepted for review only after the project has
received approval from the approving authority. At the time of recording of the final plat, Covenants,
Conditions, and Restrictions (CC&Rs) shall be approved by the city and recorded. The recorded
CC&Rs shall provide:
(1) That the owners are jointly and severally responsible for the continued maintenance and
repair of the common elements of the development, including common portions of the
buildings, such as foundations, roofs, common walls, etc., and share equitably in the cost of
such upkeep.
(2) An association for the purpose of governing the operation of the common interests.
(3) Maintenance access easements on individual lots where necessary for the purpose of
property maintenance and repair.
(4) The specific rights of, or limitations on, individual lot owners to modify any portion of a
building or lot, including the provision that no common elements be modified without the
consent of the association.
TOWNHOUSE DWELLINGS
Three or more attached dwelling units, with each unit on a separate
tax lot, occupying the interior space from ground to roof, and having
direct access to individual private outdoor space.

DEVELOPMENT
STANDARDS 
Standard SFR-10 MFR-15 MFR-20
DENSITY
FACTOR RANGE
6.0 to 10.0
dwelling units
per gross acre
10.0 to 15.0
dwelling units
per gross acre
15.0 to 20.0
dwelling units
per gross acre
MINIMUM LOT AREA (SQUARE
FEET) 3,250 2,500 1,800 
MAXIMUM
COVERAGE
FACTOR (See
10.706) 50%
MINIMUM
INTERIOR LOT
WIDTH 25 feet 20 feet
MINIMUM
CORNER LOT
WIDTH 35 feet 30 feet
MINIMUM LOT
DEPTH 90 feet 90 feet
MINIMUM LOT
FRONTAGE
25 feet
20 feet
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 13/144
MINIMUM FRONT
YARD BUILDING
SETBACK
15 feet *
EXCEPT 20 feet for vehicular entrances to
garages or carports
MINIMUM
STREET SIDE
YARD BUILDING
SETBACK
10 feet *
EXCEPT 20 feet for vehicular entrances to
garages or carports
MINIMUM SIDE
YARD BUILDING
SETBACK (side
not attached to a
building)
4 feet for 0-18 feet building
height
6 feet for 19-22 feet building
height
8 feet for 23-26 feet building
height
10 feet for 27-30 feet building
height
12 feet for 31 feet or taller
building height
MINIMUM REAR
YARD BUILDING
SETBACK
10 feet *
10 feet *
MAXIMUM
HEIGHT (See
10.705) 35 feet
BUFFERYARD
SETBACK
8 feet from bufferyard to any doors on a
dwelling unit
* Those portions of any townhouse dwelling located within 20 feet of
any property line common with property containing single-family
zoning shall not exceed one story.
The terms used herein, such as lot width, lot depth, front yard,
etc., are defined in Article I, Section 10.012.
[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 6231, Nov. 3, 1988; Amd Sec. 4, Ord. No. 7612, April 7, 1994; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 7776, Dec. 1,
1994; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No.7940, Aug, 3, 1995; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 8013, Jan. 4, 1996; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8702,
Oct. 3, 1996; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2005-97, June 2, 2005; Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2012-137, Sept. 6, 2012; Amd. Sec.
18, Ord. No. 2013-131, Sept. 5, 2013, effective Dec. 1, 2013; Amd. Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2018-133, Dec. 6, 2018.]
10.713 Duplex Dwellings
The following standards apply to the development of duplex dwellings within the various residential
districts. See Article III, Sections 10.308 through 10.312 for detailed descriptions of each residential
zoning district and density factors, and Section 10.314 for conditional, special, and permitted uses.
DUPLEX DWELLINGS
Two attached dwelling units on an individual lot or divided by a lot-line.
DEVELOPMENT
STANDARDS
SFR-4
SFR-6
SFR-10
MFR-15
MFR-20
MFR-30
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 14/144
DUPLEX DWELLINGS
Two attached dwelling units on an individual lot or divided by a lot-line.
DEVELOPMENT
STANDARDS
SFR-4
SFR-6
SFR-10
MFR-15
MFR-20
MFR-30
Special
Standards
A duplex
SHALL be
divided by a
lot-line.
A duplex
SHALL be
divided
by a lot-line.
A duplex need
not be divided
by a lot-line.
A duplex is
permitted on a
lot if it meets the
density
calculation.
One or more duplexes are
permitted on a single site
when density is met..
Minimum and
Maximum
Density Factor
Range
(See 10.708)
2.5 to 4.0
dwelling
units per
gross acre
4.0 to 6.0
dwelling
units per
gross acre
6.0 to 10.0
dwelling
units per
gross acre
10.0 to
15.0
dwelling
units per
gross
acre
15.0 to
20.0
dwelling
units per
gross
acre
20.0 to
30.0
dwelling
units per
gross
acre
Lot Area
Range
(Square Feet)
8,500 to
18,750 each
half
6,000 to
12,500 each
half
6,000* to
12,500*
5,000* to 12,500*
Maximum
Coverage
Factor (See
10.706)
50% 50%
Minimum
Interior Lot
Width
75 feet each
half
60 feet each
half
50 feet*
Minimum
Corner Lot
Width
75 feet each
half
60 feet each
half
60 feet*
Minimum Lot
Depth
90 feet
Minimum Lot
Frontage
15 feet each half 30 feet*
Minimum Front
Yard Building
Setback
15 feet
EXCEPT the garage shall be a minimum of 20 feet. If the garage door is
perpendicular to the street then the minimum setback to the side wall of the
garage is 15 feet (see Garage Setback Diagram in Section 10.710
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 15/144
DUPLEX DWELLINGS
Two attached dwelling units on an individual lot or divided by a lot-line.
DEVELOPMENT
STANDARDS
SFR-4
SFR-6
SFR-10
MFR-15
MFR-20
MFR-30
Minimum Street
Side Yard
Building
Setback
10 feet
EXCEPT 20 feet for vehicular entrances to garages or carports
Minimum Side
Yard Building
Setback
4 feet for 0–18 feet building height
6 feet for 19–22 feet building height
8 feet for 23 –26 feet building height
10 feet for 27 –30 feet building height
12 feet for 31 feet or taller building height
Minimum Rear
Yard Building
Setback
The rear yard is equal to the greater of the side yard setbacks calculated in
§10.705(C), and not less than 4 feet. EXCEPTION: If the rear property
line abuts a collector or arterial street, or the parcel is a through lot, then
the setback is a minimum of 10 feet.
Maximum
Height (See
10.705)
35 feet
Bufferyard
Setback
8 feet from bufferyard to any doors on a dwelling unit
Where the duplex is REQUIRED to be divided by a lot-line (SFR-4 and SFR-6), THEN the
standards pertain to each half separately.
For the other zoning districts, the * indicates standards that are divided in half IF the duplex
is to be divided by a lot-line. Where the duplex is permitted without being divided by a lotline,
THEN two DETACHED dwelling units are permitted in lieu of the duplex.
The terms used herein, such as lot width, lot depth, front yard, etc., are defined in
Article I, Section 10.012.
[Amd. Sec. 21, Ord. No. 5820, March 19, 1987; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 5873, May 21, 1987; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 6231, Nov. 3, 1988; Amd. Sec.
5, Ord No. 7612, April 7, 1994; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 7776, Dec. 1, 1994; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 7940, Aug. 3, 1995; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 8013,
Jan. 4, 1996; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996; Amd. Ord. No. 2003-149, June 5, 2003; Amd. Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2012-137, Sept. 6, 2012;
Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2015-123, Dec. 17, 2015; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2016-61, May 19, 2016; Amd. Sec. 17, Ord. No. 2018-133, Dec. 6, 2018].
10.714 Multiple-Family Dwellings
The following standards apply to the development of multiple-family dwellings within the various
residential districts. See Article III, Sections 10.308 through 10.312 for detailed descriptions of each
residential zoning district and density factors, and Section 10.314 for conditional, special, and
permitted uses.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS
Three or more attached dwelling units.
DEVELOPMENT
STANDARDS
SFR-10 MFR-15 MFR-20 MFR-30
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 16/144
SPECIAL
STANDARDS
Multiple-family dwellings in SFR-10 are
permitted ONLY if the units can be individually
owned
MINIMUM AND
MAXIMUM
DENSITY
FACTOR
RANGE (See
10.708)
6.0 to
10.0
dwelling
units per
gross acre
10.0 to
15.0
dwelling
units per
gross
acre
15.0 to
20.0
dwelling
units per
gross
acre
20.0 to
30.0dwelling
units per
gross acre
MINIMUM LOT
AREA
(SQUARE
FEET) 15,000 9,000 8,000
MAXIMUM
COVERAGE
FACTOR (See
10.707) 50% 50%
MINIMUM
INTERIOR LOT
WIDTH 80 feet
MINIMUM
CORNER LOT
WIDTH 90 feet
MINIMUM LOT
DEPTH 120 feet 100 feet
MINIMUM LOT
FRONTAGE
30 feet
MINIMUM
FRONT YARD
SETBACK
20 feet *
EXCEPT 15 feet IF vehicular access to the
garage is parallel to the street
MINIMUM
STREET SIDE
YARD
SETBACK
15 feet *
EXCEPT
20 feet for
vehicular
entrances
to
garages
or
carports
10 feet *
EXCEPT 20 feet for
vehicular entrances to garages or
carports
MINIMUM SIDE
YARD
SETBACK 10 feet *
4 feet PLUS 1/2 foot for each foot
in building height over 15 feet *
MINIMUM REAR
YARD
SETBACK 20 feet
4 feet PLUS 1/2 foot for each foot
in building height
over 15 feet EXCEPT 10 feet IF
the rear property line
abuts a collector or arterial street *
MAXIMUM
HEIGHT (See
10.705) 35 feet
BUFFERYARD
SETBACK
8 feet from bufferyard to any doors on a
dwelling unit
Those portions of any multiple-family dwelling located within 20
feet of any property line common with property containing singlefamily
zoning shall not exceed one story.
The terms used herein, such as lot width, lot depth, front
yard, etc., are defined in Article I, Section 10.012.
[Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 6231, Nov. 3, 1988; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 7612, April 7, 1994; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 7776, Dec. 1,
1994; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 7940, Aug. 3, 1995.; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord, No. 8013, Jan. 4, 1996; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8207,
Oct. 3, 1996; Amd. Sec. 18, Ord. No. 2018-133, Dec. 6, 2018.]
10.715 [Repealed, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 17/144
10.715A Multiple-Family Dwellings, Special Development Standards, Purpose
The purpose of Sections 10.717 through 10.719 is to establish a series of clear and objective
standards for multiple-family dwellings in order to:
(a) Enhance the visual character and livability of the community;
(b) Promote building and site design that contributes positively to a sense of neighborhood and
to the overall streetscape.
This purpose statement is not intended to create an independent basis for denying a multiple-family
dwelling project that meets all clear and objective standards.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2018-100, Sept. 6, 2018.]
10.716 [Repealed, Sec, 1, Ord. No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996.]
10.716A Multiple-Family Dwelling, Special Development Standards, Applicability
A. The requirements of Sections 10.717 through 10.719 shall apply to all multiple-family dwellings
consisting of three or more attached dwelling units.
B. Unless otherwise specified, any applicant that affirmatively elects to deviate from these
requirements shall be subject to the subjective standards provided for in MLDC Section 10.719.
[Added Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2018-100, Sept. 6, 2018.]
10.717 Multiple-Family Dwellings, Special Development Standards
A. Building Orientation and Entrances.
(1) Buildings shall be oriented to public streets and public street intersections.
(2) Buildings located at intersections shall incorporate a corner building entrance.
(3) For buildings located within 30 feet of a street, the main entrance(s) of ground floor units
must face the street frontage.Main entrances may provide access to individual units, clusters
of units, courtyard dwellings, or common lobbies.Deviations from this standard are allowed as
follows:
(a) On corner lots the main building entrance(s) may face either of the streets or be
oriented to the corner.
(b) For buildings with more than one entrance serving multiple units, only one entrance
must meet this standard.
(c) For buildings proposed to be perpendicular to public streets due to access
requirements and/or dimensional constraints not created by the applicant, main entries
may face up to 90 degrees away from the street provided both of the following apply:
i. They are visible from the street.
ii. The building side facing the street shall contain windows occupying a minimum of
15% of the overall facade length.
B. Building Mass and Facade.
(1) Outside of the Central Business Overlay District, residential buildings located within 30 feet
of a street shall be limited in length to 150 feet, and any other residential buildings on the site
shall be limited in length to 200 feet.There is no maximum building length within the Central
Business Overlay District.
(2) On buildings greater than three stories in height, all facades shall be divided into three
elements (base, middle, and top) and visibly articulated to define each element.
(a) The building base consists of the lowermost floor or two floors.The building top
consists of the uppermost floor or two floors.The building middle consists of the
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 18/144
remainder of the facade between the base and the top.
(b) The building base, middle, and top shall each be differentiated through horizontal
articulation and/or a discernible change in materials.
(3) Street-facing facades shall contain windows covering a minimum of 15% of the façade
length on each floor level.
C. Building Articulation.
(1) In order to preclude long expanses of uninterrupted wall surfaces, exterior elevations of
buildings shall incorporate design features such as off-sets, projections, balconies, bays,
windows, entries, porches, porticos, or similar elements.Rear and/or side elevations that are
only visible from the interior of the site are not subject to these articulation requirements.
(a) Horizontal surface: at least two of the design features outlined above shall be
incorporated along the horizontal face of the building, to be repeated at intervals of no
more than 40 feet.
(b) Vertical surface:at least two of the design features outlined above shall be
incorporated along the vertical face of the building, to be repeated at intervals of no more
than 30 feet.
(2) When off-sets and projections are used to fulfill articulation requirements, they shall vary
from other wall surfaces by a minimum of 2 feet, and such changes in plane shall have a
minimum width of 6 feet.
(3) Individual and common entries shall be articulated by roofs, awnings, or porticos that are a
minimum of 6 feet wide and 4 feet deep.
(4) Windows shall be inset a minimum of 3 inches from the adjacent wall plane, or fully
surrounded by trim in order to create the necessary minimum inset depth of 3 inches.
D. Building Materials.
(1) The following primary building materials shall be utilized on a minimum of 65% of the
street-facing facade:
(a) Brick;
(b) Stone
(c) Stucco;
(d) Flat metal composite panels;
(e) Wood siding and wood simulation materials;
(f) Fiber reinforced cement siding or panels;
(g) Ceramic tile; and
(h) Transparent glass.
(2) The following building materials shall not be allowed on more than 35% of each individual
facade:
(a) Corrugated metal;
(b) Plain or split-faced concrete block;
(c) Plain concrete; and
(d) Spandrel glass.
(3) Vertical changes in wall cladding materials shall take place on inside corners.Horizontal
changes in wall cladding materials shall take place at cornices, belt courses, and other such
horizontal elements.
(4) The following building materials are prohibited:
(a) Vinyl siding; and
(b) Plywood siding (e.g. T1-11).
(5) Fencing materials shall be durable, maintainable, and attractive.The following fencing
materials are prohibited:
(a) Plastic or vinyl fencing; and
(b) Chain link fencing.
E. Roof Forms.
(1) All sloped roofs shall have a minimum 4:12 pitch.
(2) All sloped roofs shall have eaves projecting a minimum of 12 inches from the building wall.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 19/144
(3) All roofs with a slope of less than 4:12 pitch shall be articulated by a parapet wall projecting
a minimum of 12 inches above the roof line, or be architecturally treated such as with a
decorative cornice.
F. Vehicle Circulation and Parking.
(1) In order to strengthen the presence of buildings on the street, no parking spaces shall be
located within any required front yard area, and no automobile circulation or parking areas
shall be located between buildings and the street. Any proposed deviation from this standard
shall be subject to a request for an Exception as outlined in Section 10.186.
[Added Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2018-100, Sept. 6. 2018.]
10.718 Optional Adjustment of Special Development Standards, Purpose
The purpose of this section is to create a mechanism for an applicant to seek approval of innovative
and/or unconventional residential designs that may not precisely satisfy the clear and objective
design standards set forth in Sections 10.715A through 10.717(E). This section is not meant to
supersede the clear and objective standards set forth above unless an applicant affirmatively elects
to request review under this section.
[Added Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2018-100, Sept. 6, 2018.]
10.719 Optional Adjustment of Special Development Standards, Review Criteria
A. Notwithstanding Sections 10.715A through 10.717, if an applicant affirmatively elects to request
review (in writing) under this section, the Site Plan and Architectural Commission may approve a site
plan and architectural review application for a multiple-family dwelling development if it can find that
the proposed development conforms, or can be made to conform through the imposition of
conditions, with the following criteria:
(a) The requested adjustment will allow the project to achieve an equivalent or higher quality
design than would otherwise result through strict adherence to the standards, through
architectural massing, features or details to distinguish elements of the building; vibrant
facades with visual detail; and enhanced public and private spaces that contribute positively to
the site, streetscape, and adjoining properties; and
(b) The requested adjustment will allow the project to achieve an equivalent or higher quality
design than would otherwise result through strict adherence to the standards through an
overall site design that promotes safety, security, and privacy, and reduces visual, noise, and
lighting impacts of the development on adjacent properties.
B. Denial of the application. If the Site Plan and Architectural Commission finds that an application
for residential development reviewed under this section does not satisfy the conditions of 10.719A,
the Site Plan and Architectural Commission shall also review the
application as set forth in Sections 10.715A through 10.717. If the application does not satisfy the
requirements of Sections 10.715A through 10.717 either, the Site Plan and Architectural
Commission shall make such findings on the record.
[Added Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2018-100, Sept. 6, 2018.]
10.720 Public Parks Site Development Standards
The following standards apply to the Public Parks and development.
PUBLIC PARKS SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 20/144
Development
Standards
Parks
PUBLIC PARKS SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Development
Standards
Parks
Minimum and
Maximum Area for
Zoning
(Acres)
None
Lot Area Range
(Square Feet)
Maximum Coverage
Factor (See 10.706)
Minimum Lot Width
Minimum Lot Depth
Minimum Lot
Frontage
Minimum Front &
Street Side Yard
Building Setback
10 feet, except 20 feet for vehicular entrances to garages or carports
Minimum Side & Rear
Yard Building Setback
4 feet except ½ foot for each foot in building height over 20 feet
Maximum Building
Height
(See 10.705)
35 feet
(may be up to 55 feet if approved through the applicable land use review
process)
Courts for volleyball, basketball, tennis, or other noise producing sport activity must be located 50
feet from the nearest residential property unless the approving authority determines it is
unnecessary.
The terms used herein, such as lot width, lot depth, front yard, etc., are defined in Article I, Section
10.012.
[Added Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2018-52 June 7, 2018 (effective July 9, 2018).]
10.721 Commercial and Industrial Site Development Standards
The following standards apply to commercial and industrial development. See Article III, Sections
10.326 through 10.332 for detailed descriptions of each zoning district, and Section 10.337 for
conditional, special, and permitted uses.
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT
DEVELOPMENT
STANDARDS C-N
CS/
P C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
MINIMUM &
MAXIMUM
AREA FOR
ZONING
DISTRICT
(ACRES)
0.5
-3.0 None
MINIMUM LOT 7,000 15,000 7,000 20,000 10,000
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 21/144
AREA
(SQUARE
FEET)
MAXIMUM
COVERAGE
FACTOR (See
10.706) 30% 40% 60% 50% 90%
MINIMUM LOT
WIDTH 70 feet
MINIMUM LOT
DEPTH 100 feet
MINIMUM LOT
FRONTAGE
70
feet
30
feet 70 feet
30
feet 70 feet
MINIMUM
FRONT &
STREET SIDE
YARD
BUILDING
SETBACK
10 feet
EXCEPT 20 feet for vehicular entrances to garages or
carports
MINIMUM SIDE
AND REAR
YARD
BUILDING
SETBACK
None
EXCEPT 1/2 foot for each foot in building height over
20 feet
MAXIMUM
BUILDING
HEIGHT (See
10.705)
35
feet
85 feet
EXCEPT 35 feet if
structure is within
150 feet of a
residential zoning
district boundary or
Special Area Plan
designation.
35
feet
85 feet
EXCEPT 35 feet if
structure is within
150 feet of a
residential zoning
district boundary
or Special Area
Plan designation
MAXIMUM
GROSS FLOOR
AREA PER
BUSINESS
(SQUARE
FEET) EXCEPT
as noted in
10.337 2,500 None 50,000 None
PERMITTED
OUTDOOR
USES
See
Note
1 See Note 2 See Note 3
Note 1: All uses must be located completely within an enclosed building
or behind a sight-obscuring fence.
Note 2: All uses, EXCEPT those customarily conducted outdoors, must
be located completely within an enclosed building.
Note 3: All uses, EXCEPT those customarily conducted outdoors, must
be located behind a sight-obscuring fence.
The terms used herein, such as lot width, lot depth, front yard, etc., are
defined in Article I, Section 10.012.
[Amd. Sec. 22, Ord. No. 5820, Mar. 19, 1987; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 5873, May 21, 1987; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 5986, Oct.
1, 1987; Amd. Ord. No. 6564, March 1, 1990; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 7786, Dec. 15, 1994; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 7940,
Aug. 3, 1995; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8010, Dec. 21, 1995; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8207, Oct. 3, 1996; Amd. Sec. 13, Ord.
No. 8285, Feb. 6, 1997; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2008-247, Dec. 4, 2008; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2014-161, Dec. 22, 2014.]
10.722 Large Retail Structures, Purpose
(1) The purpose of Sections 10.722 through 10.725 is to establish development standards for large
retail structures that result in
(a) greater visual design interest; and
(b) pedestrian-oriented site design.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 22/144
(2) The approving authority has the discretion to allow modifications to the standards set forth in
Section 10.725 if the approving authority adopts findings to support that any proposed modifications
satisfy subsections (1)(a) and (1)(b) above.
[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2008-06, Jan. 3, 2008].
10.723 Large Retail Structures, Definitions
When used in this Chapter in reference to large retail structures, the following terms shall have the
meanings as herein ascribed:
Architectural projections. Portions of a building wall that are extended so as to create articulation
of the exterior building wall.
Architectural recesses. Portions of a building wall that are set back so as to create articulation of
the exterior building wall.
Building façade. Any exposed exterior wall of a building.
Business. Commercial establishment.
Large retail structure. A retail structure whose footprint is at least 50,000 square feet.
Large retail structure complex. A site containing at least one (1) large retail structure and one or
more businesses or services in separate buildings.
Retail structure. A structure in which sixty percent (60%) or more of the gross floor area is devoted
to the sale or rental of goods, including stocking, or to services incidental to the sale or rental of such
goods. A retail structure may contain one (1) or more retail businesses.
Service drive. A secondary means of vehicular access for purposes of shipping, receiving and
employee access.
Storefront. The building façade that contains the public entrance. In buildings with multiple
businesses, the storefront shall mean the length of the façade containing the public entrance for a
particular business.
Transparent windows. Clear or lightly tinted windows that allow views into the structure or into
display windows from the outside.
[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-06, Jan. 3, 2008.]
10.724 Large Retail Structures, Applicability
A. The requirements of Sections 10.722 through 10.725 shall apply to:
(1) New construction of a retail structure as defined herein, the footprint of which is at least
50,000 square feet; and,
(2) A large retail structure created by construction which represents a fifty percent (50%) or
greater increase in building footprint and results in a footprint of at least 50,000 square feet.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 23/144
(3) A large retail structure comprised of two (2) or more abutting buildings which have a
common wall, roof or foundation, and whose combined footprint is at least 50,000 square feet.
(4) A large retail structure comprised of two (2) or more abutting and structurally independent
buildings which appear to be a single building and whose combined footprint is at least 50,000
square feet.
B. When overlay zoning district provisions differ from the standards of Section 10.722 through
10.725, the overlay zoning district provisions shall take precedence.
[Added, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2008-06, Jan. 3, 2008.]
10.725 Large Retail Structures, Special Development Standards
A. Building Facades.
(1) Architectural Projections or Recesses. With the exception of building facades less than one
hundred seventy-five (175) feet long with off-street truck loading facilities, abutting building
facades separated by a service drive, and facades abutting service drives and not visible from
any public or private street, building facades greater than one-hundred (100) feet in length
measured horizontally shall include architectural projections or recesses having a depth of at
least three percent (3%) of the length of the façade and extending for at least twenty percent
(20%) of the length of the façade. Such architectural features shall be incorporated into
building façade design at least every one-hundred (100) horizontal feet. (See Figure 10.725-1)
(2) Animating Features. With the exception of building facades with off-street truck loading
facilities and abutting building facades separated by a service drive, building facades visible
from planned or existing streets, plazas or parking shall have covered walkways, transparent
windows, entrances, awnings, or other such features along at least sixty percent (60%) of their
horizontal length. (See Figure 10.725-2) The design of building facades visible from planned
or existing streets, plazas or parking, and those with public entrances, shall contain at least
one (1) feature from a minimum of three (3) of the following groups:
Group 1 (a) Canopies, awnings, or porticos
(b) Overhangs
Group 2 (a) Recesses, projections
(b) Architectural details, such as tile and moldings that are
integrated into the building structure and design
(c) Transparent windows, display windows
Group 3 (a) Covered walkways
(b) Arches
Group 4 (a) Raised corniced parapets over public entrances
(b) Peaked roofs
(3) Windows. When large retail structures contain (1) or more businesses of less than 50,000
square feet of gross ground floor area with separate exterior entrances, each such business
shall have transparent windows along at least fifty percent (50%) of the horizontal length of its
storefront. The bottom of the windows shall be no more than four (4) feet above the adjacent
exterior grade.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 24/144
(4) Repeating Elements. All building facades shall include a repeating element that includes at
least three (3) of the following elements, one of which shall repeat horizontally:
(a) Color change
(b) Texture change
(c) Material change
(d) Architectural or structural bays provided through a change in plane of at least twelve
(12) inches in width, such as an offset, reveal or projecting rib. (See Figure 10.725-3.)
(5) Materials and Colors.
(a) At least seventy-five percent (75%) of exterior building materials shall include brick,
cedar shakes or shingles, beveled or shiplap siding, or other narrow-course horizontal
boards or siding, vertical board and batten siding, durable stucco, rock, stone, or tinted
and textured concrete masonry units. Other materials may be permitted if authorized by
the approving authority.
(b) Exterior building materials shall not include: smooth-faced concrete masonry units
(except for limited accent purposes); smooth-faced tilt-up concrete panels; or
unarticulated board siding (e.g., T1-11 siding, plain plywood, sheet pressboard).
(6) Entrances.
Each large retail structure shall have at least one (1) clearly visible and architecturally
prominent public entrance.
B. Roof Features.
Roofs shall have no less than two (2) of the following features:
(1) Parapets;
(2) Overhanging eaves or cornices, extending at least three (3) feet past the supporting walls;
(3) Sloping roofs with a roof plane of between 1:3 and 1:1 slope.
C. Site Design.
(1) Buffering. Where a lot(s) containing a large retail structure or a large retail structure
complex abuts land zoned for residential uses and no public street separates the residential
zoned land from the lot(s), a Type B bufferyard, as described in Section 10.790.E, shall be
installed between the lot(s) and residential zoned land.
(2) Pedestrian Walkways. In addition to the standards of Sections 10.773, Pedestrian Walkway
Connections and Routing and 10.775, Pedestrian Walkway Design Standards, the following
shall apply:
(a) Continuous pedestrian walkways shall be provided from the public sidewalk or rightof-
way to the principal public entrance(s) of all large retail structures. With the exception
of walkways located within structures, these pedestrian walkways shall feature abutting
landscaped areas that include trees, shrubs, benches, planting beds, live ground covers,
or other such plantings or features for no less than fifty percent (50%) of the length of the
walkway.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 25/144
(b) Continuous pedestrian walkways shall be provided along the full length of any
building facade featuring a public entrance, and along any building facade abutting public
parking areas. Such walkways shall be located at least six (6) feet from the building
façade, with planting beds for foundation landscaping included between the building
façade and the walkway, except where features such as covered entrances are part of
the building facade.
(c) Pedestrian walkways provided in conformance with (b) above shall include weather
protection features such as awnings within thirty (30) feet of all customer entrances.
(d) Pedestrian walkways crossing driving surfaces shall be distinguished from driving
surfaces through the use of durable, low maintenance surface materials such as pavers,
bricks or stamped concrete.
(3) Parking. Parking spaces shall be provided as in Section 10.743, Off-Street Parking
Standards.
(4) Public Plaza.
(a) Each large retail structure shall provide a public plaza, as defined in Section 10.012
Definitions, Specific. The public plaza is intended to attract tenants and to provide the
community with a pleasant, comfortable place to rest and interact.
(b) In addition to the requirements for public plazas in Section 10.012, Definitions,
Specific, public plazas provided by large retail structures shall comply with the following
provisions:
i. Seating areas shall be provided in the public plaza and shall be shaded with
trees, cloth canopies, or structures over fifty percent (50%) of their area.
ii. A minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the public plaza shall be landscaped with
live plantings subject to the landscape and irrigation requirements in Section
10.780, General Landscape and Irrigation Requirements.
iii. Abutting large retail structures may connect their public plaza areas.
(c) Each public plaza shall have focal points and/or other amenities. The focal points and
other amenities shall be constructed of materials that are equal or superior to the
principal materials of the building and landscaping. Focal points and/or amenities may
include the following:
i. An outdoor playground with safe play structures for children;
ii. A water feature, clock tower, or similar focal feature;
iii. A covered community bulletin board (kiosk);
iv. Art works;
v. Space for small or temporary food vendors.
[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2008-06, Jan. 3, 2008; Amd. Ord. No. 2008-46, March 6, 2008; Amd. Sec.
5, Ord. No. 2009-77, Apr. 16, 2009; Amd. Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2012-137, Sept. 6, 2012.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 26/144
IMAGES FOR THIS CODE
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 27/144
(Click on an image to see a larger version)
10.727 Excavation and Grading Permit
When an excavation and grading permit is required by this Chapter or by Chapter 9, the application for the
permit shall be reviewed and approved by the City of Medford Building Safety Director or designee. When a
permit is required, no grading or excavation shall occur prior to issuance. The permit shll not be issued until a
grading plan pursuant to Section 10.728 has been reviewed and approved. Additional supporting data
consisting of a soils engineering report and engineering geology report may also be required. The plans and
specifications shall be signed and prepared by a registered engineer.
[Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2009-193, Aug. 20, 2009, effective Oct. 15, 2009.]
10.728 Information to be Conveyed on the Grading Plan and in the Specifications
The proposed grading and drainage plan shall include the following information:
(1) The general location of the work to be shown on a vicinity map.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 28/144
(2) The name and address of the owner/developer and the person who prepared the plans.
The legal description for the property shall also be included.
(3) Property limits and accurate contours of the existing terrain, utilizing contours at two-foot
(2') intervals for slopes of less than fifteen percent (15%) and ten-foot (10') intervals for slopes
exceeding fifteen percent (15%) and the location of existing drainage and direction of flow.
(4) The plan shall also indicate, when applicable, all existing wetlands, existing natural
streams, intermittent and permanent; areas of high, moderate and slight stability hazard;
excessively steep slopes (15% to 35% & 35% and greater); flood-prone areas and designated
flood plains, showing elevations of the 100-year flood and poorly drained areas; and areas
previously used as a land fill.
(5) Street improvements and existing and proposed public storm water facilities.
(6) Finished contours to be achieved by the grading along with the proposed drainage
channels and related construction. Areas of cut and fill shall be identified in a manner to be
easily identifiable.
(7) For grading and drainage plans concerning land development, the proposed lot
configurations with finished elevations at all corners are to be shown. Proposed contours will
indicate necessary grading for street improvements, delineating edge of earth work for
sidewalk construction.
(8) Detailed plans of all subsurface and surface drainage devices, walls, cribbing, dams, and
other protective devices to be constructed with, or as part of the proposed work.
(9) Location of any existing or proposed buildings or structures, including retaining walls, on
the property where the work is to be performed, and the location of any proposed or existing
buildings or structures, including retaining walls, on land adjacent to the project which are
within 15 feet of any area affected by the proposed grading operations.
(10) Specifications shall contain information covering construction and material requirements;
describing, but not limited to, soil compaction requirements, measures to mitigate soil erosion
along with the background computations made for the sizing of drainage facilities. The
specifications shall describe the maintenance responsibilities of all private storm water
systems.
(11) Plans for depositing the excavated soil at a particular on-site location or transporting it
from the site.
[Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2009-193, Aug. 20, 2009, effective Oct. 15, 2009.]
10.729 Stormwater Quality and Detention Facilities, Private Property
A. Purpose. It is the City’s policy to maintain the natural hydrology and preserve water quality by
mitigating the direct impacts of new development and preserving the environmental benefits of
natural water bodies.
B. Applicability. Stormwater quality and detention facilities shall be required for development and
building permits, with the exception of single-family residences and duplexes, which meet any one
(1) of the following conditions
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 29/144
(1) Building permits for development that creates 5,000 square feet or more impervious
surface; or
(2) Building permits for development that adds or reconstructs 1,000 square feet or more of
impervious surface, if that construction activity is part of a larger common plan of development
that contains, or will contain, 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface. A "common plan
of development" means the overall plan for development of land, including any pre-existing
development and approved plans for future development; or
(3) Building permits for development that existed prior to adoption of City regulations requiring
stormwater detention facilities that add or reconstruct 1,000 square feet or more of impervious
surface. These shall provide stormwater detention for only the added or reconstructed portion;
or
(4) Subdivisions, partitions, or PUDs which will contain new private streets, Minimum Access
Easements, or other easements creating 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface.
C. Location. Stormwater detention facilities for development that does not include public rights-ofway,
as per Section 10.486, shall be constructed on private property.
D. Construction and Maintenance Standards.
(1) Stormwater detention facilities shall be constructed in conformance with Section 10.481,
Improvement Standards Adopted.
(2) Stormwater detention facilities for development that does not include public rights-of-way
shall be privately maintained and shall have an Operation and Maintenance Plan approved by
the City prior to construction of the facility. An approved form of the Operation and
Maintenance Plan is located in Appendix of the current adopted version of the Rogue Valley
Stormwater Quality Design Manual.
(3) When the property owner will not be responsible for maintenance of the private stormwater
detention facility or when there will be multiple responsible parties, an Operation and
Maintenance Agreement, in a form acceptable to the Public Works Department and the City
Attorney, shall be required, in addition to the Operation and Maintenance Plan.
[Added, Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2009-240, Nov. 5, 2009.]
10.731 General Provisions
Every fence shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and shall not be allowed to
become and remain in a condition of disrepair. Any fence which is, or has become, dangerous to the
public safety, health, or welfare shall be considered a violation of this chapter. Barbed wire fencing
and other fences constructed of sharp materials shall only be permitted in commercial or industrial
zoning districts. Wood picket fences are permitted in all districts.
10.732 Fencing of Lots
(1) Fencing located within the front yard setback area of all zones, except the MFR zone, shall not
exceed three (3) feet in height when measured from the grade of the street centerline. When within a
MFR zone, a fence shall not exceed three (3) feet in height when located within ten (10) feet of a
street right-of-way unless otherwise approved by the approving authority. (Effective Dec. 1, 2013.)
(2) Fencing located in the side or rear yards (when not a through-lot) shall not exceed eight (8) feet
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 30/144
in height. Height shall be measured as follows:
(a) In required yards abutting a street, it shall be the effective height measured from the
finished grade on the side nearest the street.
(b) In other required yards, it shall be measured from the highest adjacent finished ground
level.
(3) No fencing shall conflict with the site distance requirements of Section 10.735, Clear View of
Intersecting Streets.
(4) All fencing shall comply with Section 9.560, Hazardous Fences Prohibited, of the City Code.
(5) Gates on primary vehicle entrances adjacent to public streets shall be set back a minimum of 20
feet from the right-of-way. Gates on secondary entrances (e.g., stored vehicles, etc.) may be set
back less than 20 feet if approved by the Engineering Division. Gates provided with a remotely
operated opening mechanism may be set back 20 feet from the nearest existing or planned
vehicular travel lane as determined by the City Engineer.
[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 7786, Dec. 15, 1994; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 7940, Aug. 3, 1995; Amd. Sec.
2, Ord. No. 8010, Dec. 21, 1995; Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 8013, Jan. 4, 1996; Amd. Sec. 19, Ord.
No. 2013-131, Sept. 5, 2013; Amd. Sec. 19, Ord. No. 2018-133, Dec. 6, 2018.]
10.733 Exceptions to Fencing Height
Where parking, loading, storage, or similar areas are located above finished grade, the height of
fences, walls, or landscaping required to screen such areas or space shall be measured above the
level thereof.
10.735 Clear View of Intersecting Streets
(1) In order to provide a clear view of intersecting streets, there shall be a triangular area of clear
vision formed where a street intersects with another street, driveway, or alley.
(2) The size of the triangular area is a function of traffic control, volume and speed. See Table
10.735-1 below for posted speeds and site distances.
(3) On any portion of a lot that lies within the triangular area described and illustrated in Figures
10.735-1 & 2, below, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner
as to impede vision between a height of three (3) feet and ten (10) feet above the height of the top of
the curb. Where there is no curb, the height shall be measured from the street center lines.
(4) The triangular area of clear vision shall be determined based upon the type of stop control used
at the subject intersection.
(a) The clear vision triangular area for an intersection of a street without stop control is shown in
Figure 10.735-1. See Table 10.735-2 below for determining all other curb line distances.
Figure 10.735-1 Clear Vision Triangle for an Intersection without Stop Control - SEE BELOW
Figure 10.735-2 Clear Vision Triangle for an Intersection with Stop Control - SEE BELOW
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 31/144
(b) The clear vision triangle area for an intersection of a street, alley or driveway with stop control is
shown in Figure 10.735-2.
(c) Stop controlled intersections include driveways, alleys, and intersections with signals or stop
signs.
Table 10.735-1 Intersection Site Distance
Posted Speed Limit Intersection Sight Distance (ft.)
20 115
25 155
30 200
35 250
40 305
45 360
50 425
55 495
(d) On one-way streets, the clear vision triangle may be reduced or deleted on the down-stream
side of the intersection with approval of the Director of Public Works or designee.
(e) For alleys and streets with no curb in place, the anticipated location of the curb at full street
build-out as per the current City of Medford Transportation System Plan (TSP) shall be used. Table
10.735-2 specifies the distance the curb would be expected from the right-of-way line.
Table 10.735-2 Planned Distance from the Right-of-Way Line to Curb Line For Different Street
Classifications
Street Type Right-of-Way Width
(ft.)
Distance Curb is to be Located From Edge of Rightof-
Way (ft.)
Major Arterial 100 ft. 15 ft.
Minor Arterial 78 ft. 15 ft.
Major Collector 74 ft. 15 ft.
Minor Collector 72 ft. 13.5 ft.
Commercial 63 ft. 13.5 ft.
Industrial 80 ft. 13.5 ft.
Standard
Residential 63 ft. 13.5 ft.
Minor Residential 55 ft. 13.5 ft.
Residential Lane 30 ft. 3 ft.
Alley Varies 0
(5) The preceding provisions (1) through (4) of this Section shall not apply to the following:
(a) A public utility pole;
(b) A tree trimmed (to the trunk) to a line at least eight feet above the level of the intersection;
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 32/144
(c) Another plant species, other than trees of open growth habit, that is not planted in the form of a
hedge, and which is so planted and trimmed as to leave, at all seasons, a clear and unobstructed
cross-view;
(d) A supporting member or appurtenance to a permanent building lawfully existing on the date this
standard became effective;
(e) An official warning sign or signal;
(f) A place where the natural contour of the ground is such that there can be no cross-visibility at the
intersection.
[Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2008-70, Apr. 17, 2008; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2011-32, Mar. 3, 2011.]
IMAGES FOR THIS CODE
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 33/144
(Click on an image to see a larger version)
10.741 Parking and Loading, General Provisions
A. Off-Street Parking and Loading.
(1) A development permit shall not be issued until plans and evidence are presented to show
how the parking and loading requirements are to be fulfilled and that property is and will be
available for exclusive use as parking and loading space.
Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided and maintained as set forth in Sections
10.741 - 10.745 for all uses in all zoning districts.
(2) Such off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided at the time a certificate of
occupancy is issued for a new building or the expansion of an existing building.
Any use requiring one-half (1/2) or more of a parking or loading space shall be deemed to
require the full space.
Parking and loading spaces provided to meet the requirements of this code shall not be
reduced in size or number to an amount less than required by this code for the use occupying
the building or site.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 34/144
The provision and maintenance of off-street parking and loading spaces is a continuing
obligation of the property owner.
In the case of mixed uses, the total requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be the
sum of the requirements for the various uses computed separately.
Required parking spaces shall be available for the parking of operable automobiles of
residents, customers and employees and shall not be used for the storage of vehicles or
materials or for the parking of trucks used in conducting the business or use. A required
loading space shall not be used for any purpose other than the immediate loading or unloading
of goods.
B. Change of Use Parking and Loading Requirements.
The number of parking and loading spaces provided shall be increased when a change of use of
either a structure or of land requires additional parking and loading spaces in compliance with this
Code, except as provided below. Parking and loading spaces may be decreased when a change of
use requires fewer spaces than originally provided.
A principal use which is not deficient in the number of parking and loading spaces provided may
expand without having to provide additional parking and loading spaces under certain
circumstances. Such circumstances are: (1) When after the expansion or change in use, the
number of parking and loading spaces provided still meets or exceeds the required minimum or, (2)
If the expansion or change in use results in the need to provide no greater than twenty-five percent
(25%) additional parking and/or loading spaces in order to meet the minimum number of required
spaces, these additional spaces are waived.
C. Parking and Loading Plan.
A parking plan, drawn to scale, shall accompany development permit applications for all
developments excluding those for single and two-family dwellings. The parking plan shall show all
those elements necessary to indicate that the requirements of this Code will be fulfilled and shall
include, but are not limited to:
(1) Delineation and typical dimensions of individual parking and loading spaces;
(2) Dimensions of the circulation and maneuvering areas necessary to serve parking and
loading spaces;
(3) Access to streets, alleys and proper ties to be served;
(4) Curb cuts;
(5) Type of fencing or other screening materials;
(6) Abutting land uses;
(7) Grading, drainage, surfacing and subgrading details;
(8) Location, height, and candlepower of lighting fixtures;
(9) Delineations of all structures and other obstacles to parking and circulation on the site;
(10) Specifications as to signs and bumper guards, and
(11) Parking lot landscaping plan.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 35/144
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2009-77, Apr. 16, 2009.]
10.742 Off-Street Loading Standards
(1) Types of Loading Berths; Design. Required off-street loading space shall be provided in berths
which conform to the following minimum specifications.
(a) Type "A" berths shall be at least 60 feet long by 12 feet wide by 15 feet high, inside
dimensions with a 60-foot maneuvering apron.
(b) Type "B" berths shall be at least 30 feet long by 12 feet wide by 14 feet 6 inches high,
inside dimensions with 30-foot maneuvering apron.
(2) Number of Loading Spaces Required: The following numbers and types of berths shall be
provided for the specified uses. The uses specified below shall include all structures designed,
intended or arranged for such use.
Use Gross Floor
Area (sq. ft.)
Berths
Required
Type
a. Freight terminals
industrial plants,
manufacturing or
wholesale
establish
ments,
warehouses
12,000 - 36,000
36,000 - 60,000
60,000 -
100,000
each additional
50,000 or
fraction thereof
1
2
3
1
additional
A
A
A
A
b. Motel,
convention
halls, multi-family
dwellings or sports
arenas
25,000 -
150,000
150,000 -
400,000
each additional
250,000 or
fraction
thereof
1
2
1
additional
B
B
B
c. Multi-Family
(Central Business
District)*
more than
25,000
Minimum
1
B
d. Hospital,
convalescent
homes and similar
institutional uses
10,000 -
100,000
over 100,000
1
2
B
B
*Adequate loading spaces shall be provided so that a minimum of one space shall be provided to serve all dwellings within
an improved walking distance of 250 feet, excluding vertical distances being served by an elevator.
Use Gross Floor
Area (sq. ft.)
Berths
Required
Type
e. Department
stores
7,000 - 24,000
24,000 - 50,000
1
2
B
B
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 36/144
retail
establishments
funeral homes, and
commercial
establishments
not
otherwise
specified
50,000 -
100,000
over 100,000
each additional
50,000 or major
fraction thereof
3
1
additional
B
B
f. Hotels or office
buildings
25,000 - 40,000
40,000 -
100,000
each additional
100,000 - or
major
fraction thereof
1
2
1
additional
B
B
B
g. Schools over 14,000 1 B
(3) Uses not specifically mentioned. In the case of a use not specifically mentioned, the
requirements for off-street loading facilities shall be the same as the above mentioned use which, as
determined by the Planning Director, is most similar to the use not specifically mentioned.
(4) Concurrent different uses. When any proposed structure will be used concurrently for different
purposes, final determination of loading requirements will be made by the Planning Director but in no
event shall the loading requirements be less than the total requirement for each use based upon its
aggregate floor area.
(5) Location of required loading facilities. The off-street loading facilities required for the uses
mentioned in this code shall be in all cases on the same lot or parcel of land as the structure they
are intended to serve. In no case shall the required off-street loading space be part of the area used
to satisfy the off-street parking requirements.
(6) Manner of using loading areas. No space for loading shall be so located that a vehicle using such
loading space projects into any public right-of-way. Loading space shall be provided with access to
an alley, or if no alley adjoins the lot, with access to the street. Any required front, side or rear yard
may not be used for loading.
10.743 Off-Street Parking Standards
(1) Vehicle Parking – Minimum and Maximum Standards by Use. The number of required off-street
vehicle parking spaces shall be determined in accordance with the standards in Table 10.743-1.
Where a use is not specifically listed in table 10.743-1, parking requirements shall be determined by
the Planning Director or designee finding that the use is similar to one of those listed in terms of
parking needs.
Parking spaces that count toward the minimum requirement are parking spaces meeting minimum
dimensional and access standards in garages, carports, parking lots, bays along driveways, and
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 37/144
shared parking areas.
[For non-residential uses, there is no minimum number of off-street parking spaces required in the
Downtown Parking District, per Section 10.358(1)(a); and the Southeast (S-E) Overlay District,
Commercial Center, per Section 10.378 (6).]
(2) Number of Required Parking Spaces. Off-street vehicle parking spaces shall be provided as
follows:
(a) Parking Space Calculation. Parking space ratios are based on spaces per 1,000 square
feet of gross floor area, unless otherwise noted.
(b) Parking Categories.
(i) Table 10.743-1 contains parking ratios for minimum required number of parking
spaces and maximum permitted number of parking spaces for each land use.
A. Minimum Number of Required Parking Spaces. For each listed land use, the City
shall not require more than the minimum number of parking spaces calculated for
each use.
B. Maximum Number of Permitted Parking Spaces. The number of parking spaces
provided shall not exceed the maximum number of parking spaces allowed for each
listed land use.
(3) Exceptions to Required Off-Street Parking for Non-Residential Uses. The approving
authority may allow exceptions to the number of parking spaces in Table 10.743-1 for specific uses
without complying with Section 10.186 if they find that the applicant’s detailed description of the
proposed use demonstrates that the number of needed parking spaces is less than the minimum
required or more than the maximum allowable based upon one or both of the following (effective
Dec. 1, 2013):
(a) An explanation why the characteristics of the proposed use require a different off-street
parking standard than what is otherwise required.
(b) An analysis providing parking data for the same business or a similar use within the city
that demonstrates a need for a different off-street parking standard than what is otherwise
required.
Table 10.743-1 – City of Medford
Minimum and Maximum Parking Standards
Land Use
Category
Parking Standards are based on number of spaces per 1,000 Square Feet of Gross Floor
Area (unless otherwise noted)
Minimum Number of Required Parking Spaces Maximum Permitted Parking
Spaces
Central Business District CB
Overlay (outside of
Downtown Parking
District)**
All Other Zones All Zones
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 38/144
Table 10.743-1 – City of Medford
Minimum and Maximum Parking Standards
Land Use
Category
Parking Standards are based on number of spaces per 1,000 Square Feet of Gross Floor
Area (unless otherwise noted)
Minimum Number of Required Parking Spaces Maximum Permitted Parking
Spaces
Central Business District CB
Overlay (outside of
Downtown Parking
District)**
All Other Zones All Zones
Bank
4.0 spaces plus 5.0 spaces for
drive-up window queue when
permitted
4.5 spaces plus 5.0 spaces for
drive-up window queue 5.4 spaces
Bowling
Alley
4.0 spaces per lane plus 1.0
space per employee at largest
shift
4.5 spaces per lane plus 1.0
space per employee at largest
shift
5.4 spaces per lane plus 1.0
space per employee at largest
shift
Cemetery n/a
1.0 space per employee, plus
1.0 space per 4.4 visitors to the
maximum occupancy of the
chapel
1.0 space per employee, plus
1.0 space per 3.5 visitors to the
maximum occupancy of the
chapel
Church
1.0 space per 4.8 seats of
maximum occupancy or 9.5
feet of bench length,
whichever is greater
1.0 space per 4.4 seats of
maximum occupancy or 9.0
feet of bench length,
whichever is greater
1.0 space per 3.5 seats of
maximum occupancy or 8.0 feet
of bench length, whichever is
greater
Commercial
Use: less than
25,000 square
feet
4.0 spaces 4.5 spaces 5.4 spaces
Commercial
Use: between
25,000 and
50, 000 square
feet
3.6 spaces 4.0 spaces 5.0 spaces
Commercial
Use: between
50,000 and
100,000
square feet
3.3 spaces 3.7 spaces 5.0 spaces
Commercial
Use: more
than 100,000
square feet
3.0 spaces 3.3 spaces 5.0 spaces
Community or
Recreation
Center
3.2 spaces or 1.0 space per 4.8
patrons at maximum
occupancy, whichever is
greater
3.6 spaces or 1.0 space per 4.4
patrons at maximum
occupancy, whichever is
greater
4.3 spaces or 1.0 space per 3.5
patrons at maximum occupancy,
whichever is greater
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 39/144
Table 10.743-1 – City of Medford
Minimum and Maximum Parking Standards
Land Use
Category
Parking Standards are based on number of spaces per 1,000 Square Feet of Gross Floor
Area (unless otherwise noted)
Minimum Number of Required Parking Spaces Maximum Permitted Parking
Spaces
Central Business District CB
Overlay (outside of
Downtown Parking
District)**
All Other Zones All Zones
Day Care,
Child or Adult
Care Center
0.8 space per
teacher/employee on the
largest shift, plus 1.0 space per
7.0 students
0.9 space per teacher/employee
on the largest shift, plus 1.0
space per 6.5 students
1.1 spaces per
teacher/employee on the largest
shift, plus 1.0 space per 5
students
Emergency
Shelter
1 space per 30.0 resident beds, plus
1.0 space per employee on the largest
shift
1 space per 25.0 resident beds, plus
1.0 space per employee on the largest
shift
1 space per 20.0 resident beds, plus 1.0
space per employee on the largest shift
Enclosed Mall
(shops
interconnected
by enclosed
walkways)
2.6 spaces 2.9 spaces 4.0 spaces
Furniture
Store 2.0 spaces 2.3 spaces 3.0 spaces
Golf Courses n/a
4.5 spaces per hole, plus 0.9
spaces for each employee on
the largest shift, plus 70% of
spaces otherwise required for
accessory uses (e.g., bars,
restaurants)
6.0 spaces per hole, plus 1.2
spaces for each employee on
the largest shift, plus 75% of
spaces otherwise required for
accessory uses (e.g., bars,
restaurants)
Golf Course,
Miniature n/a 1.4 spaces per hole 1.7 spaces per hole
Golf Driving
Range n/a 0.9 space per tee 1.2 spaces per tee
Hospitals
2.0 spaces per 3.6 patient beds,
plus 1.0 space per staff doctor
and each other employee on
the largest shift
2.0 spaces per 3.3 patient beds,
plus 1.0 space per staff doctor
and each other employee on
the largest shift
2.0 spaces per 2.6 patient beds,
plus 1.0 space per staff doctor
and each other employee on the
largest shift
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 40/144
Table 10.743-1 – City of Medford
Minimum and Maximum Parking Standards
Land Use
Category
Parking Standards are based on number of spaces per 1,000 Square Feet of Gross Floor
Area (unless otherwise noted)
Minimum Number of Required Parking Spaces Maximum Permitted Parking
Spaces
Central Business District CB
Overlay (outside of
Downtown Parking
District)**
All Other Zones All Zones
Hotel or
Motel
1.0 space per room, plus 1.0
space per every 3.6 employees
on the largest shift, plus 1.0
space per 3.6 persons at the
maximum occupancy of each
public meeting and/or banquet
room, plus 40% of the spaces
otherwise required for
accessory uses (e.g.,
restaurants and bars)
1.0 space per room, plus 1.0
space per every 3.3 employees
on the largest shift, plus 1.0
space per 3.3 persons at the
maximum occupancy of each
public meeting and/or banquet
room, plus 45% of the spaces
otherwise required for
accessory uses (e.g.,
restaurants and bars)
1.0 space per room, plus 1.0
space per every 2.6 employees
on the largest work shift, plus
1.0 space per 2.6 persons at the
maximum occupancy of each
public meeting and/or banquet
room, plus 55% of the spaces
otherwise required for
accessory uses (e.g., restaurants
and bars)
Industrial or
Warehouse n/a
1.0 space per employee on the
largest shift, plus 0.2 space per
1,000 square feet of gross floor
area
1.0 space per employee on the
largest shift, plus 0.3 space per
1,000 square feet of gross floor
area
Library or
Museums
2.0 spaces or 1.0 space per 4.8
seats at the maximum
occupancy, whichever is
greater, plus 1.0 space per 2.4
employees on the largest shift
2.3 spaces or 1.0 space per 4.4
seats at the maximum
occupancy, whichever is
greater, plus 1.0 space per 2.2
employees on the largest shift
3 spaces or 1.0 space per 3.5
seats at the maximum
occupancy, whichever is
greater, plus 1.0 space per 1.8
employees on the largest shift
Mini-
Warehouse or
Mini-Storage
Facility
2.0 spaces per manager’s
residence, plus 1.0 space per
12 storage cubicles
2.0 spaces per manager’s
residence, plus 1.0 space per
11 storage cubicles
2.0 spaces per manager’s
residence, plus 1.0 space per 9
storage cubicles
Nursery, Plant 4.0 spaces 4.5 spaces 5.4 spaces
Office,
General
(under 4,000
square feet)
3.1 spaces 3.6 spaces 5.0 spaces
Office,
General (over
4, 000 square
feet)
2.6 spaces 3.0 spaces 5.0 spaces
Office,
Medical
4 spaces plus 1.0 space per
doctor
4.5 spaces plus 1.0 space per
doctor
5.4 spaces plus 1.0 space per
doctor
Personal
Service (such
as spas, tattoo
parlors, hair
salons)
2.0 spaces per station 2.2 spaces per station 2.7 spaces per station
Private Club 1.0 space per 3.6 persons at
maximum occupancy
1.0 space per 3.3 persons at
maximum occupancy
1.0 space per 2.6 persons at
maximum occupancy
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 41/144
Table 10.743-1 – City of Medford
Minimum and Maximum Parking Standards
Land Use
Category
Parking Standards are based on number of spaces per 1,000 Square Feet of Gross Floor
Area (unless otherwise noted)
Minimum Number of Required Parking Spaces Maximum Permitted Parking
Spaces
Central Business District CB
Overlay (outside of
Downtown Parking
District)**
All Other Zones All Zones
Public
Services (such
as utility
service yards)
1.0 space per 1.2 employees on
the largest work shift, plus 1.0
space per company vehicle
normally stored on the
premises
1.0 space per 1.1 employees on
the largest work shift, plus 1.0
space per company vehicle
normally stored on the
premises
1.0 space per .8 employees on
the largest work shift, plus 1.0
space per company vehicle
normally stored on the premises
Recreation 1.0 space per 4.8 patrons at
maximum occupancy
1.0 space per 4.4 patrons at
maximum occupancy
1.0 space per 3.5 patrons at
maximum occupancy
Recreation,
Skating Rink
(ice or roller)
2.6 spaces 3.0 spaces 3.6 spaces
Recreation,
Swimming
Facility
1.0 space per 90 square feet of
gross water area plus 1.0 space
per employee on the largest
shift
1.0 space per 85 square feet of
gross water area plus 1.0 space
per employee on the largest
shift
1.0 space per 65 square feet of
gross water area plus 1.0 space
per employee on the largest
shift
Recreation,
Tennis,
Racquetball,
or Handball
Courts
3.2 spaces per court plus 1.0
space per employee on the
largest shift
3.6 spaces per court plus 1.0
space per employee on the
largest shift
4.5 spaces per court plus 1.0
space per employee on the
largest shift
Recreational
Vehicle Park
1.2 spaces per RV site, plus 1.0
space per 1.2 employees on the
largest shift
1.4 spaces per RV site, plus 1.0
space per 1.1 employees on the
largest shift
1.7 spaces per RV site, plus 1.0
space per employee on the
largest shift
Repair
Services,
except vehicle
2.6 spaces 3.0 spaces 3.6 spaces
Residential,
Duplex 1 space per dwelling unit 2 spaces per dwelling unit n/a
Residential,
Group Living
(nursing
homes or
similar special
needs
housing)
1.0 space per 7.0 resident beds,
plus 1.0 space per employee
on the largest shift
1.0 space per 6.5 resident beds,
plus 1.0 space per employee on
the largest shift
1.0 space per 5.5 resident beds,
plus 1.0 space per employee on
the largest shift
Residential,
Multiple
Family
1 space per dwelling unit 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit n/a
Residential,
Retirement or
Congregate
Housing
0.4 spaces per dwelling unit
plus 1.0 space per 1.2
employees on the maximum
shift
0.45 spaces per dwelling unit
plus 1.1 space per employee
on the maximum shift
0.6 spaces per dwelling unit
plus 1.0 space per employee on
the maximum shift
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 42/144
Table 10.743-1 – City of Medford
Minimum and Maximum Parking Standards
Land Use
Category
Parking Standards are based on number of spaces per 1,000 Square Feet of Gross Floor
Area (unless otherwise noted)
Minimum Number of Required Parking Spaces Maximum Permitted Parking
Spaces
Central Business District CB
Overlay (outside of
Downtown Parking
District)**
All Other Zones All Zones
Residential,
Single Family 2 spaces per dwelling unit 2 spaces per dwelling unit n/a
Residential,
Townhouse 1 space per dwelling unit 2 spaces per dwelling unit n/a
Restaurant,
Standard 8.0 spaces 9.0 spaces 11.0 spaces
Restaurant
(with drive
thru)
11.0 spaces plus 5.0 spaces for
drive-up window queue
12.0 spaces plus 5.0 spaces for
drive-up window queue 14.0 spaces
Road Service
or Towing 4.0 spaces 4.5 spaces 5.4 spaces
School,
College,
University,
Vocational, or
other
Educational
Courses
1.0 space per 3.6 students, plus
1.0 space per employee
(including faculty) at largest
capacity class attendance
period
1.0 space per 3.3 students, plus
1.0 space per employee
(including faculty) at largest
capacity class attendance
period
1.0 space per 2.6 students, plus
1.0 space per employee
(including faculty) at largest
capacity class attendance period
School,
Elementary
Kindergarten
– 8th
1.0 space per teacher and staff
plus 1.0 space per 2.4
classrooms
1.0 space per teacher and staff
plus 1.0 space per 2.2
classrooms
1.0 space per teacher and staff
plus 1.0 space per 1.8
classrooms
School,
Secondary
(9th - 12th)
1.0 space per teacher and staff
plus 1.0 space per 6 non-bused
students
1.0 space per teacher and staff
plus 1.0 space per 5.5 nonbused
students
1.0 space per teacher and staff
member plus 1 space per 4.4
non-bused students
Taverns,
Dance Halls,
Night Clubs,
and Lounges
16.0 spaces 18.0 spaces 22.0 spaces
Temporary
Shelter*
1 space per 30.0 resident
beds, plus 1.0 space per
employee on the largest
shift
1 space per 25.0 resident
beds, plus 1.0 space per
employee on largest shift
1 space per 20.0 resident
beds, plus 1.0 space per
employee on the largest
shift
Theater or
Auditoriums,
indoor or
outdoor
1.0 space per 3.6 patrons 1.0 space per 3.3 patrons 1.0 space per 2.6 patrons
Vehicle Sales 0.5 spaces 0.6 spaces 1.0 spaces
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 43/144
Table 10.743-1 – City of Medford
Minimum and Maximum Parking Standards
Land Use
Category
Parking Standards are based on number of spaces per 1,000 Square Feet of Gross Floor
Area (unless otherwise noted)
Minimum Number of Required Parking Spaces Maximum Permitted Parking
Spaces
Central Business District CB
Overlay (outside of
Downtown Parking
District)**
All Other Zones All Zones
Vehicle
Repair and
Maintenance
2.0 spaces 2.2 spaces 3 spaces
Veterinary
Office or
Animal
Hospital
2.4 spaces per doctor plus 1.0
space per other employee on
the largest shift
2.7 spaces per doctor plus 1.0
space per other employee on
the largest shift
3.3 spaces per doctor plus 1.0
space per other employee on the
largest shift
* A single asterisk indicates that minimum parking standards may be exempt for a particular use, by
the approving authority, if adequate parking can be demonstrated to already exist.
** The Downtown Parking District is bound by Fourth Street on the north, Tenth Street on the south,
Bear Creek on east, and the railroad right-of-way on the west.
(4) Reductions in Required Parking Spaces.
The total number of required motor vehicle parking spaces for an existing or new industrial,
commercial, or office development may be reduced by five percent (5%) for each of the activities
listed below that are provided by the owners or operators in perpetuity, up to a maximum of ten
percent (10%) reduction in the total number of motor vehicle spaces required per development.
(a) Providing showers and lockers for employees who commute by bicycle or foot;
(b) Providing twice as many covered, secured bicycle parking spaces as required by this code;
(c) Providing a public plaza as defined herein adjacent to a transit route with transit service
currently available, which is within one quarter (¼) mile of a major transit stop on that route. If
there is a bus stop along the site’s frontage, the plaza must be adjacent to the bus stop. The
plaza must be open to the public, and at least 300 square feet in size exclusive of connecting
walkways.
(d) Providing a transit shelter with landscaping, and trash receptacle;
(e) Other incentives provided in an approved Transportation Demand Management Plan (TDM)
approved by the Approving Authority.
(5) Two-Wheeled Vehicle Parking.
When over twenty (20) spaces are required, a maximum of five percent (5%) of the required parking
may be two-wheeled vehicle spaces (e.g. motorcycle/moped/scooter). Each two-wheeled vehicle
space must be at least four (4) feet wide and eight (8) feet deep. The two-wheeled vehicle spaces
shall be clearly designated by a sign posted or be marked on the pavement within the two-wheeled
parking area. Two-wheeled spaces shall be grouped together in designated areas and need not be
individually striped. Two-wheeled parking shall be closer to the building than fifty percent (50%) of
the vehicle spaces.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 44/144
(6) Design Requirements for Large Parking Lots.
Large parking areas shall not exceed three (3) contiguous acres without incorporating one or more
of the following components: plazas, large landscape areas, pedestrian walkways consistent with
10.725(C)(2), interior streets or driveways with street-like features. Street-like features include: a
raised sidewalk of at least four (4) foot in width with a six (6) inch curb, accessible curb ramps, street
trees in planter strips or tree wells, and pedestrian scale lighting.
(7) Exceeding Maximum Parking Ratios.
The Approving Authority may approve parking in excess of the maximum allowable set forth in Table
10.743-1 for phased projects or for planned future buildings or building additions. If any parking in
excess of the maximum permitted is located in a parking structure, the parking ratios may be
exceeded without requiring an approval by the Approving Authority.
[Replaced, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2009-77, Apr. 16, 2009; Amd. Sec. 20, Ord. No. 2013-131, Sept. 5,
2013; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2014-65, May 15, 2014; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2015-123, Dec. 17,
2015; Amd. Sec. 163, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018); Amd. Sec. 4, Ord.
No. 2018-113, Sept. 20, 2018.]
10.744 Shared Parking
The off-street parking requirements of two or more uses, structures, or parcels of land may be
satisfied by the same parking or loading space used jointly to the extent that it can be shown by the
owners or operators of the uses, structures, or parcels that their operations and parking needs do
not overlap in point of time. If the uses, structures, or parcels are under separate ownership, the
right to joint use of the parking space must be evidenced by a deed, lease, contract, or other
appropriate written and recorded document to establish the joint use. Parking spaces provided
through "shared parking" do not apply toward the maximum number permitted.
[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2009-77, Apr. 16, 2009.]
10.745 Location of Parking Facilities
All parking spaces shall be on the same lot as the main structure it serves or on an abutting lot.
However, upon demonstration by the applicant that parking on the same lot or abutting lot is not
available, the approving authority may authorize the parking spaces to be on any lot within 250 feet
walking distance of the structure being served upon written findings of compliance with the following
provisions:
(1) There is a safe, direct, attractive, lighted and convenient pedestrian route between the parking
area and the use being served;
(2) There is assurance in the form of deed, lease, contract or other similarly recorded document that
the required spaces will continue to be available for off-street parking use according to the required
standards.
10.746 General Design Requirements for Parking
With the exception of storage of trailered items and recreational vehicles at single-family residences,
all parking, loading, driveway, and vehicle maneuvering areas, including but not limited to, wheeled7/
9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 45/144
vehicle sales lots, truck trailer parking areas, and on-site single-family residential driveways etc.,
shall be paved and improved pursuant to the following minimum design requirements of this section.
The design provisions of this section are applicable to all new parking facilities, parking lot
expansions, and to areas where existing parking facilities are excavated and re-installed. A preexisting
parking lot that is legally nonconforming to a standard in subsections 10.746(3), (4), (9), or
(10) and is improved with a surface pavement overlay only, without excavation of existing pavement,
may remain nonconforming to that particular standard(s). All other provisions of this section are
applicable to resurfaced parking lots.
(1) Surfacing. All surfacing shall be consistent with Section 9.550 of the City Code. Residential
development may reduce the concrete standard to a four (4) inch minimum thickness.
Extended single-family residential driveways shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width.
[Amd. Ord. No. 7022, Nov. 7, 1991.]
(2) Curb Cuts. Access points with the street shall be the minimum necessary to provide access while
not inhibiting the safe circulation and carrying capacity of the street. Curb cuts shall be located not
closer than 5 feet to a side lot line, except that a common access way to two adjacent properties
(width not exceeding 45 feet) may be provided at the common lot line. Common access ways shall
be encouraged in order to reduce the number of access points to streets. Access grades shall not
exceed 15% and shall be graded to allow clearance to pass a standard American automobile 15 feet
in length.
(3) Parking Area Planters.
It is the purpose of this subsection to create shade and visual relief for large expanses of parking.
a. Parking areas exceeding 24 parking spaces shall contain areas of interior landscaping,
such as planter islands or planter projections into the parking area, which comply with the
planting schedule provided in Subsection 10.746 (3)f. and Section 10.780, Landscape and
Irrigation Requirements, and as approved by the approving authority.
b. Planters shall be dispersed throughout the parking area and contain, at minimum, the
landscaping area square footage specified in the Planting schedule of Subsection 10.746 (3)f.
Square footage of each parking area planter may vary; however, each parking area planter
shall meet the soil volume requirements of Subsection 10.780 G(10)a.
c. Prior to installing plant materials in parking area planters, the developer shall remove
detrimental construction materials and prepare the soil within the planters in accordance with
Subsection 10.780 G(9). If structural soils are necessary, areas under planned impervious
surfaces surrounding planters, shall be prepared in accordance with Subsection 10.780 G(10)
(a).
d. So as to not obstruct driver vision, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to
grow in such a manner as to impede vision between a height of three (3) feet and eight (8) feet
above the top of the curb. The property owner shall maintain shrub and tree growth in planter
areas to ensure shrubs are kept lower than three (3) feet and tree canopies are maintained
above eight (8) feet.
e. Trees planted in parking area planters shall have a moderate to broad spreading canopy.
f. The minimum landscaped area within parking area planters and number of required plants
per 24 spaces is as follows:
Parking Area Planters
Planting Schedule
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 46/144
Zoning District Plants/ per 24 Spaces
trees/shrubs
Sq. Ft./ per 24 Spaces
Industrial Zones 2/4 325
SFR (Nonresidential uses
only), MFR zones, Commercial
Zones,
3/6 500
*Public Zones 3/6 500
* Shrub and ground cover within the parking lot planter bays in parks may be substituted with nonliving
ground cover if allowed by the approving authority (artificial turf not allowed).
[Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2013-84, June 6, 2013 (effective Dec. 1, 2013); Amd. Sec. 16, Ord. No.
2018-52 June 8, 2017, (effective July 9, 2018).]
(4) Irrigation Systems. All landscaped areas shall be irrigated with a permanent irrigation system
unless a licensed landscape architect submits written verification that the proposed plant materials
do not require irrigation.
(5) Conformity with Code. No building or structure shall be changed or enlarged without the inclusion
of additional parking spaces in conformance with the requirements of this code. The requirements of
this code shall apply only to the additional parking necessitated by the change in use or building
expansion.
(6) D.E.Q. Indirect Source Construction Permit. All parking areas, where applicable, shall be subject
to review and approval by the Department of Environmental Quality (D.E.Q.).
(7) Final Certificate of Occupancy. No Final Certificate of Occupancy shall be granted to any
structure until the parking areas are completed and ready for use.
(8) Accessible Parking Space Requirements. The following rates and design regulations are
derived from ORS 447.233.
(a) The number of accessible parking spaces shall be provided at these rates:
Total
Parking
In Lot
Required Minimum
Number of Accessible
Spaces
Required Minimum
Number of Van-
Accessible Spaces
Required Minimum Number of
Spaces marked “Wheelchair
User Only”
1–25 1 1 –
26–50 2 1 –
51–75 3 1 –
76–100 4 1 –
101–150 5 – 1
151–200 6 – 1
201–300 7 – 1
301–400 8 – 1
401–500 9 – 2
501–
1,000 2% of total parking – 1 per 8 accessible spaces or
portion thereof
>1,000
20 spaces plus 1 for
each set of 100 spaces
over 1,000
– 1 per 8 accessible spaces or
portion thereof
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 47/144
(b) In addition, one in every eight accessible spaces, but not fewer than one, shall be van
accessible. Where five or more parking spaces are designated accessible, any space that is
designated as van accessible shall be reserved for wheelchair users. A van-accessible
parking space shall be at least nine feet wide and shall have an adjacent access aisle that is at
least eight feet wide.
(c) Accessible parking spaces shall be at least nine feet wide and shall have an adjacent
access aisle that is at least six feet wide.
(d) The access aisle shall be located on the passenger side of the parking space except that
two adjacent accessible parking spaces may share a common access aisle.
(e) A sign shall be posted for each accessible parking space. The sign shall be clearly visible
to a person parking in the space, shall be marked with the International Symbol of Access and
shall indicate that the spaces are reserved for persons with disabled person parking permits.
A van-accessible parking space shall have an additional sign marked "Van Accessible"
mounted below the sign. A van-accessible parking space reserved for wheelchair users shall
have a sign that includes the words "Wheelchair User Only."
(f) Accessible parking spaces and signs shall be designed in compliance with the standards
set forth by the Oregon Transportation Commission in consultation with the Oregon Disabilities
Commission.
(g) No ramp or obstacle may extend into the parking space or the aisle, and curb cuts and
ramps may not be situated in such a way that they could be blocked by a legally parked
vehicle.
(h) Accessible parking spaces shall be located on the shortest practical accessible route to an
accessible building entry. In facilities with multiple accessible building entries with adjacent
parking, accessible parking spaces shall be dispersed and located near accessible entries.
(i) Parking spaces required by this section shall be maintained so as to meet the requirements
of this section at all times and to meet the standards established by the state building code.
[Amd. Ord. No. 7022, Nov. 7, 1991; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2012-32, March 1, 2012.]
(9) Screening. Where parking, vehicle maneuvering, or loading areas abut a public street, there shall
be provided a minimum ten (10) foot wide landscaping buffer. Within public parks, shrub and
groundcover within this area may be substituted with non-living ground cover if approved by the
approving authority (artificial turf not allowed).
[Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 8010, Dec. 21, 1995; Amd. Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2018-52 June 7, 2018
(effective July 9, 2018).]
(10) Parking, Required Yard. Parking and loading spaces and their maneuvering area shall not be
located in a required yard, except as follows:
(a) In a SFR or MFR zone, parking lots with more than three (3) spaces that do not back
directly into the street may encroach to within ten (10) feet of a street right-of-way.
(b) When creating a common driveway with an adjacent parcel.
(c) At a single-family residence in a SFR zone, paving may be located within a required side or
rear yard.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 48/144
(d) Paved driveways located in a required front yard, street side yard, or rear yard off an alley
may be counted toward the off-street parking requirement for the lot or parcel. The paved area
shall meet the dimensional requirements for a parking space and shall not be located within a
public right-of-way.
[Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 5986, Oct. 1, 1987; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 7786, Dec. 15, 1994; Amd. Sec. 4,
Ord. No. 8010, Dec, 21, 1995; Amd. Ord. No. 8195, Sept. 19, 1996; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2015-
123, Dec. 17, 2015.]
(11) Driveways. All driveways shall be improved to the standards set forth in Article IV, Section
10.550, Driveway Approaches. Residential driveways on arterial and collector streets shall comply
with the minimum turnaround standards as illustrated below:(see graphic image at bottom of page)
(12) Aisles. Except for single or two family dwellings, groups of more than three parking spaces shall
be provided with adequate aisles or turnaround areas so that all vehicles may enter the street in a
forward manner. [Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 8010, Dec, 21, 1995.]
(13) Minimum Clearance. Driveways, aisles, turnaround areas and ramps shall have a minimum
vertical clearance of at least twelve feet for their entire length and width but such clearance may be
reduced in parking structures.
(14) Drainage. Adequate drainage shall be provided to dispose of the run-off generated by the
impervious surface area of the parking area. Provisions shall be made for the on-site collection of
drainage waters to eliminate sheet flow of such waters onto sidewalks, public rights-of-way, and
abutting private property.
(15) Connect Parking Areas. Parking areas with access to arterial or collector streets shall be so
designed as to connect with existing or future parking areas on adjacent sites thereby eliminating the
necessity of utilizing the arterial or collector street for cross movements.
(16) Parking Space Minimum Dimension Standards.
Parking Angle Space Width Space Length Aisle Width
(1-way)
Aisle Width
(2-way)
90 deg. 9'0" 19'0" 24'0" 24'0"
60 deg. 9'0" 19'0" 16'0" 24'0"
45 deg. 9'0" 19'0" 12'0" 24'0"
0 deg/Parallel 8'0" 24'0" 12'0" 24'0"
(17) Compact Cars. A maximum of twenty (20) percent of the total required parking may be
improved as compact parking spaces. All compact parking spaces must be identified for compact
parking only. Compact parking space shall have the following minimum dimensions: 9 feet wide by
16 feet long
(18) Parking Encroachment. Vehicle encroachment and a reduction in the length of a standard
parking space by two feet is permitted when adjacent to a seven-foot pedestrian walkway. Vehicle
encroachment and a reduction in the length of a standard parking space by two feet is permitted into
a required landscape yard if an additional two feet of landscape yard is provided. No vehicle
encroachment is permitted into a bufferyard area.
[Added - Sec. 27, Ord. No. 5820, Mar. 19, 1987; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2013-84, June 6, 2013 (effective
Dec. 1, 2013); Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2014-161, Dec. 22, 2014.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 49/144
IMAGES FOR THIS CODE
(Click on an image to see a larger version)
10.747 General Provisions, Bicycle Parking
The bicycle parking and storage provisions are intended to provide bicycle parking facilities to
accommodate bicycle travel and encourage additional bicycle trips. Bicycle parking facilities shall be
either lockable enclosures in which the bicycle is stored or stationary racks which accommodate
bicyclist's locks securing the frame and both wheels. Bicycle racks or lockers shall be securely
anchored to the surface or to a structure. If 10 or more bicycle parking spaces are required, then at
least 50% of the bicycle parking spaces shall be covered. For the purposes of this section, covered
parking may include placement underneath an awning, eave or other overhang or other facility as
determined by the approving authority that protects the bicycle from direct exposure to the elements.
Bicycle parking shall be separated from motor vehicle parking and maneuvering areas by a barrier
or sufficient distance to prevent damage to parked bicycles.
Any building expansion or any new construction, excluding two-family and three-family dwellings,
shall bring the property into conformance with the Bicycle Parking and Storage Regulations.
When required by this code, the site development plan shall include a bicycle parking plan, drawn to
scale and submitted with the development permit application. The plan shall show all those elements
necessary to indicate that the requirements of this code are being fulfilled.
[Added Sec. 13, Ord. No. 7629, May 5, 1994; Amd. Sec. 21, Ord. No. 2013-131, Sept. 5, 2013;
Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2014-161, Dec. 22, 2014.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 50/144
10.748 Bicycle Parking Standards
Bicycle parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following:
Commercial: 10% of the number of spaces provided for automobiles, to be calculated by rounding
up to the nearest whole number.
Industrial: 20% of the number of spaces provided for automobiles, to be calculated by rounding up to
the nearest whole number.
Office: 10% of the number of spaces provided for automobiles, to be calculated by rounding up to
the nearest whole number.
Institutional: 10% of the number of spaces provided for automobiles, to be calculated by rounding up
to the nearest whole number.
Residential, multiple-family: One space per unit (4 units or more).
Residential, retirement or congregate housing: .05 space per unit; 4 space minimum, regardless of
number of units.
Schools: 4 spaces per classroom.
Transit centers/park and ride lots: 10% of the number of spaces provided for automobiles.
[Added, Sec. 14, Ord. No. 7629, May 5, 1994.]
10.749 Location of Bicycle Parking Facilities
Required bicycle parking facilities shall be located on-site in well lighted, secure locations within 50
feet of well-used entrances and not farther from the entrance than the closest automobile parking
space. Bicycle parking shall have direct access to both the public right-of-way and to a main
entrance of the principal use. Bicycle parking may also be provided inside a building in suitable,
secure and accessible locations. Bicycle parking for multiple uses (such as in a commercial center)
may be clustered in one or several locations.
[Added, Sec. 15, Ord. No. 7629, May 5, 1994.]
10.750 General Design Requirements for Bicycle Parking
All bicycle parking and maneuvering areas shall be constructed to the following minimum design
standards:
(1) Surfacing: Outdoor bicycle parking facilities shall be surfaced in the same manner as a motor
vehicle parking area or with a minimum of a three-inch thickness of hard surfacing (i.e., asphalt,
concrete, pavers or similar material). This surface will be maintained in a smooth, durable and welldrained
condition.
(2) Parking Space Dimension Standard: Bicycle parking spaces shall be at least 6 feet long and 2
feet wide with minimum overhead clearance of 7 feet.
(3) Lighting: Lighting shall be provided in a bicycle parking area so that all facilities are thoroughly
illuminated and visible from adjacent sidewalks or motor vehicle parking lots during all hours of use.
(4) Aisles: A 5-foot aisle for bicycle maneuvering shall be provided and maintained beside or
between each row of bicycle parking.
(5) Signs: Where bicycle parking facilities are not directly visible from the public rights-of-way, entry
and directional signs shall be provided to direct bicycles from the public rights-of-way to the bicycle
parking facility. [Added, Sec. 16, Ord. No. 7629, May 5, 1994.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 51/144
10.751 Exceptions to Bicycle Parking Standards
The approving authority may allow exceptions to the bicycle parking standards in connection with
temporary uses or uses that do not generate the need for bicyclists parking such as Christmas tree
sales and mini-storage units.
[Added, Sec. 17, Ord. No. 7629, May 5, 1994.]
10.752 Noise Standards and Regulations for Commercial and Industrial Sources
A. Existing Noise Sources.
No person owning or controlling an existing industrial or commercial noise source shall cause or
permit the operation of that noise source if the statistical noise levels generated by that source and
measured at an appropriate measurement point, specified in Section 10.752.F(2)(b), exceed the
levels specified in Table 752-1, except as otherwise provided herein.
B. New Noise Sources.
(1) New Sources Located on Previously Used Sites: No person owning or controlling a new
industrial or commercial noise source located on a previously used industrial or commercial
site shall cause or permit the operation of that noise source if the statistical noise levels
generated by the new source and measured at an appropriate measurement point, specified in
Section 10.752.B(2), exceed the levels specified in Table 752-2, except as otherwise provided
herein.
(2) New Sources Located on Previously Unused Site.
(a) No person owning or controlling a new industrial or commercial noise source located
on a previously unused industrial or commercial site shall cause or permit the operation
of that noise source if the noise levels generated or indirectly caused by that noise
source increase the ambient statistical noise levels, L10 or L50, by more than 10 dBA in
any one hour, or exceed the levels specified in Table 752-2 , as measured at an
appropriate measurement point, as specified in Section 10.752.F(2).
(b) The ambient statistical noise level of a new industrial or commercial noise source on
a previously unused industrial or commercial site shall include all noises generated or
indirectly caused by or attributable to that source, including all of its related activities.
Sources exempted from the requirements of Section 10.752.A of this rule, which are
identified in Section 10.752.H, shall not be excluded from this ambient measurement.
C. Impulse Sound.
Notwithstanding the noise rules in Tables 752-1 through 752-3, no person owning or controlling an
industrial or commercial noise source shall cause or permit the operation of that noise source if an
impulsive sound is emitted in air by that source which exceeds the sound pressure levels specified
below, as measured at an appropriate measurement point, as specified in Section 10.752.F(2).
(1) Blasting: 98 dBC, slow response, between the hours of 7 am and 10 pm and 93dBC, slow
response, between the hours of 10 pm and 7 am.
(2) All Other Impulse Sounds: 100 dB, peak response, between the hours of 7 am and 10 pm
and 80 dB, peak response, between the hours of 10 pm and 7 am.
D. Octave Bands and Audible Discrete Tones.
When the Planning Director has reasonable cause to believe that the requirements of Sections
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 52/144
10.752.A or B do not adequately protect the health, safety or welfare of the public as provided for in
ORS Chapter 467, the Planning Department may require the noise source to meet the following
standards:
(1) Octave Bands: No person owning or controlling an industrial or commercial noise source
shall cause or permit the operation of that noise source if such operation generates a median
octave band sound pressure level which, as measured at an appropriate measurement point,
specified in Section 10.752.F(2) exceeds applicable levels specified in Table 752-4.
(2) One-third Octave Bands: No person owning or controlling an industrial or commercial
noise source shall cause or permit the operation of that noise source if such operation
generates a median one-third octave band sound pressure level which, as measured at an
appropriate measurement point, specified in Section 10.752.F(2) and in a one-third octave
band at a preferred frequency, exceeds the arithmetic average of the median sound pressure
levels of the two adjacent one-third octave bands by:
(a) 5 dB for such one-third octave band with a center frequency from 500 Hertz to
10,000 Hertz, inclusive. Provided: such one-third octave band sound pressure level
exceeds the sound pressure level of each adjacent one-third octave band, or:
(b) 8 dB for such one-third octave band with a center frequency from 160 Hertz to 400
Hertz, inclusive. Provided: such one-third octave band sound pressure level exceeds the
sound pressure level of each adjacent one-third octave band, or:
(c) 15 dB for such one-third octave band with a center frequency from 25 Hertz to 125
Hertz, inclusive. Provided: such one-third octave band sound pressure level exceeds the
sound pressure level of each adjacent one-third octave band.
This code shall not apply to audible discrete tones having a one-third octave band sound
pressure level 10 dB or more below the allowable sound pressure levels specified in
Table 752-4 for the octave band which contains such one-third octave band.
E. Compliance.
Upon written notification from the Planning Director, the owner or controller of an industrial or
commercial noise source operating in violation of this code shall submit a compliance schedule
acceptable to the Planning Department. The schedule will set forth the dates, terms, and conditions
by which the person responsible for the noise source shall comply with the adopted standards.
F. Measurement.
(1) Sound measurement procedures shall conform to those procedures which are adopted by
the Environmental Quality Commission and set forth in the Department of Environmental
Quality’s Sound Measurement Procedures Manual (NPCS-1) or to such other procedures as
are approved in writing by the Department.
(2) Unless otherwise specified, the appropriate measurement point shall be that point on the
noise-sensitive property described below, which is further from the noise source:
(a) 25 feet (7.6 meters) toward the noise source from that point on the noise-sensitive
building nearest the noise source,
(b) That point on the noise-sensitive property line nearest the noise source.
G. Monitoring and Reporting.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 53/144
(1) Upon written notification from the Department, persons owning or controlling an industrial
or commercial noise source shall monitor and record the statistical noise levels and operating
times of equipment, facilities, operations, and activities, and shall submit such data to the
Planning Department in the form and on the schedule requested by the Planning Department.
Procedures for such measurements shall conform to those procedures set forth in the
Department of Environmental Quality’s Sound Measurement Procedures Manual (NPCS-1).
(2) Nothing in this section shall preclude the Planning Department from conducting separate
or additional noise tests and measurements. Therefore, when requested by the Planning
Department, the owner or operator of an industrial or commercial noise source shall provide
the following:
(a) access to the site,
(b) reasonable facilities, where available, including but not limited to electric power and
ladders adequate to perform the testing,
(c) cooperation in the reasonable operation, manipulation, or shutdown of various
equipment or operations as needed to ascertain the source of sound and measure its
emission.
H. Exemptions.
Except as otherwise provided in Section 10.752.B(2)(b), the standards in Section 10.752.A shall not
apply to:
(1) Emergency equipment not operated on a regular or scheduled basis.
(2) Warning devices not operating continuously for more than 5 minutes.
(3) Sounds created by the tires or motor used to propel any road vehicle complying with the
noise standards for road vehicles.
(4) Sounds resulting from the operation of any equipment or facility of a surface carrier
engaged in interstate commerce by railroad only to the extent that such equipment or facility is
regulated by preemptive federal regulations as set forth in Part 201 of Title 40 of the Code of
Federal Regulations promulgated pursuant to Section 17 of the Noise Control Act of 1972, 86
Stat. 1248, Public Law 92-576; but this exemption does not apply to any standard, control,
license, regulation, or restriction necessitated by special local conditions which is approved by
the Administrator of the EPA after consultation with the Secretary of Transportation pursuant to
procedures set forth in section 17(c)(2) of the Act.
(5) Sounds created by bells, chimes or carillons.
(6) Sounds not electronically amplified which are created by or generated at sporting,
amusement, and entertainment events, except those sounds which are regulated under other
noise standards. An event is a noteworthy happening and does not include informal, frequent
or ongoing activities such as, but not limited to, those which normally occur at bowling alleys or
amusement parks operating in one location for a significant period of time.
(7) Sounds that originate on construction sites in compliance with Section 5.225.
(8) Sounds created in construction or maintenance of capital equipment.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 54/144
(9) Sounds created by lawn care maintenance and snow removal equipment in compliance
with Section 5.225.
(10) Sounds generated by the operation of aircraft and subject to preemptive federal
regulation. This exception does not apply to aircraft engine testing, activity conducted at the
airport that is not directly related to flight operations, and any other activity not preemptively
regulated by the federal government or controlled under OAR 340-35-0045.
(11) Sounds created by the operation of road vehicle auxiliary equipment complying with the
noise rules for such equipment as specified in OAR 340-35-0030(1)(e).
(12) Sounds created by agricultural activities.
I. Exceptions.
Upon written request from the owner or controller of an industrial or commercial noise source, the
Planning Department may authorize exceptions to Section 10.752.A, pursuant to Oregon
Administrative Rule 340-35-0010, for:
(1) Unusual and/or infrequent events.
(2) Industrial or commercial facilities previously established in areas of new development of
noise-sensitive property.
(3) Those industrial or commercial noise sources whose statistical noise levels at the
appropriate measurement point are exceeded by any noise source external to the industrial or
commercial noise source in question.
(4) Noise-sensitive property owned or controlled by the person who controls or owns the noise
source.
(5) Noise-sensitive property located on land zoned exclusively for industrial or commercial
use.
J. Tables Used in this Section. The following tables are the same as Tables 7–10 under OAR 340-
035-0035.
TABLE 752-1.
Existing Industrial and Commercial Noise Source Standards
Allowable Statistical Noise Levels in Any One Hour
7 am–10 pm 10 pm–7 am
L50 55 dBA L50 50 dBA
L10 60 dBA L10 55 dBA
L1 75 dBA L1 60 dBA
TABLE 752-2.
New Industrial and Commercial Noise Source Standards
Allowable Statistical Noise Levels in Any One Hour
7 am–10 pm 10 pm–7 am
L50 55 dBA L50 50 dBA
L10 60 dBA L10 55 dBA
L1 75 dBA L1 60 dBA
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 55/144
TABLE 752-3.
Industrial and Commercial Noise Source Standards for Quiet Areas
Allowable Statistical Noise Levels in Any One Hour
7 am–10 pm 10 pm–7 am
L50 50 dBA L50 45 dBA
L10 55 dBA L10 50 dBA
L1 60 dBA L1 55 dBA
TABLE 752-4.
Median Octave Band Standards for Industrial and Commercial Noise Sources
Allowable Octave Band Sound Pressure Levels
Octave Band Center 7 am–10 pm 10 pm–7 am
Frequency, Hz
31.5 68 65
63 65 62
125 61 56
250 55 50
500 52 46
1000 49 43
2000 46 40
4000 43 37
8000 40 34
[Sections 10.752 through 10.761 combined into Section 10.752, Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2012-32, March
1, 2012.]
10.753 Combined into Section 10.752
[Per Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2012-32, March 1, 2012.]
10.754 Combined into Section 10.752
[Per Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2012-32, March 1, 2012.]
10.755 Combined into Section 10.752
[Per Section 11, Ord. No. 2012-32, March 1, 2012.]
10.756 Combined into Section 10.752
[Per Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2012-32, March 1, 2012.]
10.757 Combined into Section 10.752
[Per Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2012-32, March 1, 2012.]
10.758 Combined into Section 10.752
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 56/144
[Per Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2012-32, March 1, 2012.]
10.759 Combined into Section 10.752
[Per Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2012-32, March 1, 2012.]
10.760 Combined into Section 10.752
[Per Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2012-32, March 1, 2012.]
10.761 Combined into Section 10.752
[Per Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2012-32, March 1, 2012.]
10.762 [Repealed, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2013-31, Feb. 21, 2013.]
Repealed
10.763 Particulate Matter (Windborne Dust)
The release of windborne dust across lot lines shall be considered a nuisance. Open storage piles,
unpaved roads, open yards and the like shall be wetted, oiled, planted or covered to eliminate or
minimize windborne dust.
Fugitive sources of windborne dust, such as from windows, ventilators, conveyors and the like shall
be controlled by closure, collection, or other acceptable methods of good practice.
10.764 Glare
In all districts, any operation or activity producing glare shall be so conducted that direct or indirect
light from the source shall not have a maximum permitted illumination in excess of 0.5 footcandles
on any property in a residential district, other than the lot on which the glare is generated. This
section is not intended to apply to public street lighting.
(1) Definitions.
Candlepower: The amount of light that will illuminate a surface one (1) foot distant from a light
source to an intensity of one (1) footcandle. Maximum (peak) candlepower is the largest amount of
candlepower emitted by any lamp, light source, or luminaire.
Footcandle: A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of which are one (1) foot from a
uniform point source of one (1) candle.
Glare: The brightness of a light source which causes eye discomfort.
Maximum Permitted Illumination: The maximum illumination measured in footcandles at the interior
buffer-yard line at ground level in accordance with the standards of Subsection 4 below.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 57/144
Post Height: The distance measured from the grade at the base of the light post to the top of the
light fixture.
(2) Exemption for Specified Outdoor Recreational Uses.
Because of their unique requirements for nighttime visibility and their limited hours of operation,
lighting for ball diamonds, playing fields, and tennis courts is exempted from the exterior lighting
standards of Subsection (4) below. Exterior lighting for outdoor recreational uses must meet all other
applicable requirements of this section and of this code.
(3) Maximum Lighting Height for Specified Outdoor Recreational Uses.
Notwithstanding height limitations elsewhere in this code, exterior lighting for the outdoor
recreational uses specified in (2) above shall be permitted a maximum post height of ninety (90)
feet. When a Conditional Use Permit is required for the specified outdoor recreational uses,
additional height limitations may be imposed to meet approval criteria.
(4) Additional Regulations: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary:
(a) No flickering or flashing lights shall be permitted.
(b) Light sources or luminaires shall not be located within bufferyard areas except on
pedestrian walkways.
(5) Measurement: When required, the measurement of lighting levels shall be conducted by the
developer and certified by a licensed engineer that the measurements have been conducted as per
the following:
(a) Metering Equipment. Lighting levels shall be measured in footcandles with a direct-reading,
portable light meter. The meter shall have a color and cosine-corrected sensor with multiple
scales and shall read within an accuracy of plus or minus five (5) percent. It shall have been
tested, calibrated, and certified by an independent commercial photometric laboratory or the
manufacturer within one (1) year of the date of its use.
(b) Method of Measurement. The meter sensor shall be mounted not more than six (6) inches
above ground level in a horizontal position. Readings shall be taken by qualified personnel
only after the cell has been exposed long enough to provide a constant reading.
Measurements shall be made after dark with the light sources in question on, then with the
same sources off. The difference between the two readings shall be compared to the
maximum permitted illumination and property line at ground level. This procedure eliminates
the effects of moonlight and other ambient light.
(6) Exterior Lighting Plan. At the time any exterior lighting is installed or substantially modified an
exterior lighting plan shall be submitted in order to determine whether the requirements of this
section have been met. The lighting plan shall identify:
(a) Location of light fixtures
(b) Type of luminaire
(c) Height of luminaire
(d) Maximum illumination
(e) Cut-off angle
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 58/144
[Amd. Ord. No. 2006-28, Feb. 2, 2006.]
10.765 [Repealed, Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2013-31, Feb. 21, 2013.]
Repealed
10.766 [Repealed, Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2013-31, Feb. 21, 2013.]
Repealed
10.767 Oxidizing Materials
The manufacture of oxidizing materials is prohibited. The storage or utilization of oxidizing materials
in excess of 500 pounds is prohibited.
10.768 Flammable Gases
The storage, utilization or manufacture of flammable gases shall not exceed 250,000 standard cubic
feet, exclusive of finished products in sealed portable containers.
[Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2013-31, Feb. 21, 2013.]
10.769 [Repealed, Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2013-31, Feb. 21, 2013.]
Repealed
10.770 [Repealed, Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2013-31, Feb. 21, 2013.]
Repealed
10.771 [Repealed, Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2013-31, Feb. 21, 2013.]
Repealed
10.772 Pedestrian Walkway General Provisions
These walkway provisions are intended to provide safe, direct and convenient pedestrian access in
new office and commercial developments.
Internal pedestrian circulation shall be provided in new office and commercial developments through
clustering of buildings, construction of pedestrian ways, skywalks, where appropriate, and similar
techniques.
[Added, Sec. 18, Ord. No. 7629, May 5, 1994.]
10.773 Pedestrian Walkway Connections and Routing
A pedestrian walkway shall be provided:
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 59/144
(1) To each street abutting the property, and for every 300 feet of street frontage not including limited
access freeways.
(2) To connect with walkways, sidewalks, bikepaths, and other bicycle or pedestrian connections on
adjacent properties.
(3) To connect building entrances to one another, to existing or planned transit stops and to connect
the pedestrian circulation system to other areas of the site such as parking lots, children's play
areas, required outdoor areas and any pedestrian amenities such as plazas, resting areas and
viewpoints.
[Added, Sec. 19, Ord. No. 7629, May 5, 1994; Amd. Sec. 24, Ord. No. 2009-207, Sept. 17, 2009.]
10.775 Pedestrian Walkway Design Standards
Pedestrian walkways shall be:
(1) At least five feet in paved unobstructed width, except walkways bordering parking spaces which
shall be at least seven feet wide unless concrete bumpers, bollards or curbing and landscaping or
other similar improvements are provided which prevent parked vehicles from obstructing the
walkway. Vehicle encroachment is permitted into the walkway when a minimum of seven feet is
maintained.
(2) Separated from parking area by grade, different paving materials, speed bumps or landscaping.
(3) Provided with stairs and ramps where necessary to provide a direct route.
(4) Provided with parking lot or pedestrian scale lighting.
(5) As direct as possible and avoid unnecessary meandering.
(6) Designed to minimize driveway crossings.
(7) Located so that the pedestrian has a minimum distance to walk between a transit stop or a street
with a transit stop and the entrance to a building.
[Added, Sec. 20, Ord. No. 7629, May 5, 1994; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2014-161. Dec. 22, 2014.]
10.776 Exceptions to Pedestrian Walkway Standards
A required walkway or walkway connection need not be provided where an alternate route is
reasonably direct. The alternate route is reasonably direct if the total walking distance does not
increase by more than 50% and not more than 100 feet over the other required route.
Walkways are not required between buildings or portions of a site which are not intended for or likely
to be used by pedestrians. Such building features include: truck loading docks, warehouses, not
including office/warehouse combinations, automobile sales lots, temporary uses, outdoor storage
areas, etc.
[Added, Sec. 21, Ord. No. 7629, May 5, 1994.]
10.780 Landscape and Irrigation Requirements
A. Purpose.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 60/144
The purpose of this section is to help ensure the aesthetic environment of the entire community, and
to enhance the quality of life for all citizens.
B. General Provisions.
(1) Landscaping shall provide a variety of plant sizes, shapes, texture and color while being
horticulturally compatible and minimizing irrigation reliance, thus conserving the public water
supply.
(2) Landscaping shall be maintained in good health by the property owner in conformance
with approved landscaping plans and shall not be reduced in area or number.
(3) Noncompliance with this section or approved plans is a violation of the Medford Land
Development Code and is subject to a maximum fine of $250 per day.
C. Applicability.
(1) The provisions of this section are applicable to all landscaping areas within commercial,
industrial, institutional, or multiple-family developments and open space/landscaping tracts
within all subdivisions, including single family residential.
a. Except as provided in subsection 10.780 C.(1)b., provisions of this section are not
applicable to:
1. Single-family lots.
2. Duplex lots.
3. Individual townhome lots.
4. Public Parks
5. Future development sites, unless irrigated landscaping is placed thereon. When
irrigated landscaping is provided upon a future development site, all provisions of
this section shall apply.
b. Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (CC&Rs) recorded for private regulation of
any development or subdivision, regardless of development type or zoning district, shall
not establish any restriction inhibiting the use of water-conserving landscaping design, or
require the installation of high water use landscape elements, as defined herein, upon
property governed by the CC&Rs.
(2) The approving authority may approve landscape plans or irrigation plans not in full
compliance with provisions of the Medford Land Development Code Chapter 10, without the
need for a separate Exception application, subject to the following:
a. The approving authority shall make one of the following findings to grant relief from a
provision:
1. Due to a unique circumstance of the site, strict application of the standards
requires an improvement that does not further the intent of this chapter, and
granting relief does not:
i. Diminish the quality of life;
ii. Diminish the aesthetic environment of the site and its surroundings;
iii. Increase reliance on irrigation water;
iv. Allow landscaping that is horticultural incompatible with the surroundings
or climate.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 61/144
2. A particular public benefit will be achieved by not complying with a provision of
this section.
b. If an application proposes a landscaping area to be left in a natural condition with
undisturbed soil for purposes of protecting natural features, such as native trees, riparian
vegetation, or similar attributes, the approving authority may grant relief from
landscaping and/or irrigation design standards in accordance with this subsection.
c. Relief from a provision shall not be used to cure a self-imposed condition.
d. Granting relief from provisions is a discretionary decision and shall be sparingly
exercised. Other landscaping or irrigation measures may be imposed by the approving
authority in lieu of relieved provisions.
e. The applicant shall provide findings supporting the request for relief within the project
narrative submitted with the application. The project narrative shall provide the following
information:
1. The specific provision(s) and site location(s) for which relief is sought; and,
2. How the strict application of this section results in an improvement that does not
further the intent of this chapter and meets the criteria of subsection 10.780 C.
(2)a.1. or, how a public benefit is achieved by granting relief from the provision(s).
D. Definitions.
When used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings as herein ascribed:
1. Bubblers: A range of irrigation devices that are pressure-compensating and dispense water as
a trickle down the riser, in a short umbrella, or in a fixed and non-misting short stream.
2. Certified Irrigation Professional (CIP): A person possessing one of the following credentials:
Irrigation Association Certified Irrigation Designer, State of Oregon Registered Landscape
Architect, or, State of Oregon Licensed Irrigation Contractor.
3. Drip Irrigation: Devices that apply water at or below the soil surface. Spray or misting emitters
are not drip irrigation devices.
4. ET (Evapotranspiration): The quantity of water transpired from plants and evaporated from
adjacent soil during a specified time, which is an indicator of how much water needs to be
replaced to maintain healthy plants.
5. ETo (Reference Evapotranspiration): The evapotranspiration rate for a standardized coolseason
grass crop that is well-watered. The ETo is considered to be the maximum
evapotranspiration rate under a given set of parameters, and is used as the basis for
comparing water needs of specific plants (see Plant Factor) under the same conditions.
6. High Water Use Landscape Elements: The wetted surface area of water features, and plants
with a plant factor that is 0.70 (70%) or greater of the reference Evapotranspiration (ETo).
7. Irrigation Zone: The portion of an irrigation system served by a single control valve, typically
operated by a unique station on the irrigation controller.
8. Landscaping Area: Any portion of a site not occupied by buildings or under pervious or
impervious surfaces associated with parking lots, drive aisles, utility boxes, trash enclosures,
or sidewalks, and any area of a planter strip adjacent to the site within the public right-of-way.
9. Mature Compost: A stable organic amendment characterized by raw materials (yard
trimmings, vegetative food waste, feedstock manures, etc.) that have been sufficiently
decomposed under controlled moisture and aeration conditions. Mature Compost is a wellcured
product in which viable seed and pathogens have been eliminated through the
application of high temperatures. For purposes of this code, mature compost is a product
certified by the US Composting Council Seal of Testing Assurance Program.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 62/144
10. Mulch: A permeable protective covering of organic material such as bark, pine needles or
compost spread over soil and around plants to reduce evaporation, maintain even soil
temperature, prevent soil erosion, and prevent weeds.
11. Open Space/Landscaping Tract: An area reserved on a subdivision final plat dedicated to a
property owners’ association or reserved for future public acquisition for the purposes of open
space, landscaping, conservation, active or passive recreation, stormwater detention,
floodplain protection, etc., and may include ancillary buildings and structures such as play
equipment, restrooms, ramadas, and gazebos.
12. Overhead Sprinklers: Irrigation devices that delivers water through the air (e.g. spray heads,
and rotors). A bubbler is not an overhead sprinkler.
13. Plant factor: The ratio of the evapotranspiration rate for a specific plant compared to the
reference evapotranspiration (ETo) under the same conditions. Appropriate water use
landscape materials are referenced in the Species Evaluation List -1999, under the Region 2
classification within the publication entitled A Guide to Estimating Irrigation Water Needs of
Landscape Plantings in California, a copy of which is on file in the Planning Department.
14. Parking Area Planters: Landscape planters interior to and dispersed throughout a parking lot
intended to create shade and visual relief for expanses of parking.
15. Structural Soil: An artificially engineered stone/soil mix that meets or exceeds road bearing
load requirements for structurally sound pavement design and installation, while supporting
tree growth, remaining root penetrable, and encouraging deep root growth away from
pavement surfaces.
16. Tree: A woody perennial plant having one or a few main stems or trunks, and which grows to
a height of at least fifteen feet. Non-coniferous trees typically do not develop and/or retain
branches on their lower parts.
17. Tree Caliper: Diameter of the tree trunk at a height of six (6) inches above grade.
18. Undisturbed Soil: Topsoil that is in good health, has been successfully protected from
disturbance, compaction and contamination, and is characterized by a water intake
(percolation) rate consistent with the optimal percolation rate typical of its soil classification.
19. Water Feature: Site elements such as swimming pools, spas, ponds, fountains, artificial
streams and other design elements where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational
function.
E. Landscape Plan and Irrigation Plan Review.
All development and building permit applications that include landscaping areas, as defined herein,
with the exception of development types provided within Section 10.780 C.(1)a., shall include a
Landscape Plan and Irrigation Plan in accordance with the provisions of this section. Landscaping
and irrigation improvements shall be installed in accordance with approved plans.
(1) Landscape Plan Review Process.
a. Landscape plan documents complying with Subsections 10.780 F and 10.780 G, and
prepared by a State of Oregon Registered Landscape Architect or State of Oregon
Licensed All-Phase Landscape Contractor for developments containing more than 1,500
square feet of landscaping area, unless exempted by ORS 671.540(a), shall be
submitted for review and approval by the Approving Authority. Subsequent to the
approval of the landscape plan, the applicant shall file an irrigation plan in accordance
with Subsection 10.780 E.(2).
b. The plan submittal shall include the quantity and size of landscape plan documents
specified on the application form.
(2) Irrigation Plan Review Process.
a. After approval of the landscape plan by the Approving Authority, and concurrently with
submittal of plans for building permits, irrigation plan documents complying with
Subsections 10.780 F and 10.780 H shall be submitted for staff review and approval. No
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 63/144
permit for building, paving, utilities, or other onsite construction improvement, other than
grading, shall be issued until irrigation plans for the landscaping have been approved.
b. The applicant shall submit two sets of the irrigation plan at a scale matching the
approved landscape plan or submit an electronic copy of the irrigation plan at scale
matching the landscape plan with the building permit construction plan set.
c. A full-sized copy of the approved landscape plan shall be submitted with the irrigation
plan.
d. The irrigation plan submitted for review shall be prepared by a Certified Irrigation
Professional (CIP), as defined herein for developments containing more than 1,500
square feet of landscaping area, unless exempted by ORS 671.540(a).
F. Landscape Plan and Irrigation Plan Requirements.
(1) Plan Title Block. The landscape or irrigation plan title block shall include:
a. Project name and address.
b. Applicant’s or agent’s name, address, phone number, fax number, and email address.
c. Designer’s name, address, phone number, fax number, and email address.
d. Sheet numbers, if more than a single sheet.
e. Date of plan preparation and all revision dates subsequent to initial submittal.
f. Scale of plan in accordance with Subsection 10.780 F(2).
(2) Plan Scale. The landscape or irrigation plan shall be drawn at one of the scales below:
a. One-inch equals ten feet.
b. One-inch equals twenty feet.
c. One-inch equals thirty feet.
d. 1/16 Architectural scale.
e. 1/32 Architectural scale.
(3) Plan Information. The landscape or irrigation plan shall include the following:
a. North arrow.
b. Designer credentials:
1. Landscape Plans. A State of Oregon Registered Landscape Architect’s
seal with signature, or State of Oregon Licensed All-Phased Landscape
Contractor number.
2. Irrigation Plans. A State of Oregon Registered Landscape Architect’s seal
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 64/144
with signature, State of Oregon Licensed Irrigation Contractor number, or
attached copy of Irrigation Association Certificate for Irrigation Designers.
c. Site information:
1. Property lines, existing and proposed.
2. Structures, existing and proposed.
3. Existing natural features, including:
i. Trees with a trunk six (6) inches in diameter or greater, measured at
four feet above ground, with location, species type, canopy edge, and
notation of whether they are to be preserved or removed.
ii. The canopy of any tree on adjacent property that extends over the
property line.
iii. Streams, riparian corridors and wetlands, including top-of-bank
and/or wetland edge.
4. Impervious surfaces, existing and proposed, including parking lots, plazas,
concrete walkways, and other hardscape areas.
5. On a separate plan sheet, a utilities plan showing all aboveground and
underground utilities, including, sewer, water, communications, and electricity.
6. Easements.
7. Clear vision areas in accordance with Section 10.735, Clear View of
Intersecting Streets.
8. Stormwater management facilities.
9. Any other site improvements.
10. Total square footage of landscaping areas noted on the cover page.
11. Total square footage of parking area planters noted on the cover page.
12. Existing topography at two (2) foot intervals, or direction of slopes,
notated with arrows and slope percentage.
(4) Landscape Plan Details. The landscape plan shall include the following additional
information:
a. All proposed landscaping materials and location, including:
1. Landscaping required by this chapter, including street frontage, parking area
planter, and bufferyard landscaping.
2. Location of all plant materials, landscaping features, fences, retaining walls,
hardscape elements, accent landscape lighting, and ground coverage materials
(e.g., mulch, native grasses, shale, or other rock materials).
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 65/144
b. Legend that includes botanical and common names and sizes of plant materials, and
ground coverage material.
c. Total square footage of all landscaping areas and total percentage of landscaping
areas containing high water use landscape elements, as defined herein.
d. Details and specifications for tree planting, soil preparation, other applicable planting
work, retaining walls, fences, landscaping headers, tree grates, and other landscaping
improvements.
e. Location of all areas to be provided with protective fencing for soil and/or existing tree
protection.
f. On the cover page, a note stating the required soil preparation procedures outlined in
Subsection 10.780 G.(9)b.
(5) Irrigation Plan Details. The irrigation plan shall include the following additional information:
a. Water meter(s) size, location, static water pressure, and anticipated friction loss at the
highest flow sprinkler design flow.
b. Backflow prevention device(s) location, model, and manufacturer.
c. Irrigation system layout identifying all components, including model and manufacturer.
d. Installation details for irrigation components.
e. Calculations, submitted on a separate worksheet provided by the City, providing data
identifying the system’s design parameters, hydraulics, and irrigation
schedule.
f. An irrigation legend containing:
1. A summary of the manufacturer’s stated flow rates and pressure losses, and
recommended operation pressures and sizes (e.g., nozzle sizes, pipe diameter
sizes, and pop-up heights) for all system components.
2. Identification of each unique irrigation component, with the manufacturer’s
recommended flow rates and pressure losses, and the manufacturer’s
recommended operating pressure and size.
g. A note in a conspicuous location on the cover page:
1. Stating that the irrigation system is designed to operate within the manufacturer’s
recommendations.
2. Directing the installer to verify proper operation of the irrigation
system.
3. Directing the installer to adjust pressure reducing valve(s) as necessary to
ensure that all components operate within the manufacturer’s recommendations.
h. An irrigation schedule.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 66/144
1. The irrigation schedule shall be based on:
i. Medford area historical peak week ETo of 2.3 inches of water.
ii. The water needs of the plants on the approved landscape plan.
iii. The soil type of the site.
iv. The proposed slopes.
2. For drip irrigation systems, the irrigation schedule shall provide instructions for
adjustment of the system to accommodate the maturing plant water needs, and
adding and/or resizing drip emitters at three-year increments until plant reaches
maturity.
G. Landscaping Design Standards.
(1) Other Applicable Code Sections. In addition to meeting the landscaping design
requirements of this Section, the landscape plan shall also meet landscaping design
requirements of the following Sections where applicable:
a. Street Frontage Landscaping Requirements. Private property abutting streets shall
meet the landscaping provisions of Section 10.797.
b. Parking Area Planter Landscaping Requirements. Parking lots shall meet the
landscaping provisions of Section 10.746 (3).
c. Bufferyard Landscaping Requirements. Bufferyards shall meet the landscaping
provisions of Section 10.790.
d. Southeast Overlay District Landscaping Requirements. Development occurring within
the Southeast Overlay District shall meet the landscaping provisions of Sections 10.370
through 10.385.
e. Stormwater Facilities Landscaping Requirements. Stormwater quality and detention
facilities shall be landscaped in accordance with the current adopted version of the
Rogue Valley Stormwater Quality Design Manual.
f. Large Retail Structure Landscaping Requirements. Development subject to the
provisions of Section 10.724 shall meet the landscaping provisions of Section 10.725.
(2) Plant Size Requirements.
The following minimum plant sizes shall apply at the time of planting to all landscaping
required by this Chapter unless otherwise stated:
a. Deciduous trees shall be a minimum of 1¾-inch caliper as defined herein.
b. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in height.
c. Shrubs shall be a minimum of one (1) gallon in size.
d. Groundcovers shall be in flats or a minimum size of four (4) inch pots.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 67/144
(3) Living Groundcover Requirements.
All landscaping areas, including right-of-way planter strips adjacent to the site, shall include
sufficient shrubs, turf grass, and/or other living groundcover to spread over 85% of each area
within eight years.
a. An area without living groundcover within a three (3) foot radius centered at the base
of each new tree may be counted toward this requirement.
b. For existing trees to be preserved, an area without living groundcover within a ten-foot
radius centered at the base of each existing tree or 50% of the canopy area, whichever is
less, may be counted toward this requirement.
c. In lieu of living groundcover, up to ten percent (10%) of the total landscaped area may
be covered with rock, brick, or decorative pavers, and may be counted toward this
requirement.
d. In no circumstance shall the sum of ground cover credit provided in Subsections a, b,
and c above cause the living ground cover percentage to be reduced to less than 50% of
the total landscape area.
(4) Non-Living Groundcover Requirements.
Landscaping areas not covered with turf grass shall be covered with a minimum of three (3)
inches of unsettled mulch. Subject to approval by the approving authority, a limited application
of rock or similar non-living groundcover material may be utilized. Bark mulch applied within
public right-of-way medians or planter strips shall be of shredded texture. Bark nuggets or
chips may not be applied.
(5) High Water Use Landscape Element Limitations.
a. The total landscaping area of a development site, including areas located within
adjacent public right-of-way planter strips, shall not exceed the following percentage of
high water use landscape elements, as defined herein:
1. Single-family residential open space/landscaping tract = 40%
2. Multiple-family residential = 40%
3. Commercial/office = 30%
4. Institutional = 30%
5. Industrial = 20%
b. Water features shall use recirculating water systems.
(6) Turf Grass Limitations.
a. Turf grass area shall have a minimum average width of eight (8) feet and shall be no
less than six (6) feet in width at any point, except for stormwater facilities constructed in
accordance with the current adopted version of the Rogue Valley Stormwater Quality
Design Manual.
b. Slopes exceeding 15% shall not be landscaped with turf grass.
c. Where on-street parking is located adjacent to a public right-of-way planter strip,
minimum turf width requirements of Subsection 10.780 G.(6)a. are not applicable to the
adjoining planter strip. Turf grass applied in the planter strip shall be included and
counted toward the High Water Use Landscape Element limitation identified in Section
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 68/144
10.780 G.(5).
(7) Slope Limitation in Landscaping Areas.
The maximum finished slope for landscaping areas is 33% (3 to 1). Slopes steeper than 33%
shall be terraced. This provision is not applicable to landscaping areas intended to remain in
their natural vegetated and soil condition.
(8) Irrigated Landscaping Adjacent to Impervious Surfaces.
Landscaping areas located adjacent to an impervious surface shall have a finished grade that
is one (1) inch lower than the impervious surface where they adjoin.
a. If there is a retaining wall or curb adjacent to the impervious surface, for areas uphill
of the wall, the referenced grade for this provision shall be the top of the retaining wall or
curb.
b. Finished grade of the irrigated landscaping area is the top surface elevation after
application of the required non-living groundcover material specified by Subsection
10.780 G.(4), or turf grass.
(9) Soil Quality/Restoration/Preparation
a. Required Organic Content:
Mature compost, as defined herein, shall be added to the soil of landscaping areas at a
rate of three cubic yards of compost per 1,000 square feet of landscaping area to be
planted. This requirement is not applicable in the following circumstances:
1. In areas fully secured by fencing for the purpose of protecting undisturbed soil
from damage and compaction during construction.
2. In stormwater quality and detention facilities constructed in accordance with the
current adopted version of the Rogue Valley Stormwater Quality Design Manual.
3. In landscaped areas where a soil test demonstrates an organic content of at
least three percent based upon core samples taken at one test per 20,000 square
feet, with a minimum of three samples per test. Samples shall be taken at least 40
feet apart to a depth of six (6) inches following completion of rough grading.
b. Required Soil Preparation Procedures:
1. Assure that soil is suitably dry before beginning.
2. Spread desired topsoil. (Optional)
3. Open/rip soil to a depth of eight (8) inches.
4. Assure organic content as required by Subsection 10.780 G.(9)a.
5. Cultivate soil and amendment(s) to a depth of four (4) to six (6) inches.
(10) Tree Requirements.
a. Soil Volume:
Each new or existing tree shall have sufficient soil volume to establish and maintain a
root system that will support the tree at maturity. For each tree, at least two cubic feet of
soil volume is required for each one square foot of tree canopy at maturity.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 69/144
1. Soil volume is calculated as the landscaping area under the tree canopy, free of
impervious surface or paving, and measured at a depth of three (3) feet.
2. For trees within parking area planters or sidewalk planters, in lieu of the soil
volume provisions above, structural soil may be utilized as an alternative material
under impervious surfaces to meet the required soil volume calculation.
b. Root Barriers:
Commercially-engineered root barriers shall be installed for all new trees located within
three feet of any public right-of-way impervious surface, and shall consist of six lineal feet
of 24-inch barrier, running parallel to the impervious surface, centered on the tree.
c. Fencing:
Existing trees to be preserved shall be fully secured by fencing at the canopy edge for
the purpose of protecting the tree from disturbance and soil compaction during
construction.
H. Irrigation System Design Standards.
All landscaping areas shall be irrigated with an irrigation system having an automatic controller in
accordance with the specifications provided in this Subsection.
(1) Water Needs. Plants in the same irrigation zone shall have similar watering needs unless
irrigated by drip irrigation having emitters sized for individual plant water needs.
(2) Overhead Irrigation.
a. A landscaping area irrigated by overhead irrigation shall have a minimum average
width of eight (8) feet and shall be no less than six (6) feet in width at any point; if less
than eight (8) feet in average width, it shall be irrigated by drip irrigation components or
bubblers.
b. The minimum pop-up sprinkler height shall be four (4) inches. All pop-up sprinklers
within one valve zone shall have matched precipitation rates.
c. Overhead irrigation systems shall be designed to maximize uniformity in water
application, such as providing overlapping sprinkler spacing as appropriate for the
planted area.
d. Overhead irrigation shall not be utilized in parking area planters.
(3) Irrigation Flow.
a. Irrigation systems designed for a flow of greater than 50 gallons per minute (GPM)
shall have a master valve at the point of connection.
b. Irrigation systems designed for a flow of greater than 80 GPM shall have a high flow
sensor.
(4) Irrigation Controllers. Automatic irrigation controllers shall be, at a minimum:
a. Capable of storing at least three (3) complete programs, with each program providing
three (3) or more start times, station run times in minutes to hours, and water days by
interval, day of the week and even/odd days.
b. Equipped with a percent adjust (water budget) feature unless utilizing weather-based
sensors or soil moisture sensors.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 70/144
c. Equipped with non-volatile memory and/or a self-charging battery circuit.
d. Capable of accepting an external rain or soil moisture sensor.
e. Equipped with master valve capability for systems with any designed flow having a
flow rate of 50 GPM or greater.
f. Equipped with high flow sensor capability for systems with any designed flow having a
flow rate of 80 GPM or greater.
(5) Pressure Regulation. All irrigation zones shall be equipped with pressure reduction valves
when needed to meet the manufacturer’s recommended operating pressure for the
components of each zone. Where needed, pressure regulation shall be located at the meter or
solenoid valve. Use of pressure-regulating sprinklers does not satisfy the requirement for a
pressure reduction valve.
(6) Isolation Valves. Isolation valves are required on the mainline:
a. At the irrigation system point of connection.
b. At each valve box.
c. At paved crossings of 20 feet or greater, such as streets, driveways or other
impervious surfaces.
(7) Swing Joints. Swing joints are required on all sprinkler head risers.
I. Landscaping and Irrigation Installation Certification, and Inspection.
(1) Landscaping and Irrigation Installation Certification.
Upon installation of landscaping and irrigation improvements, the State of Oregon Registered
Landscape Architect or the State of Oregon Licensed Landscape Contractor, responsible for
the installation of the landscaping and/or irrigation shall certify that such improvements were
installed in accordance with approved plans and specifications by preparing, signing and
submitting a Landscaping and Irrigation Certification form provided by the City.
a. The completed and signed certification form shall be submitted to the City prior to the
issuance of Certificate of Occupancy for any portion of the project, unless landscaping
and irrigation improvements have been deferred in accordance with Subsection 10.780 I.
(2).
b. The submittal of the certification form serves as the applicant’s notice of completion of
the landscaping and irrigation improvement and shall be submitted a minimum of two (2)
full business days prior to the final building inspection.
c. If installation is found by the City to be deficient based upon the approved plans and
the requirements of this code, the Building Official shall be provided a list of deficiencies
to be satisfied prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. The City shall also
forward the list of the landscaping and irrigation deficiencies to the certifier at the
addresses provided on the certification form.
d. If a Deferred Landscaping Improvement Agreement is utilized in accordance with
Subsection 10.780 I.(2), the City shall authorize the release of the financial assurance
upon confirmation of competed landscaping and irrigation improvement.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 71/144
e. If landscaping or irrigation installation is incorrectly certified:
1. The property owner is not relieved of the responsibility for installing the
landscaping and/or irrigation required by approved plans.
2. The City may notify the regulatory or certification body with which the installation
certifier is licensed.
(2) Deferred Landscaping and Improvement Agreement
a. If landscaping and irrigation installation must be delayed for seasonal reasons, such
as excess soil moisture, or additional time is required to complete the installation of
required landscape improvements, installation may be deferred for up to six (6) months
following the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy through the execution of a Deferred
Landscaping Improvement Agreement. The written agreement, in a form acceptable to
the City Attorney, shall specify:
1. That within six (6) months of the date of issuance of the Certificate of
Occupancy, all landscaping and irrigation improvements shall be completed in
accordance with approved plans.
2. That, if the property owner fails to complete said landscaping and irrigation
improvements in accordance with the terms of the agreement, the City may have
access to landscaping areas, complete the same as specified on the approved
plans, and recover the full cost and expense thereof from the financial assurance,
developer, and/or property owner.
3. The indemnification of the City, its councilmembers, officers, board members,
commissioners, and employees from claims of any nature arising or resulting from
the performance of any acts required by the City to be done in accordance
therewith.
4. That, to secure full and faithful performance thereof, the applicant shall file with
the City, either:
i. A surety bond, in an amount equal to 125% of the estimated cost of
completing the landscaping and irrigation improvements, executed by a
surety company authorized to transact business in the State of Oregon; or,
ii. Cash in an amount equal to 125% of the estimated cost of completing the
landscaping and irrigation improvements.
[Added, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 7786, Dec. 15, 1994; Amd. Sec. 3. Ord. No. 1998-75, Apr. 16, 1998; Amd.
Sec. 1, Ord. No. 1999-211, Dec. 16, 1999; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2000-55, Apr. 6, 2000; Amd. Sec.
12, Ord. No. 2013-31, Feb. 21, 2013; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2013-84, June 6, 2013 (effective Dec.
1, 2013); Amd. Sec. 17, Ord. No. 2018-52 June 7, 2018 (effective July 9, 2018).]
10.781 Concealment of Trash Receptacles
Trash receptacles shall be kept in enclosures made of solid wood, metal, brick, or masonry block
which conceal them from view. Access doors shall be made of solid wood or metal. When possible,
enclosures should be incorporated into the building (i.e., wing walls, alcoves). If free standing, the
enclosures shall be constructed of materials which are compatible with other structures on the site.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 72/144
Chain link fencing, with or without slats, for this purpose is prohibited.
[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 1999-211, Dec. 16, 1999.]
10.782 Concealment of Heating, Ventilation, Air Conditioning (HVAC) Equipment and Roof-
Mounted Wireless Communication Facilities
All HVAC equipment and roof-mounted wireless communication facilities shall be concealed from
view. Where possible, such concealment should be accomplished using the architectural elements
of the buildings (i.e., roof forms, parapets, wing walls, alcoves, etc.). Free standing walls or fences
may also serve as sight-obscuring concealment devices. Chain link fencing, with or without slats, for
this purpose is prohibited.
[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 1999-211, Dec. 16, 1999; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2008-04, Jan. 3, 2008.]
10.783 Location of Wall Mounted Utility Services
Wall mounted utility devices, such as meters and television cable boxes, shall be mounted on the
side of the building not facing a street unless they are concealed from view. Where possible,
concealment should be accomplished using architectural elements of the building (i.e., wing walls,
alcoves, etc.).
[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 1999-211, Dec. 16, 1999.]
10.790 Bufferyards
A. Purpose.
Bufferyards are utilized in order to minimize potential conflicts caused by in types and intensity of
uses on adjacent properties. Factors to be mitigated include nuisances, such as visual impacts of
buildings or parking areas, glare, views from upper story windows, dirt, litter, noise and signs.
B. Location.
Bufferyards shall be located along property lines which define the boundary between one zoning
district and another, or along the boundary between a zoning district and a General Land Use Plan
Map (GLUP) designation where there is not yet city zoning. The specific location of the bufferyard,
relative to the property line, is governed by Subsections C-E. Bufferyards are not required along any
portion of a public right-of-way or private street.
[Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 7776, Dec. 1, 1994.]
C. Determination of Bufferyard Requirements.
(1) To determine the type of bufferyard required between two adjacent lots, the following
procedure shall be followed:
(a) Identify the zoning district within which the subject lot with its proposed use is
located.
(b) Identify the zoning district(s) or, absent city zoning, the GLUP designation(s) within
which the abutting lot(s) are located.
(c) Determine the bufferyard required along each boundary, or segment thereof, of the
subject lot by referring to Subsection D, Tables of Bufferyard Standards, which specify
the bufferyard types required between zones or GLUP designations.
(d) A standard bufferyard shall be provided in addition to any agricultural buffering
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 73/144
required by Section 10.801.
(2) Responsibility for bufferyard installation. In the case of two abutting vacant lots, the first lot
to develop shall provide the buffer required by Subsection D, Tables of Bufferyard Standards.
The second use to develop shall, at the time it develops, provide all additional material/land
necessary to provide the total bufferyard required of Subsection D, Tables of Bufferyard
Standards.
[Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 7776, Dec. 1, 1994.]
D. Tables of Bufferyard Standards.
The letter designations contained in these tables refer to the bufferyard standards contained in
Subsection E, Bufferyard Standards.
Table 10.790-1. Bufferyard Standards-Zone to Zone
Subject Site Zoning
Zoning on Abutting Land
Vac SFR MFR CS/P C-N C-C C-R C-H I-L I-G I-H
SFR – – – – – – – – – – –
MFR 1 A – – – – – – – – –
CS/P 1 A A – – – – – – – –
C-N 1 A A – – – – – – – –
C-C 1 A A – – – – – – – –
C-R 1 A A A – – – – – – –
C-H 1 A A A – – – – – – –
I-L 1 A A A A – – – – – –
I-G 2 B B B B A A A A – –
I-H 2 B B B B A A A A – –
Table 10.790–2. Bufferyard Standards—Zone to GLUP
Subject Site
Zoning
GLUP Designation on Abutting Land
UR UH SC C GI HI
SFR – – – – – –
MFR A – – – – –
CS/P A A – – – –
C-N A A – – – –
C-C A A – – – –
C-R A A A – – –
C-H A A A – – –
I-L A A A A – –
I-G 3 3 A A – –
I-H 3 3 3 A – –
1 A type-A bufferyard shall be provided at the time of development of the site.
2 Where the bufferyard will be a type A, based on the current zoning, the entire bufferyard shall be
installed. Where the bufferyard will be a type B, based on the current zoning, only the 8-foot wall of
the bufferyard shall be installed.
3 Only the 8-foot wall of the type-B bufferyard shall be installed.
- Signifies no buffering requirement.
[Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 7776, Dec. 1, 1994.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 74/144
E. Bufferyard Standards.
(1) This Subsection provides the width of the bufferyard, type of wall required, and the
required planting scheme to provide effective screening between adjacent properties having
dissimilar land use. For an administratively approved bufferyard, the Standard Planting
Scheme as required by 10.790 (E)(1)(a) shall be used unless the applicant wishes to submit a
Site Plan and Architectural Review application to have the Commission consider modifying the
requirement.
(a) Planting Scheme: In addition to compliance with other landscaping provisions in this
chapter, bufferyards shall include a variety of plant sizes and shapes and provide
effective visual screening between the adjacent properties having dissimilar land uses.
The bufferyard shall be planted with trees and shrubs of the appropriate size, shape and
spacing to provide a continuous canopy between the top of the wall and a height of 20
feet within ten (10) years. A minimum of 60 percent of the trees used to provide visual
screening shall be non-deciduous species. The planting plan shall take into account the
nature of the impacts specific to the two sites, particularly building height and locations of
windows and lighting.
Table 10.790-3. Bufferyard Types
Type Width Wall
A 10 feet Six (6) foot concrete or masonry wall.
B 20 feet Eight (8) foot concrete or masonry wall
(2) The wall shall typically be placed on the property line between the two uses; however, the
approving authority may authorize its location anywhere within the bufferyard. Walls shall be
constructed of a material and design that is sight-obstructing, compatible with adjacent uses,
and accepted by the approving authority.
(3) Any part of the bufferyard may be located on the adjoining property provided it is planted
with a proportionate share of the required plants and, for any part located outside of the
standard setback, a perpetual bufferyard easement is recorded by the property owner. The
easement shall allow for the installation and perpetual maintenance of the bufferyard and
restrict use of the area to only the bufferyard.
(4) Encroachments into bufferyards: The bufferyard is intended to provide a minimum
amount of space for the required plants to grow and for aesthetic separation between uses.
Therefore, this area shall be reserved exclusively for such use. Encroachment of driveways,
parking and maneuvering areas, sidewalks, patios, or structures (other than the required fence
or wall) are prohibited in the bufferyard area.
(5) Bufferyard credits: Existing plant materials within the bufferyard area may be counted
toward the bufferyard requirement.
(6) Adjustments to bufferyards: The approving authority shall have the discretion to make
adjustments to the bufferyard requirements if an unusual circumstance exists and a finding is
made that adequate buffering will be provided to avoid significant adverse impacts to the
livability or value of the adjoining properties. Adjustments shall not be made simply for the
convenience of site design. Adjustments to the bufferyard requirements may include, but are
not limited to, the following:
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 75/144
(a) Where a building wall with no openings below eight (8) feet abuts the bufferyard, the
building wall may be counted in place of a required wall or fence.
(b) Where there is existing development on the site, such as paving or a building, which
affects or precludes implementation of the bufferyard standard.
(c) Where a proposed project abuts existing development, and the adjacent uses are
the same (i.e., apartment parking lot adjacent to commercial parking lot) or are
sufficiently compatible that the full buffering, otherwise required, is not necessary and the
uses are not expected to change significantly over time.
(d) Where a project abuts an irrigation canal, natural waterway, railroad right-of-way, or
other such element.
[Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 7776, Dec. 1, 1994; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2013-84, June 6, 2013 (effective Dec.
1, 2013).]
F. Ownership of Bufferyards.
Bufferyards shall remain in the ownership of the original developer (successors and assigns) of the
lot on which the buffer is located.
[Section 10.790 amended and Sections 10.792, 10.793, 10.794, 10.795, and 10.796 consolidated
into Section 10.790 by Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2012-137, Sept. 6, 2012; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2013-84,
June 6, 2013 (effective Dec. 1, 2013); Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2014-161, Dec. 22, 2014.]
10.792 [Consolidated into Section 10.790, Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2012-137, Sept. 6, 2012.]
Consolidated into Section 10.790, Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2012-137, Sept. 6, 2012.
10.793 [Consolidated into Section 10.790, Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2012-137, Sept. 6, 2012.]
Consolidated into Section 10.790, Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2012-137, Sept. 6, 2012.
10.794 [Consolidated into Section 10.790, Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2012-137, Sept. 6, 2012.]
Consolidated into Section 10.790, Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2012-137, Sept. 6, 2012.
10.795 [Consolidated into Section 10.790, Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2012-137, Sept. 6, 2012.]
Consolidated into Section 10.790, Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2012-137, Sept. 6, 2012.]
10.796 [Consolidated into Section 10.790, Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2012-137, Sept. 6, 2012.]
Consolidated into Section 10.790, Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2012-137, Sept. 6, 2012.]
10.797 (A) [Repealed, Sec. 26, Ord. No. 2009-207, Sept. 17, 2009.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 76/144
10.797 Street Frontage Landscaping Requirements
A. This section establishes the minimum landscaping requirements along all street frontages
outside of the public right-of-way. Plans submitted to comply with this section shall be approved by
the approving authority.
(1) For land divisions with houses that do not face an arterial street, an arterial street frontage
landscape plan shall be submitted showing a vertical separation feature that is a minimum of
eight (8) feet in height. The separation feature shall create a solid visual screen. A fence or
wall shall be engineered to stand straight. The separation feature shall be reduced in height
where otherwise required in a front or side yard or clear vision triangle. The Planning
Commission may allow adjustments to the above requirement in response to topography.
(2) For all other street frontages the number of plants required for distances above or below
one hundred (100) feet shall be prorated with the resulting numbers of plants rounded so that
one-half or more shall be deemed to require a full plant. All required planting shall be located in
the required yard area adjacent to the street, or within the planter strip, or a combination of
both.
(3) Existing plant materials which meet the requirements of this code may be counted as
contributing to the total landscaping required by this section. Interstate 5 and other highway
frontages shall be treated the same as city street frontage.
(4) The following table specifies the type and number of plants required by this section.
Table 797-1. Frontage Landscaping - Materials and Quantities
Zoning District Number of plants required per 100
feet of street frontage less
driveways
Trees Shrubs
SFR (Nonresidential uses),
MFR, C-N, C-S/P, C-C, C-R, C-H
4 25
I-L, I-G, I-H 3 15
Frontage landscaping shall not be required for areas in public parks that do not have buildings within
20 feet from the adjacent right-of-way unless the approving authority determines it is necessary to
buffer specific park activities.
[Amd. Ord. No. 6749, Oct. 18, 1990; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 7786, Dec. 15, 1994; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord.
No. 7970, Oct. 5, 1995; Amd. Sec. 13, Ord. No. 8013, Jan. 4, 1996; Amd. Sec. 15, Ord. No. 8285,
Feb. 6. 1997; Amd. Sec. 25, Ord. No. 2009-207, Sept. 17, 2009; Amd. Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2012-137,
Sept. 6, 2012; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2013-84, June 6, 2013 (effective Dec. 1, 2013); Amd. Sec. 18
Ord. No. 2018-52 June 7, 2018 (effective July 9, 2018); Amd. Sec. 20, Ord. No. 2018-133, Dec. 6,
2018.]
10.798 [Repealed, Sec. 17, Ord. No. 2012-137, Sept. 6, 2012.]
Repealed
10.798 General Exceptions to Yard Requirements
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 77/144
The following projections shall be permitted within the required yard area:
(1) Cornices, eaves, fireplaces, canopies, mechanical (heating and cooling equipment), or
other similar architectural features may extend a maximum of one (1) foot into a required yard.
(2) Open uncovered accessory structures such as fire escapes, patios, porches, balconies, or
outside stairways may extend a maximum of one (1) foot into the required side and rear yard
and a maximum of six feet into a required front yard. Porches, decks or stoops which are open
and uncovered and not exceeding 18 inches in height may be located within 18 inches of any
lot line.
(3) Within the commercial districts awnings shall be allowed to extend a maximum of six (6)
feet into the required front yard.
(4) Established Neighborhoods: On a parcel where the abutting lots, adjoining the same street,
contain legally constructed buildings whose setbacks are equal to or less than that required by
the underlying zone, the front yard setback may be reduced to a distance equal to the average
setback of the abutting parcels. If one of the adjoining lots is vacant, the minimum setback of
the underlying zone shall be utilized to determine the average.
[Amd. Sec. 52, Ord. No. 7659, June 2, 1994; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 7940, Aug. 3, 1995; Amd. Sec.
2, Ord. No. 98-56, March 19, 1998.]
10.801 Agricultural Buffering in Non-Urban Reserve Areas
A. Purpose.
The provisions of this Section related to agricultural buffering implement a policy that was mutually
adopted by the City and Jackson County as part of the Urban Growth Boundary Management
Agreement as amended. Moreover, the purpose of these provisions is to minimize or mitigate:
(1) Trespass upon and vandalism of agricultural land which is located in near proximity to
urban development.
(2) Potential adverse impacts on urban development associated with noise, dust, spray drift
and surface waters.
[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 8014, Jan. 4, 1996.]
B. Applicability.
The provisions of this Section apply to the development permit applications listed below in this
subsection where land proposed for urban development is not in an urban reserve (see Regional
Plan Element) and abuts and has a common lot line with other land which is zoned Exclusive Farm
Use (EFU) or Exclusive Agriculture (EA). However, development which requires City approval for
more than one of the below development permit applications for the same development shall be
required to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this Section only in the first such
application.
(1) Land Divisions.
(2) Planned Unit Developments.
(3) Conditional Use Permits.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 78/144
(4) Site Plan and Architectural Review or Historic Review where the action being sought will
result in the construction of one or more buildings intended for human occupancy as dwellings
or for business purposes.
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8014, Jan. 4, 1996; Amd. Sec. 22, Ord. No. 2013-131, Sept. 5, 2013,
effective Dec. 1, 2013.]
C. Information Required: Agricultural Impact Assessment Report.
As part of any land use or development application listed in Subsection 10.801.B where the
agricultural buffering provisions in Subsections 10.801.A through E apply, an applicant for such
application shall supply the Planning Department with the following information in a report entitled
“Agricultural Impact Assessment Report”:
(1) An excerpt of a City of Medford and/or Jackson County zoning map showing the zoning of
land adjacent and within two hundred (200) feet of the property proposed for urban
development.
(2) A description of the type and nature of agricultural uses and farming practices, if any,
which presently occur on adjacent lands zoned EFU or EA and sources of such information.
The information thus required, if applicable, shall include:
(a) Method of irrigation.
(b) Type of agricultural product produced.
(c) Method of frost protection.
(d) Type of agricultural equipment customarily used on the property.
(3) Detailed information obtained from the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NCRS)
concerning soils which occur on adjacent lands zoned EFU or EA, and whether the land has
access to water for irrigation.
(4) Wind pattern information.
(5) A description of the measures proposed to comply with the requirements of Subsections
10.801.A through E.
(6) The persons who prepared said report and all persons, agencies, and organizations
contacted during preparation of the report.
(7) All statements shall be documented, sources given as reference, and any other detailed
information needed to substantiate conclusions should be provided in the appendices.
[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 8014, Jan. 4, 1996.]
D. Mitigation and Impact Management.
(1) Agricultural Classification (Intensive or Passive). For the purposes of this Section,
agricultural land is hereby classified as either intensive or passive. Intensive agriculture is
defined as farming which is under intensive day-to-day management, and includes fruit
orchards and the intensive raising and harvesting of crops or, notwithstanding its current use,
has soils of which a majority are class I through IV as determined by the NRCS, has irrigation
water available and is outside of the Urban Growth Boundary. Passive agriculture is defined
as farming that is not under intensive day-to-day management, and includes land used as
pasture for the raising of livestock. The approving authority shall determine whether adjacent
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 79/144
agricultural uses are intensive or passive based upon the specific circumstances of each case
and the nature of agriculture which exists on the adjacent land zoned EFU or EA at the time
the urban development application is filed and accepted by the City.
(2) Mitigation - Intensive Agriculture. To minimize or mitigate the adverse potential impacts
associated with the proximity of urban and agricultural land uses, the following measures shall
be undertaken by the developer when urban development is proposed adjacent to land which
is in intensive agricultural use:
(a) Fencing. A wood fence, chain link fence, masonry wall, or other comparable fence,
as approved by the approving authority not less than six (6) feet in height or such greater
height as may be required, shall be installed at the rear or side property boundary where
the urban development property adjoins and has a common property line with land zoned
EFU or EA. In no case shall a fence or wall be required within a front yard area. The
fence or wall used to buffer agricultural land shall comply with the regulations regarding
fencing, Sections 10.731 through 10.735. Information shall be provided regarding the
long term maintenance responsibility for the fence.
(b) Landscaping. On the property proposed for urban development there shall be a
landscaped strip adjoining the fence or wall required in subsection 10.801.D(2)(a) which
shall have a width of not less than eight (8) feet within which there shall be planted a row
of evergreen trees spaced not more than eight (8) feet apart. The species and variety of
evergreen trees proposed shall be approved by the approving authority and shall be
selected on the basis of fast growth and vegetation density. The City may compile and
adopt a list of trees suitable for agricultural buffering and once adopted, only trees from
the approved list may be selected to satisfy the requirements of this section. The trees
shall be served by an underground irrigation system. Information shall be provided
regarding the long-term responsibility for care and maintenance of the landscaping.
(c) Deed Declaration. All urban land proposed for development which lies within two
hundred (200) feet of an EFU or EA zoning district boundary shall be subject to a deed
declaration that requires the owner and all successors in interest to recognize and accept
common, customary and accepted farming practices. The declaration shall also provide
that the perpetual maintenance of fencing, the horticultural care for and maintenance of
landscaping, and the maintenance of other buffering features installed to comply with this
Section shall be the sole responsibility of the owners of property subject to the deed
declaration. The deed declaration shall be in a form approved by the City. After the
deed declaration is signed it shall be recorded in the official records of Jackson County,
and copies shall be mailed to the owners of adjacent agricultural lands zoned EFU or EA.
(d) Irrigation Runoff. Measures appropriate to the circumstances present shall be
undertaken by the urban developer to mitigate adverse impacts which occur from
periodic naturally occurring runoff and inadvertent agricultural irrigation runoff.
(3) Mitigation - Passive Agriculture. To minimize or mitigate the adverse potential impacts
associated with the proximity of urban and agricultural land uses, the following measures shall
be undertaken by the developer when urban development is proposed adjacent to land in
passive agricultural use:
(a) Fencing. A wood fence, chain link fence, or masonry wall, not less then six (6) feet
in height shall be installed at the property boundary where the development property
adjoins and has a common property line with land zoned EFU or EA. In no case shall a
fence or wall be required within a front yard area. The fence or wall used to buffer
agricultural land shall comply with the regulations regarding fencing, Sections 10.731
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 80/144
through 10.735. Information shall be provided regarding the long-term maintenance
responsibility for the fence or wall.
(b) Deed Declaration. The deed declaration required in subsection 10.801.D(2)(c) shall
be required.
(c) Irrigation Runoff. Measures appropriate to the circumstances present shall be
undertaken by the urban developer to mitigate adverse impacts which occur from
periodic naturally occurring runoff and inadvertent agricultural irrigation runoff.
(4) Discretionary Mitigation Measures/Design Considerations. In addition to the specific
mitigation measures required in Subsections 10.801.D(2) and 10.801.D(3), an applicant shall
also consider the following design items and the approving authority may, in its sole discretion,
impose conditions which do any of the following:
(a) Increase the rear or side yard setback to afford greater spatial separation between
agriculture and urban development.
(b) Regulate the location of garages and parking areas to place them between dwellings
and other buildings intended for human occupancy and agricultural land.
(c) Require the placement of streets, driveways, open space or common areas between
urban development and agricultural land.
(d) Require fencing and landscaping, including the use of berms, in excess of that
required in Subsection 10.801.D.
(e) Regulate or require other mitigation measures or features deemed reasonably
necessary and appropriate by the approving authority to protect the public health, safety
and general welfare, and to make urban development compatible with agricultural uses
which exist on adjacent lands zoned EFU or EA.
[Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 8014, Jan. 4, 1996.]
E. Alteration or Removal of Buffering Measures.
The measures required by the approving authority to buffer agricultural land from urban uses and
development may be altered or removed entirely when the zoning of an adjacent and touching
agricultural land is changed from EFU or EA to a city zoning district other than EA. No alteration or
removal of the agricultural land buffering features shall cause the removal of fencing or landscaping
which is required to meet the Bufferyard requirements of Sections 10.790 through 10.796.
[Sections 10.801, 10.802, 10.803, 10.804 and 10.805 consolidated into Section 10.801, Sec. 2, Ord.
No. 2012-128, Aug. 16, 2012; Amd. Sec. 22, Ord. No. 2013-131, Sept. 5, 2013.]
10.802 Urban-Agricultural Conflict Mitigation in Urban Reserve
NOTE: GRAPHICS FOR FIGURES 10.802-1, 10.802-2, 10.802-3, AND 10.802-4 CAN BE FOUND
BELOW.
The regulations in this section apply only to urban land in the urban growth boundary that was added
from the urban reserve shown in the Regional Plan Element of the Comprehensive Plan. For other
land in the City, development is subject to the agricultural buffering standards in Section 10.801. The
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 81/144
basis for these regulations can be found in the Greater Bear Creek Valley Regional Problem-Solving
Plan (Regional Plan), Volume II, Appendix III.
A. Purpose.
The purpose of these standards is to mitigate the potential for conflict between farming activities and
urban uses. These provisions implement a policy mutually adopted by the City and Jackson County
in the Regional Plan Element of the Comprehensive Plan. The mitigation provisions of this Section
seek to achieve the following objectives:
1. Minimize the impacts of urban development on agricultural production activities.
2. Minimize the potential for complaints about agricultural practices and activities.
3. Ensure the continued use of agricultural land for agricultural uses.
4. Minimize potential conflict by developing a well-defined boundary between agricultural and
urban uses. The best boundary will be one that minimizes conflict in both directions.
B. Definitions.
The following definitions apply only to this Section.
1. Agricultural land uses. The use of land for the cultivation and husbandry of plant and animal
products, including agricultural activities permitted on land zoned Exclusive Farm Use (EFU).
2. Classification, Agricultural
(a) Intensive Use (I). The agricultural lands in this category:
(1) Are composed of Class I–IV agricultural soils; or
(2) Support existing or scheduled plantings of long-term crops with a height at
maturity exceeding four (4) feet.
(b) Passive Use (P). The agricultural lands in this category:
(1) Are composed of predominately Class IV soils, can demonstrate an unbroken
or essentially unbroken 25-year history of agricultural inactivity or grazing use, and
which have either of the following: (i) greater than 50% hydric soils or (ii) greater
than 50% shallow soils (surface to bedrock) of less than two feet in depth; or
(2) Are composed of greater than 50% of Class VI or poorer soil; or
(3) Are outside of an irrigation district’s boundary and outside of areas suitable for
future expansion of a district, as determined by the district.
3. Mitigation area. A management zone of varying size, shape, and characteristics between
the two land uses that utilizes combinations of mitigation elements to buffer between
agricultural land and urban land uses.
4. Mitigation element. A physical or legal feature within a mitigation area that mitigates an
adverse impact. A mitigation element may consist of vegetation, transportation and utility
corridors, natural barriers, deed restrictions, or other natural or man-made features.
5. Spray drift. Airborne movement of agricultural chemicals onto a non-target area.
6. Urban Receptor, Sensitivity of:
(a) Urban receptor, Higher-sensitivity (H):
(1) Residential use.
(2) Motel, hotel, or hostel.
(3) Place of worship; public meeting facility.
(4) Childcare center, kindergarten, school, university, or other educational
institution.
(5) Medical center or hospital.
(6) Public or quasi-public use, such as library, park, etc.
(7) Other similar uses.
(b) Urban receptor, Lower-sensitivity (L):
(1) Commercial use, except for any defined as higher-sensitivity urban receptor.
(2) Industrial use.
(3) All other uses not classified here.
C. Description of Impacts Requiring Mitigation.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 82/144
1. Spray Drift. Principally, spray drift is caused by agricultural chemical use, but may be
caused by urban use of agrochemicals. Separation between urban and agricultural uses is the
preferred tool to mitigate the impact of the spray drift, employing either large setbacks or a
combination of smaller setbacks and a tree buffer.
2. Trespass and Vandalism. Trespass and vandalism are often considered by farmers to be
the most serious adverse potential impact to agricultural operations in proximity to urban
areas. Climb-resistant, trespass-inhibiting fences and/or hedges in the mitigation area are the
means of reducing these impacts.
3. Odor. Odor is one of the less important agriculture-related adverse impacts. Unless there
are site-specific reasons why mitigation of odor is critical (such as the presence of a livestock
feed lot), issues with odor are sufficiently addressed by requiring that owners of new urban
development within 1,000 feet of the applicable agricultural land receive notice through an
explicitly worded deed declaration of the potential adverse impacts to which they will likely be
exposed.
4. Dust, Smoke, and Ash. Like odor, this grouping potential adverse impacts is one of the least
important agriculture-related issues in the region, and, like odor, can be addressed by requiring
a deed declaration.
5. Run-off. Stormwater and irrigation run-off arise from both urban and agricultural uses, and
can adversely impact agricultural operations as well as urban health and livability. Impacts may
be avoided or significantly reduced by employing erosion-prevention and erosion-control
measures.
6. Noise. Noise is an impact arising from agricultural operations. This Section contains no
noise mitigation requirements, but applicants are encouraged to consider community design
and construction practices that provide some level of noise mitigation. Recommended methods
may be found in Appendix III of the Greater Bear Creek Valley Regional Plan.
D. Applicability.
1. The provisions in this Section apply to the development permit applications listed below
where proposed urban development abuts land zoned EFU at the outer edge of the urban
growth boundary and was part of the urban reserve established in the Regional Plan Element.
Refer to Regional Plan Element of the Comprehensive Plan for a map of the urban reserve.
(a) Land Division;
(b) Planned Unit Development;
(c) Conditional Use Permit;
(d) Site Plan and Architectural review.
2. A pre-application conference is required for all applications subject to the provisions of this
Section.
3. Different degrees of mitigation are required of the applicant based on the following factors:
the sensitivity of the proposed urban use to agricultural impacts; the impact being buffered; the
intensity of uses on the adjacent EFU land; and whether the mitigation area is to be mid- or
long-term.
4. Mitigation elements established under this Section shall not be removed or reduced unless
the applicable adjacent EFU land changes to a non-agricultural zoning district.
E. Application: Agricultural Impact Assessment Report.
As part of any land use or development application listed in Subsection D where the agricultural
mitigation standards in Subsections H–M apply, an applicant shall supply the Planning Department
with a report entitled “Agricultural Impact Assessment Report” (AIAR). The purpose of the AIAR is to
provide the approving authority with sufficient evidence to determine agricultural intensity (active or
passive) and to evaluate the applicant’s proposed method of complying with the provisions of this
Section. The AIAR shall contain:
1. Map showing the zoning of land adjacent and within two hundred (200) feet of the property
proposed for urban development.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 83/144
2. A description of the type and nature of agricultural uses and farming practices, if any, which
presently occur on adjacent lands zoned EFU and sources of such information. The
information thus required, if applicable, shall include:
(a) Method of irrigation.
(b) Type of existing agricultural product produced or scheduled plantings within one year
of projected development completion date.
(c) Types of agricultural production and practices for the five preceding years.
(d) Method of frost protection.
(e) Type of agricultural equipment customarily used on the property.
3. Detailed information obtained from the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service
(NRCS) concerning soils which occur on the applicable adjacent lands zoned EFU, and
whether the land has access to water for irrigation.
4. Wind pattern information.
5. A mitigation plan which includes a description of the measures proposed to comply with the
requirements of this Section, a detailed landscaping and irrigation plan for the mitigation area,
and a copy of the proposed deed declarations, maintenance covenants, and property owners’
association covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs).
6. The persons who prepared said report and all persons, agencies, and organizations
contacted during preparation of the report.
7. All statements shall be documented, sources given as reference, and any other detailed
information needed to substantiate conclusions should be provided in the AIAR appendices.
8. If the applicant is requesting a deviation from the standards of this Section, the Agricultural
Impact Assessment Report shall not be deemed to be complete unless accompanied by the
Conflict Assessment and Mitigation Study described in Subsection O and the recommendation
of Jackson County’s Agricultural Buffering Committee, or a letter from Jackson County
indicating that no such recommendation is forthcoming.
F. Review Process.
1. Using the definitions of the urban and agricultural classifications herein and the evidence of
the AIAR, the approving authority shall determine:
(a) Whether adjacent agricultural uses are intensive or passive at the time the urban
development application is filed and accepted by the City; and
(b) Whether the applicant’s proposed mitigation plan meets the standards of this
Section.
2. The approving authority shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application
based on the AIAR and its proposals and conclusions.
G. Mitigation Requirements.
1. All mitigation elements will be sited on urban land unless arrangements have been made
with the adjacent agricultural land owner to site some or all elements on agricultural land.
2. When development results in the creation of new lots, all mitigation areas shall be located
in a separate tract or tracts under common ownership, not divided among separate lots.
3. Mitigation for Intensive Agriculture. To minimize or mitigate the potential adverse impacts
associated with the proximity of urban and agricultural land uses, the following measures shall
be required when the proposed urban development is adjacent to land which is in intensive
agricultural use:
(a) Setbacks as illustrated in subsection I, Figure 10.802-1, either alone or in
conjunction with a tree buffer;
(b) Tree Buffer as illustrated in Figure 10.802-1 and described in subsections J and K;
(c) Screening Shrubs (only in conjunction with a tree buffer) as described in subsection
L;
(d) Trespass-Inhibiting Hedges/Fencing as described in subsection M;
(e) Deed Declaration. Any portion of the site which lies within one thousand (1,000) feet
of an applicable EFU zoning district boundary shall be subject to a deed declaration that
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 84/144
requires the owners and all successors in interest to recognize and accept common,
customary and accepted farming practices which may produce noise, dust, odors, and
other impacts. The deed declaration shall be in a form approved by the City. After the
deed declaration is signed it shall be recorded in the official records of Jackson County,
and copies shall be mailed to the owners of adjacent agricultural lands zoned EFU.
(f) Maintenance Program. Mitigation areas shall be subject to a restrictive covenant that
provides that the perpetual maintenance of mitigation-related fencing, the perpetual
horticultural care and maintenance of trees, shrubs, and hedges that are used for
mitigation, and the maintenance of other mitigation elements shall be solely the
responsibility of the owners and all successors in interest of property subject to the
covenant. The covenant shall be in a form approved by the City. After the covenant is
signed it shall be recorded in the official records of Jackson County.
(g) Runoff. Measures appropriate to the circumstances present shall be required to
mitigate adverse impacts by employing erosion-prevention and erosion-control measures
during construction, and by an adequate stormwater plan for urban development that
takes into account impacts from and on the adjacent agricultural land. Any part of the
mitigation may be used for stormwater management.
4. Mitigation for Passive Agriculture. To minimize or mitigate the potential adverse impacts
associated with the proximity of urban and agricultural land uses, the following measures shall
be required when urban development is proposed adjacent to land in passive agricultural use:
(a) Setbacks as illustrated in subsection I, Figure 10.802-1, either alone or in conjunction
with a tree buffer;
(b) Tree Buffer as illustrated in Figure 10.802-1 and described in subsections J and
K;
(c) Screening Shrubs (only in conjunction with a tree buffer) as described in subsection
L;
(d) Trespass-Inhibiting Hedges/Fencing as described in subsection M;
(e) Deed Declaration. A deed declaration as described in subparagraph G.2 (e).
(f) Maintenance Program. A restrictive covenant guaranteeing perpetual maintenance as
described in subparagraph G.2 (f).
(g) Runoff. Measures as described in subparagraph G.2 (g).
5. Existing elements that are consistent with the purpose of the buffer may be incorporated in
the mitigation design, as described following:
(a) For mitigation without tree buffers, the requirements of linear distance can be
achieved by elements such as the following:
(1) Man-made or natural features such as infrastructure rights-of-way, roads,
watercourses, wetlands, rock outcrops, forested areas, and steep slopes;
(2) Non-farmable areas of the agricultural land being buffered (including yards,
storage areas, roads, and all structures);
(3) Publicly owned land without consistent present or projected public use (as
determined by the public entity owner);
(4) An easement on agricultural land purchased by the applicant;
(5) Other open areas (except undeveloped land zoned for rural residential,
commercial, or industrial use) that are considered appropriate to the purpose of the
buffer.
(b) For mitigation with tree buffers the approving authority may allow the requirements to
be partially or fully satisfied by existing areas of trees and shrubs, as long as their
mitigation effect is essentially the same as that intended by the requirements in this
Subsection. If the characteristics of the existing vegetation do not meet the requirements
in this Subsection, and cannot substitute in full or in part for an adequate tree buffer, then
the area can either be incorporated into the design at half its mitigation value (for
example, a 20-foot-wide riparian area would be calculated as 10 feet of tree buffer) or it
can be left out of the tree buffer and be calculated at its original width (20 feet of existing
vegetation would be considered as 20 feet of bare land).
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 85/144
H. Alteration or Removal of Mitigation Measures.
The mitigation measures required by the approving authority may be altered or removed entirely
when the zoning of the applicable adjacent agricultural land is changed from EFU zoning. No
alteration or removal of the mitigation elements shall cause the removal of fencing or landscaping
which is required to meet other buffering or landscaping requirements.
I. Illustration of Tree Buffer/Setback Combination Options.
1. Figure 10.082-1 (see below) illustrates the tree buffer/setback combination options.
(a) The ‘tree’ symbol illustrates the number of rows required under each option.
(b) Minimum structure setbacks are represented by the ‘structure’ symbol ranged along
a linear scale showing distance from the urban/agricultural boundary. Setbacks apply to
any structure. Setbacks do not apply to eaves or similar structural elements.
2. Figure 10.802-1 does not depict screening shrubs; however, that element is required when
a tree buffer is used and the tree species in the first row on the agricultural side will not provide
sufficient foliage cover to ground level.
3. Key to abbreviations used in the Figure:
I Intensive use agricultural land
P Passive use agricultural land
H Higher-sensitivity urban receptor
L Lower-sensitivity urban receptor
4. The letter pairs “I/H”, “I/L”, “P/H”, and “P/L” indicate the types of agricultural/urban
adjacencies that determine the extent and make-up of the tree buffer and setback elements.
The options shown under each adjacency type may be used at the discretion of the applicant.
5. Where there is a mix of urban uses, the buffer design shall protect the most sensitive use
among them.
J. Tree Buffers.
1. Three-Row Buffer (as required for I/H, option 1). Depending on the species used, the
minimum allowable tree buffer width is 50 feet; the maximum required is 100 feet. The buffer
shall be composed of at least two different conifer species. See graphic below for Figure
10.802-2.
2. Two-Row Buffer (as required for I/L, option 1, and P/H, option 1). Depending on the species
used, the minimum allowable tree buffer width is approximately 40 feet; the maximum required
is approximately 65 feet. The buffer shall be composed of at least two different conifer
species.
3. Row Spacing and Offset. The purpose of the row-by-row offset is to mitigate the effect of
individual tree mortality and to compensate for the individual differences between trees.
(a) Three-Row Buffer
(1) Offset: Set off the second row by one third the spacing distance of trees (ST) in
the first row; set off the third row by another third. Refer to Figure 10.802-2 for
clarification.
(2) Spacing of Rows: The distance between rows will be determined using the
following formula, where SR is the spacing distance between rows, D1 is the widest
foliage diameter of the tree species in one row when it reaches a height of 30 feet,
and D2 is the widest foliage diameter of the tree species in the next row when it
reaches a height of 30 feet:
SR = 0.5(D1 + D2) + 4
(b) Two-Row Buffer.
(1) Offset: Set off the second row by half the spacing distance of trees (ST) in the
first row. Refer to Figure 10.802-3 for clarification.
(2) Spacing of Rows: Use the same formula as for Three-row Buffers, above.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 86/144
4. Tree Spacing within Rows. Tree spacing within a row is based on the greatest foliar
diameter of a given tree species when it reaches a height of 30 feet. Coniferous trees vary
from narrow pyramidal forms (e.g., Atlas cedar) to broad pyramidal forms (e.g., Norway
spruce), so the following table contains calculation methods for each.
Table 10.802-1.
Calculation of tree spacing within rows for narrow- and broad-diameter trees
Higher-Intensity Buffer Lower-Intensity Buffer
Narrow
ST =
Broad
ST =
Narrow
ST =
Broad
ST =
single-species
row 1.25D 1.1D 0.95D 0.8D
two-species row 0.625(D1 + D2) 0.55(D1 + D2) 0.475(D1 + D2) 0.4(D1 + D2)
D = Typical foliar diameter of a tree species when 30 feet tall. The diameter is
measured at the widest extent of a pyramidal conifer.
ST = Tree spacing within rows; calculated as a multiple of tree diameter.
Note: When planting more than two species in a row, use the two species with
the widest diameters to calculate spacing.
5. Minimum Tree Height at Planting: 5–6 feet, balled and burlapped.
6. Permitted Tree Species.
(a) Applicants may use any species of conifer trees provided they are resistant to or will
not harbor agriculturally harmful insects or diseases.
(b) A list of recommended species is available in the Greater Bear Creek Valley Regional
Plan, Appendix III, available in the City of Medford Planning Department.
K. Transitions between buffers of different intensity.
The principal purpose of the tree buffer is to mitigate spray drift; spray height is the primary factor in
determining whether a higher- or lower-intensity buffer is required. To lessen the amount of spray
being carried past a transition between the two types of buffer, the applicant will extend the buffer 75
feet beyond the end of the higher-intensity buffer, as shown in Figure 10.802-4.
L. Screening Shrubs.
1. Screening shrubs are used only in conjunction with tree buffers.
2. If the first row of trees on the agricultural side of the tree buffer does not have foliage down
to ground level, install screening shrubs is to provide sufficient foliage cover to close the gap. If
the first row of trees on the agricultural side of the buffer provides foliage down to ground level,
then screening shrubs are not required.
3. The mature height of the shrubs shall be 125 percent of the anticipated ground-to-foliage
bare space of the average mature specimen of tree species.
4. Permitted Screening Shrubs.
(a) Applicants may use any species of screening shrubs provided they are resistant to or
will not harbor agriculturally harmful insects or diseases.
(b) A list of appropriate species is available in the Regional Plan, Appendix III.
M. Trespass-Inhibiting Hedges and Fences.
1. Hedges and fences may be used separately or in combination to inhibit trespass onto
agricultural land.
2. Hedge Standards
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 87/144
(a) Spacing and Number of Rows: one or more rows, whichever is sufficient to create an
eight-foot-wide (8’) buffer at maturity.
(b) Spacing within Rows: as appropriate to eliminate gaps within three (3) years of
planting.
(c) Overall Height:
(1) No less than five (5) feet if being used solely as a trespass inhibitor.
(2) If doubling as screening shrubbery, the hedge shall cover any bare space
between the ground and the lowest branches of trees in the central portion. Mature
height shall be 125 percent of anticipated ground-to-foliage bare space of average
mature specimen of tree species being screened.
(d) Permitted Trespass-Inhibiting Species. Applicants may use any species of trespassinhibiting
hedges provided they are resistant to or will not harbor agriculturally harmful
insects or diseases. A list of appropriate species is available in the Regional Plan,
Appendix III.
3. Fence Standards
(a) Minimum fence height: six (6) feet.
(b) Fences shall be climb resistant.
(c) Install gates only when necessary for maintenance of the mitigation area.
N. Other Design Requirements.
1. Mid-term mitigation area
(a) The agricultural land being protected by a mid-term buffer may eventually be
converted to urban uses; therefore, a mid-term buffer may be designed for eventual
conversion to urban uses.
(b) Mid-term buffer design shall be based on the following factors:
(1) The most likely time period it will remain as a buffer;
(2) The specific use to which the buffer will likely be put to once the agricultural
land is urbanized: conversion to housing, to roads, or to recreational use for the
community.
(c) Alternatively, the applicant may defer development of an appropriate portion of the
urbanizing land bordering agricultural land until such time as the agricultural land is no
longer zoned EFU.
2. Irrigation. The establishment of an irrigation system is mandatory for vegetative buffers.
Must be designed by a licensed professional, and be site and species specific, as appropriate.
The operation and maintenance of the irrigation system must be part of the buffer’s overall
maintenance plan contained in the maintenance covenant.
3. Road Placement. It is always preferable to not bisect buffers with roads due to the windfunneling
effect they create. If a road is unavoidable, it should be as narrow as possible, not
straight, and should not be oriented to the prevailing wind. It should be noted that even a road
with an acceptable orientation and design will permit some degree of increased spray drift to
pass through the buffer area, and will also pose a greater risk of trespass.
O. Deviations from Provisions.
1. A proposed mitigation area design that deviates from the provisions of this Section may be
approved by the approving authority per the process in this Subsection.
2. In order to propose a mitigation area design that deviates from the minimum standards in
this Section, the applicant is responsible for the preparation of a Conflict Assessment and
Mitigation Study (CAMS) and submittal of the CAMS for evaluation by an Agricultural Buffering
Committee appointed by the Jackson County Board of Commissioners. The Committee may
make a recommendation to the City’s approving authority regarding the acceptability of the
deviation.
3. Conflict Assessment and Mitigation Study (CAMS).
(a) The CAMS shall:
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 88/144
(1) Determine the present and likely future agricultural land uses, practices, and
activities with the potential to cause adverse impacts to adjacent urban
development. Base the determination of likely agricultural practices on factors such
as soil type; topography; parcel size, shape, and location; infrastructure;
microclimatic conditions; regional agricultural practices and crops; and the farming
history of the adjacent agricultural land and surrounding similar parcels.
(2) Determine how the proposed urban development would likely impact the
management and operation of nearby agricultural lands. All owners of EFU-zoned
land outside the UGB within 1,000 feet of the land proposed for development shall
be asked for an interview, and the findings of those interviews shall be included in
the CAMS.
(3) Identify the land uses, practices, and activities that may cause adverse impacts
and the extent of the impacts, from both the urban use as well as from the
agricultural land. Quantify the impacts, where possible, in terms of frequency and
duration of activities. As part of this evaluation, the CAMS shall consider the likely
future uses determined in (1) above. The buffering mechanisms that are proposed
shall be sufficient to accommodate these potential future uses. The current financial
viability of a particular crop shall not be considered an important limiting factor in
determining potential future use.
(4) Propose a set of mitigation measures that will achieve acceptable buffering
outcomes, which may include, but are not limited to, the siting of residences, size
and geometry of lots, separation distances, communal open space, vegetation,
natural landscape features, acoustic features, and so forth.
(5) Propose the means by which the proposed mitigation measures will be
monitored and maintained. This includes responsibility for implementing and
maintaining specific features of the buffer areas to ensure continued effectiveness.
Acknowledgment of the authority responsible for ensuring compliance with any
agreement or covenant shall be plainly cited.
(6) Establish a timeline for the development that establishes when the buffer will be
installed.
(b) The recommendations of the Agricultural Buffering Committee, if any, shall be
included in the application. The application shall not be considered complete without
such recommendations or a letter from Jackson County indicating that no such
recommendations are forthcoming.
4. The approving authority may accept the recommendation of the Agricultural Buffering
Committee in whole or in part and make findings for its acceptance, partial acceptance, or
rejection.
5. Any approval of a deviation does not create a precedent for any subsequent requests for
deviations from the standards of this Section.
[Old Section 10.802 consolidated into Section 10.801; this new Section added, Sec. 3, Ord. No.
2012-128, Aug. 16, 2012.]
IMAGES FOR THIS CODE
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 89/144
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 90/144
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 91/144
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 92/144
(Click on an image to see a larger version)
10.803 Consolidated into Section 10.801
[Consolidated into Section 10.801, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2012-128, Aug. 16, 2012.]
10.804 Consolidated into Section 10.801
[Consolidated into Section 10.801, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2012-128, Aug. 16, 2012.]
10.805 Consolidated into Section 10.801
[Consolidated into Section 10.801, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2012-128, Aug. 16, 2012.]
10.806 Transit Facilities for New Subdivisions
Transit improvements, including provision of bus stops, pullouts, shelters, on-street parking
restrictions, optimum road geometrics and similar facilities shall be provided at the time of
development of new subdivisions of 25 lots or more, when such improvements are appropriate. The
transit provider shall make this determination either through an adopted plan or on a case by case
basis in response to a development proposal review. Applicants for new subdivisions shall consult
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 93/144
with the transit provider on necessary transit facility improvements.
[Added, Sec. 22, Ord. No. 7629, May 5, 1994.]
10.807 Transit Facilities for Major Industrial, Institutional, Commercial and Office
Developments
Transit improvements, including provision of bus stops, pullouts, shelters, on-street parking
restrictions, optimum road geometrics and similar facilities shall be provided at the time of
development of major industrial, institutional, commercial and office developments when the building
or group of buildings exceeds the following:
Development Type Gross Square Footage
Commercial 60,000 sq. ft.
Industrial 120,000 sq. ft.
The transit provider shall identify the type of transit facility required. This determination shall be
made either through an adopted plan or on a case by case basis in response to a development
proposal review. Applicants for major developments shall consult with the transit provider on
necessary transit facility improvements.
[Added, Sec. 23, Ord. No. 7629, May 5, 1994.]
10.808 New Commercial and Institutional Development
All new commercial, office and institutional buildings on parcels within 600 feet of an existing or
planned major transit stop, as designated by the City of Medford Transportation System Plan (TSP),
shall provide the following:
(1) Building entrances. All such uses shall provide a main entrance on the facade of a building
nearest to and facing a street with a designated "transit route", hereinafter "transit street". A building
may have more than one main entrance. If the lot has frontage on more than one transit street, the
building need only have one main entrance oriented to a transit street or to the corner where two
transit streets intersect.
(2) Setbacks. Buildings shall be set back no more than 20 feet from the designated transit stop or
transit street. Where the site is adjacent to more than one designated transit street, a building is
required to meet the maximum setback standard on only one of the streets.
(3) Parking lots. No automobile parking shall be permitted between the building and the designated
transit street.
(4) An exception to one or more of the requirements in this section may be granted if the approving
authority determines that:
(a) Strict compliance with the standard is not possible because of terrain or other physical
conditions beyond the control of the applicant; or,
(b) Direct, convenient and safe access to transit is otherwise adequately provided for by other
measures.
[Added Sec. 24, Ord. No. 7629, May 5, 1994; Amd. Ord. No. 2007-236, Nov. 1, 2007.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 94/144
10.809 Vanpool and Carpool Preferential Parking Requirements
All new industrial, commercial and institutional development shall provide preferential parking for
vanpools and carpools as follows:
(1) Number: Industrial, commercial, institutional and office developments shall designate at least
10% of the employee parking spaces for vanpool or carpool parking.
(2) Marking: The vanpool/carpool spaces shall be clearly marked "Reserved - Vanpool/Carpool
Only".
(3) Location: Designated vanpool/carpool spaces shall be the closest employee parking spaces to
the building entrance normally used by employees except for any accessible spaces provided.
[Added, Sec. 25, Ord. No. 7629, May 5, 1994; Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2012-32, March 1. 2012.]
10.810 [Repealed, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2009-77, Apr. 16, 2009.]
10.811 Nursery Schools, Day or Child Care (Centers) Facilities
Nursery schools and day or child care center facilities shall provide and thereafter maintain outdoor
play areas with a minimum area of 100 square feet per 1/3 the total licensed capacity of children.
The Planning Director may approve a reduction of this requirement if the facility cares only for
infants up to 6 months in age. In all districts, a fence of at least five (5) feet but not more than eight
(8) feet in height shall be provided separating the outdoor play area from abutting lots. Facilities
licensed for 40 or more children shall be required to have a driveway designed for continuous
forward flow of passenger vehicles for the purpose of loading and unloading children. If a
Conditional Use Permit is required and the following information, in addition to that normally required
for a Conditional Use Permit, shall also be supplied:
(1) The maximum number of children the facility is proposed to be licensed to care for.
(2) Ages of the children to be cared for.
(3) List of any exceptions to the rules governing standards for day care facilities that the
applicant will be applying for through the Children's Services Division.
10.812 [Repealed, Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2012-32, March 1, 2012.]
Repealed
10.813 Agricultural Services and Animal Services
A. Kennels, Canine Daycares, Riding Academies, and Public Stables.
(1) All buildings and outdoor portions of kennels, canine daycares, riding academies, and
public stables shall be located not less than two hundred (200) feet from any property line,
shall provide automobile and truck ingress and egress, and shall also provide parking and
loading spaces, so designed as to minimize traffic hazards and congestion. Odor, dust, noise,
and drainage shall not constitute a nuisance, hazard, or health problem.
(2) A kennel or canine daycare may petition to reduce the setback requirement via the
conditional use permit process in Section 10.184, but, in no case, shall the setback be reduced
to less than fifty (50) feet. Among the conditions allowed under Section 10.184(C)(1)(b), the
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 95/144
approving authority should particularly consider the manner and hours of operation, mitigation
of noise and odor, and fencing.
B. Stables and Paddocks, Private.
The minimum lot area shall be one (1) acre per horse (includes ponies, mules, donkeys, and other
animals used for riding). The following minimum setbacks shall be provided:
(1) Stables, corrals, pastures, exercise areas, feed, and bedding shall be located fifty (50) feet
from any property line or street and one hundred (100) feet from any adjacent residence or
swimming pool, in order to minimize odor and nuisance problems.
(2) Manure shall not be stored or accumulated on land that is within one hundred (100) feet of
a property line.
(3) Corrals, exercise areas, and manure piles are prohibited in areas with slopes greater than
ten (10) percent.
C. Beekeeping.
The City recognizes the many benefits of bees including pollination services and useable products
such as honey and wax. The keeping of bees is permitted in the single-family residential districts,
the commercial, industrial, and the public parks districts in the city limits subject to the following
standards:
(1) Registration with the Medford Planning Department is required in order to keep beehives
within the city limits.
(2) Number of Hives Permitted.
(a) A maximum of three hives on a property less than one acre.
(b) A maximum of six hives on a property between one and two acres.
(c) For properties over two acres, an additional three hives per acre are permitted.
(3) A beekeeper who owns five or more hives is required by the State to register them with the
Oregon Department of Agriculture.
(4) Bees shall be kept in hives with removable frames or combs, which shall be kept in sound
and usable condition.
(5) For each colony permitted to be maintained under this ordinance, one temporary nucleus
colony in a hive structure not to exceed one standard 9-5/8-inch-depth, ten-frame hive body
may also be maintained on the same property.
(6) Hives shall not be placed within a required front, side, rear, street side, or buffer yard.
(7) When a beehive is located less than 20 feet from a property line, a flyway barrier at least
six feet in height shall be maintained parallel to the property line for a minimum of five feet in
either direction of the hive. The flyway barrier may consist of a wall, fence, dense vegetation
or a combination thereof, such that bees will fly over rather than through the material to reach
the colony.
(8) A constant supply of fresh water shall be provided for the colonies on site within 15 feet of
each hive.
(9) Each beekeeper shall ensure that no wax comb or other material that might encourage
robbing by other bees are left upon the grounds of the property. Such materials once removed
from the site shall be handled and stored in sealed containers, or placed within a building or
other insect-proof container.
(10) If the beekeeper serves the community by removing a swarm or swarms of honey bees
from locations where they are not desired, the beekeeper shall be permitted to temporarily hive
the swarm on their property for up to 30 days from the date acquired, at which time the hive
limit requirements of Section C.2 apply once more.
(11) Products generated on site by bees, such as honey, shall be permitted to be sold on the
property per applicable business license and/or home occupation regulations; however, no
outdoor sales are permitted.
(12) A beekeeper shall not locate or maintain a hive on property owned by another person
without first obtaining written permission from the property owner or person lawfully in
possession of the property.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 96/144
(13) A beekeeper shall immediately replace the queen in a hive that exhibits aggressive
characteristics, including stinging or attempting to sting without provocation.
(14) Only docile common honey bees shall be permitted. African honey bees or any hybrid
thereof are prohibited.
(15) A person may not keep a hive that causes a threat to human or animal health, or
interferes with normal use and enjoyment of public or private property.
(16) Violation of Section 10.813(C) constitutes a violation. Every day in which the violation
exists constitutes a separate violation.
(17) A violation of Section 10.813(C) is declared to be a public nuisance, and may be abated
in the manner provided for in Section 5.520 of the Medford Code.
[Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2013-82, June 6, 2013; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2015-37, May 7, 2015; Amd.
Sec. 19, Ord. No. 2018-52 June 7, 2018 (effective July 9, 2018); Amd. Sec. 164, Ord. No. 2018-64,
June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.814 Animal Hospitals and Veterinary Clinics
A veterinary clinic or animal hospital shall not be located within 100 feet of a lot in any residential
district unless all activities are fully enclosed within a building. If all activities are not fully enclosed
within a building, the 100-foot setback shall apply and the applicant shall show that adequate
measures and controls shall be taken to prevent offensive noise and odor. No incineration of refuse
shall be permitted on the premises.
10.815 Cemetery, Crematory, Mausoleum, Columbarium
A cemetery, crematory, mausoleum, or columbarium shall have its principal access on an arterial or
collector street with ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion and shall
provide required off-street parking space. Cemeteries located within any residentially zoned district
or abutting a residentially zoned district shall establish and maintain appropriate landscaping and
screening consistent with abutting residential use.
10.816 Churches, Hospitals, or Other Religious or Charitable Institutions in a Residential
District
(1) In any residentially zoned district, hospitals or other religious or charitable institutions, excepting
churches, shall be located on a designated arterial or collector street. Side and rear yard setbacks
shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet and landscaped as required to buffer adjacent properties.
(2) In the C-S/P zone, with conditional use approval, overnight parking for travel trailers, campers
and similar vehicles for use by patients and families of patients at a hospital, may be allowed as an
accessory use to a hospital, subject to the following standards:
(a) A minimum twenty (20) foot setback to the paved parking and maneuvering area for the
spaces shall be provided along all lot lines, including the front lot line, and sufficiently
landscaped so as to avoid adverse impacts on adjacent properties.
(b) Each of the spaces may be provided full hookups for power, water, and sanitary sewer.
(3) Churches located within the residential district shall be subject to the following standards:
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 97/144
(a) All buildings shall be set back a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the side and rear property
lines. All setbacks shall be landscaped as required to buffer adjacent properties. (b) Located
on a standard residential street, collector or arterial street.
(4) Temporary shelters shall be conditionally permitted as an accessory use to all churches,
hospitals, religious, or charitable institutions as permitted per Section 10.314(6)(c)(i).
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 7611, April 7, 1994; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2018-113, Sept. 20, 2018.]
10.817 Community Buildings, Social Halls, Lodges, Fraternal Organizations, and Clubs in a
Residential District
(1) All buildings shall be set back a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the side and rear property lines.
All setbacks shall be landscaped as required to buffer adjacent properties.
(2) There shall be no external signage, advertising or other evidence of any incidental commercial
activities taking place within the building.
(3) All such uses, except Public Parks Recreation and Leisure Facilities and Services and
appurtenant buildings and structures, shall be located on an arterial or collector street and be able to
provide access without causing traffic congestion on local residential streets, and any such use shall
prove that there will be no harm to adjacent existing or potential residential development due to
excessive traffic generation, noise, or other circumstances.
(4) Temporary shelters shall be conditionally permitted as an accessory use to all community
buildings, social halls, lodges, fraternal organizations, and clubs as permitted per Section 10.314(6)
(c)(i) of this Code.
[Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2011-32, Mar. 3, 2011; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2018-113, Sept. 20, 2018.]
10.818 [Repealed, Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2013-31, Feb. 21, 2013.]
Repealed
10.819 [Repealed, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2008-173, Aug. 21, 2008.]
10.819A Temporary Shelters
(A) Purpose and Intent.
Temporary shelters provide short-term relief for homeless individuals and families, as well as those
without adequate protection during times of extreme weather, within an existing or newly constructed
building. It is the intent of these standards to ensure that any conflicts with temporary shelters and
the surrounding land uses are mitigated through the special regulations set forth in this Section
10.819A.
(B) Definitions Pertaining to Temporary Shelters.
When used in Chapter 10 in reference to temporary shelters, the following terms shall have the
meanings as herein ascribed:
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 98/144
(1) Access Point: The main point of entry and exit for a temporary shelter where users, visitors,
and other persons must sign in and out to maintain security within a shelter.
(2) Client(s): Person or persons who receive services from an operator of a temporary shelter
which shall include overnight sleeping, and may include other items established per the
shelter’s operations plan as required in Section 10.819A(D)(1)(b).
(3) Operator: The organization in charge of daily operations of a temporary shelter. The
operator shall be a civic, non-profit, public, religious, membership based, or otherwise
competent organization and shall be the applicant for the land use review of a temporary
shelter.
(4) Operational Period: An operator’s established days of operations.
(5) Operations Plan: The guiding document for an operator to use in determining the standards
clients must adhere to in a shelter.
(6) User(s): See 10.819A(B)(2) client(s).
(C) Temporary Shelter Permit Requirements
(1) The conditional use permit (CUP) as required by Sections 10.314 and 10.337 of this Code
shall run with the lot(s), tract(s), or parcel(s) of land on which a temporary shelter was
conditionally permitted. Unless modifications to the original CUP are made, a new CUP shall
not be required for each new operational period.
(2) An operator of a temporary shelter shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal
laws, rules, and regulations (e.g. Building and Fire Department approvals) unrelated to land
use applications/reviews, unless waived by the appropriate approving authority/official.
(3) Upon request by the applicant, the Planning Director may reduce or waive application fees
and any other fees required by the Planning Department. In evaluating such a re-quest, the
Director will consider the financial hardship to the applicant and other information relevant to
the cost of processing the application and/or the applicant’s ability to pay the fees.
(4) In order to begin operating a temporary shelter, an operator shall apply for and receive an
approved Temporary Shelter Operational Permit from the Medford Fire-Rescue Department for
each operational period.
(5) Shelters operating with extensions, granted per Section 10.819A(D)(2)(e), shall be required
to perform all improvements, acquire all permits, and fulfill all other requirements of the
Medford Municipal Code, unless waived by the appropriate approving authority.
(6) All applicable permits must be approved prior to the initial date of operations.
(7) Each temporary shelter shall adhere to the Temporary Shelter Policy as established by the
City.
(D) General Standards for Temporary Shelters
The following standards of subsection 10.819A (D) shall apply to temporary shelters. The words
operator and applicant may be used interchangeably in this subsection as they are
one and the same. The requirements are as follows:
(1) Operational Requirements. The operator shall be required to meet the following standards
as it pertains to shelter operations:
(a) Conformance. It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure and maintain compliance
with applicable local, state, and federal regulations relating to the operations of
temporary shelters. Temporary shelters shall comply with all applicable building, fire,
health, life, and safety codes as they pertain to temporary shelters. Compliance with this
section requires the Operator maintain a Temporary Shelter Operational Permit.
(b) Operations Plan. An operations plan shall be required for a temporary shelter.
An operations plan shall include, at a minimum, items addressing client interaction, rules
for shelter use, facility operations and maintenance, safety and security provisions,
signage that complies with the Medford Municipal Code, and the dates of the operational
period. (c) Supervision. There shall be a minimum of two on-duty representatives of the
temporary shelter at any time, unless approved otherwise. The representative(s) contact
information shall be clearly posted at the shelter’s access point each day. The
representative may be a volunteer, hired employee, or otherwise competent and
responsible adult.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 99/144
i. When required by Medford Fire-Rescue, a fire watch shall be in place in addition
to an on-duty representative(s).
ii. On duty-representatives shall monitor all areas of a temporary shelter, in order to
ensure that all applicable rules are being followed.
(d) Shelter Capacity. Shelter capacity shall be determined by applicable Building and Fire
Codes.
(e) Areas for Sleeping. Temporary shelters may have separate and designated areas for
sleeping or shelter for the comfort of clients by separating clients into male only, female
only, and family only sleeping areas.
(f) Shelter queuing. During times of shelter intake lines or queues of people awaiting
admittance shall not obstruct any public space or right of way. A three foot clearance
shall be maintained on all sidewalks.
(g) Written proof of compliance with requirements of this Section shall be available in
hard copy at the temporary shelter’s access point and shall also be made available to the
Fire Code Official, upon request.
(h) Operational Requirements stated in this Section may be conditions of approval as
deemed necessary by the approving authority.
(2) Operational Period.
(a) The use of a temporary shelter shall not exceed 90 days within a 12 month period,
unless otherwise permitted by this code. The operational period shall start on the first day
of operations in which individuals were provided shelter and shall end once shelter has
been provided for 90 days within a 12 month period or 12 months after the first day of
operations, whichever occurs sooner.
(b) The intended timeframe in which an operational period is to take place shall be clearly
stated in an operations plan. This shall include one of the following:
i. Operations based on local weather events such as, but not limited to,
temperature extremes, persistent smoke or fog, and other acts of nature that are
hazardous to human health. Conditions for opening and closing based on weather
events shall be clearly stated in the operations plan.
ii. Specific dates in which operations are to occur, not exceeding 90 days in a 12
month period as identified in this Section, subject to the 180 day limitation for
Temporary Uses described in 10.819A(D)(2)(e) below.
(c) The operator shall notify Medford Fire-Rescue each time the shelter is closing.
(d) The operator shall notify Medford Fire-Rescue a minimum of four business days prior
to each re-opening of the shelter and shall provide the opportunity for inspection prior to
re-opening the shelter. In times of emergency the operator shall coordinate with Medford
Fire-Rescue if it is not possible or prudent to give four days’ notice.
(e) The operational period may be extended for a temporary shelter by the City if local
conditions warrant an extension. Extensions may be granted for a total of 30, 60, or 90
calendar days. Extensions shall be approved by the City Manager. The total operational
period, including extensions, shall not exceed a total of 180 consecutive days, in a 12
month period. Extensions are subject to the following conditions:
i. Operators must request to extend the operational period a minimum of 14
business days prior to the first anticipated day of extended operations.
ii. An extension of the operational period for a temporary shelter may require
additional conditions that were not previously required. Additional conditions shall
be consistent with applicable Building and Fire Codes, unless otherwise waived by
the appropriate approving authority or the City Manager.
(f) The limitations on the length of operational periods shall apply to the lot(s), tract(s), or
parcel(s) of land on which a temporary shelter operates.
(3) Reporting Requirements. Within 30 days of the end of the operational period, and/or upon
application for an extension to the operational period pursuant to section 10.819A(D)(2)(e), the
operator shall submit a report to the Housing Advisory Commission (HAC). At a minimum, the
report shall include the following information:
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 100/144
i. Number of clients served at the temporary shelter during the operational period
ii. Number of public service calls to the temporary shelter and reason for each call
iii. Services provided to the clients of the temporary shelter, if applicable
iv. Number of nights spent at full capacity (if applicable)
v. Number of clients from the operational period who were provided with more permanent
or transitional housing
The operator shall coordinate the reporting requirement with the Medford, Ashland/
Jackson County Continuum of Care using the industry standard software (e.g.
Homeless Management Information System) in place at the time of reporting.
(4) Standards for Closing/Suspending Temporary Shelters
The City shall consider the reports submitted by operators to the HAC in determining whether
to close or suspend a temporary shelter. A shelter may be closed or suspended in accordance
with the following procedures and criteria.
(a) The City may close or suspend a temporary shelter use if:
i. The City Manager has determined that it would be in the public interest to do so.
ii. More than 40 emergency service calls within 30 calendar days are made
regarding activity in or near the temporary shelter.
iii. Any safety issues are identified during an inspection, including, but not limited to
fire and life safety issues.
iv. Any violation of the Medford Municipal Code and/or state or federal law occurs.
(b) Any day on which the temporary shelter is closed or suspended due to noncompliance
with applicable codes, laws, or rules shall not count as a day of the
operational period. Closing of a temporary shelter under this section invalidates all
temporary shelter permits for the tax lot(s) on which the shelter is located, including
temporary shelters in other buildings on the same tax lot, but does not invalidate a
conditional use permit issued pursuant to Section 10.184 of this Code.
(c) When a temporary shelter is closed or suspended due to violation of the standards
outlined in this Section, it shall not be allowed on the same tax lot(s) for a time period of
one year (365 days) from the final day of operations, unless otherwise approved by the
City Council.
(d) Clients of a temporary shelter, the operator, and the property owner shall be given
seven calendar days for the operator and owner to remove temporary shelter
components, and for clients to vacate the location in which a shelter operates, once the
use has been terminated. In cases of emergency or threat to human health or life safety,
less than seven days’ notice may be given. The owner or operator shall not be required
to remove components utilized for the temporary shelter that are also part of the owner or
operator’s routine operations.
(e) The City Manager’s decision to revoke a temporary shelter’s permits shall be effective
immediately. Appeals shall be made to the City Council.
(5) Consent to Inspection of Temporary Shelter(s)
(a) Temporary shelters are subject to inspection at any time by the City to verify safe
operation of a shelter.
i. Inspections by the City may include inspections of all portions of a temporary
shelter. Inspections shall be in conformance with all applicable local, state, and
federal laws.
ii. Areas used for bathrooms and showers shall be subject to inspections by the
City, but any users of the facilities shall be given ten minutes notice prior to
inspection to allow for the privacy needs of individuals who may be using the
facilities.
(b) Inspections shall be required prior to each opening of a temporary shelter. All
violations of applicable codes found through an inspection shall be resolved prior to
commencing operations of a temporary shelter. Inspections may be required by the
following City departments to verify conformance with applicable codes, prior to
operations commencing:
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 101/144
i. Building Department
ii. Planning Department
iii. Police Department
iv. Fire-Rescue Department
(c) Each user of temporary shelter must sign a waiver and give consent to inspections
from the departments listed in this Section for reasons deemed necessary to ensure safe
operations of a temporary shelter. This waiver shall include consent to walk-through
inspections of sleeping areas as well as inspections of the facility. This shall be a part of
the operations plan and may differ from shelter to shelter.
(d) Signage stating “Inspection by the City of Medford officials, including Medford Fire-
Rescue and Medford Police Department, may occur without notice” shall be prominently
posted in the sleeping units, shower areas, and toilet areas of the temporary shelter.
(E) Site Standards for Temporary Shelters
The following standards shall apply to the development and use of temporary shelters.
(1) Temporary shelters must be at least 500 feet, measured from any property line, from any
other temporary shelter’s closest property line. This Section applies to temporary shelters
during their operational period, not for land use approvals.
(2) Temporary shelters shall be an accessory use in residential zones.
(3) In commercial and industrial zones, temporary shelters may be an accessory or primary
use.
(4) A site plan depicting how the standards of Section 10.819A of this Code have been met
shall be submitted as a part of the application submittal. A site plan shall, at a minimum,
include the following:
(a) Building footprint(s) of the primary and accessory uses on the site in which the
temporary shelter will be located.
(b) A floor plan, with square footage measurements labeled clearly for:
i. The location and size of the temporary shelter and areas intended for sleeping
ii. Location and size of other areas used in conjunction with the warming shelter
(e.g. common area(s), kitchen(s), bathroom(s), and similar spaces).
iii. Total client capacity within the temporary shelter and areas intended for sleeping
(c) Location of buildings access point(s)
(d) Location(s) of trash receptacle(s)
(e) Location(s) of lighting for site and building(s)
(5) Adequate space shall be provided for client’s personal items and shall not displace required
parking per Sections 10.741-10.751.
(6) Access points shall have a trash receptacle that does not block the public right of way and
is large enough for trash disposal during times of intake.
(7) Adequate access shall be given for emergency vehicles and personnel, where applicable.
(8) Tents, yurts, and similar temporary structures are not allowed to be used for the temporary
shelter land use.
[Added Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2018-113, Sept. 20, 2018.]
10.820 Two Single-Family Residences in Lieu of Duplex
In those zones where permitted, two single-family residences may be located on a single parcel in
lieu of a multi-family duplex.
[Added, Section 2, Ord. No. 7896, June 15, 1995.]
10.821 Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU)
For the purposes of this Chapter, a single-family dwelling with an accessory dwelling unit (ADU), as
defined herein, shall not be considered a duplex or multiple-family dwelling. ADUs are defined as
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 102/144
either:
Accessory Dwelling Unit - Attached (ADU-A). An ADU-A is attached to the primary dwelling
unit by a shared wall or as an additional story above the primary dwelling unit.
Accessory Dwelling Unit - Detached (ADU-D). An ADU-D shares no common walls with the
primary dwelling or the ADU-A.
(A) ADU General Standards
The following standards apply to all ADUs and shall be required. They are as follows:
(1) ADUs shall not be counted in residential density calculations.
(2) An ADU within the Historic Preservation Overlay shall be subject to applicable reviews as
identified in this Code.
(3) A development’s Conditions, Covenants, and Restrictions (CC&Rs) or similar legal
instrument recorded subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance shall not prohibit or limit
the construction and use of ADUs meeting the standards and requirements of the City of
Medford.
(B) ADU Development Standards. In addition to other applicable standards of this code, ADUs shall
comply with the following development standards:
(1) ADU's shall comply with maximum lot coverage and setback requirements applicable to the
parcel containing the primary dwelling.
(a) Lot coverage, as determined by the subjects parcel’s zoning may be exceeded by up
to 10%. The additional coverage allowance is exclusively for the ADU and shall not be
used for any other structures.
(2) One ADU shall be allowed per dwelling unit and only in conjunction with the following
dwelling unit type(s):
(a) A detached single-family dwelling
(b) An attached single-family dwelling, divided by a lot line, including:
(i) duplexes
(ii) townhouses
(c) A manufactured dwelling located on an individual lot
The dwelling unit types identified shall be considered the “primary dwelling.” Under no
circumstance will more than one ADU associated with each primary dwelling be permitted.
(3) The ADU may be created through conversion of an existing structure or construction of a
new structure that is either attached to the primary dwelling or detached. Existing structures
may be nonconforming, meeting the standards of 10.032-10.037 and subject to approval by
the Building Official and the Planning Director.
(4) The maximum gross habitable floor area (GHFA) of the ADU shall not exceed 75 percent of
the GHFA of the primary dwelling, or 900 square feet, whichever is less.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 103/144
(5) Conversion of existing habitable space within the primary dwelling to an Attached ADU
(ADU-A) may not be subject to the provision of 10.821(B)(4). When deviating from 10.821(B)
(4) the ADU-A shall be 50 percent or less in GHFA than the primary dwelling.
(6) A primary dwelling shall adhere to the parking standards in Table 10.743-1. No additional
parking shall be required for an ADU. When existing primary dwellings do not meet the
standards of Table 10.743-1 a reduction of the required off-street parking shall not exceed one
space if one of the below conditions is met:
(a) The subject parcel is within the Central Business (CB) Overlay or other established
Transit Oriented Districts (TODs) as established by the Transportation System Plan
(TSP); or
(b) The subject parcel is within a quarter (1/4) mile radius of a transit stop; or
(c) The subject parcel is within a half (1/2) mile radius of an existing bicycle facility
including a bicycle lane, multi-use/shared-use path or a neighborhood bikeway; or
(d) The subject parcel has at least 24 feet of lot frontage with on-street parking available,
excluding any area considered to be a part of the driveway width/throat; or
(e) The subject parcel is unable to comply with off-street parking standards due to
existing structures built prior to January 1, 2019.
(7) When alley access is available, the ADU shall take vehicle access from the alleyway,
unless off-street parking need not be constructed to comply with other provisions of this Code.
(C) Siting ADUs in Multi-Family and Commercial Zones
ADUs shall be permitted in multi-family and commercial zones when the following apply:
(1) The primary use on the property is a primary dwelling as provided for in 10.821(B)(2).
(2) A primary dwelling, as provided for in 10.821(B)(2), in the multi-family zones that meets the
standards of Section 10.826 shall be permitted an ADU meeting the standards of this Section.
(D) Illegal ADUs
It is the intent of subsection 10.821(D) to offer a land use review process to convert illegal ADUs to a
nonconforming structure or use. Any such ADU shall adhere to the following:
(1) Illegal ADUs seeking conversion to a nonconforming structure or use shall have been
constructed prior to January 1, 2019. The owner, not the City, has the burden of proving that
any illegal ADU structure or use was occupied, constructed and/or used prior to January 1,
2019.
(2) All applicable permits and utility connections required by Medford Municipal Code for the
illegal ADU shall be obtained prior to the issuance of any Certificate of Occupancy or other
required licensed for occupancy of the ADU.
(3) All building, fire, life and safety codes shall be met.
(4) If the standards of Article V of the Medford Land Development Code otherwise cannot be
met, the land use approval for an illegal ADU shall be subject to the land use review
procedures of the Type III, Exception land use review (Section 10.186). The applicable
Exception criteria for converting an illegal ADU shall be 10.186(B)(1-3).
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 104/144
(5) An illegal ADU converted to a legal structure or use per 10.821(D)(4) in this subsection
shall be considered a nonconforming ADU once all standards of 10.821(D)(1-4) have been
met.
[Added, Section 2, Ord. No. 7977, Oct. 19, 1995; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2004-259, Dec. 16, 2004;
Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2018-132, Dec. 20, 2018.]
10.822 Permitted Uses in All Industrial Zones
A. Eating and Drinking Places.
Permitted eating and drinking places (SIC 58) shall not exceed 6,000 square feet, including the
outdoor eating area.
B. Banking Institutions.
Banking institutions (SIC 60) shall not exceed 3,500 square feet of gross floor area.
C. Accessory Retail Sales.
All of the following standards shall be met:
1. The retail sales shall be directly related to and accessory to a principal use.
2. The product must be assembled, produced, or processed on the site.
3. The retail use must be clearly incidental to the principal industrial use.
4. For multiple businesses on a site, the retail use of each individual business may occupy 20
percent of the gross floor area of the structure in which it is proposed, to a maximum of 1,000
square feet.
5. For a single business on a site, the retail use may occupy 20 percent of the combined gross
floor areas of all the structures on the site, to a maximum of 4,000 square feet.
6. The retail sales portion shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
7. The construction of a separate building exclusively for retail use is prohibited.
8. Parking for the accessory use shall be calculated at the principal use rate.
[Added, Sec. 16, Ord. No. 8285, Feb. 6, 1997; Amd. Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2012-32, March 1, 2012;
Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2014-161, Dec. 22, 2014.]
10.823 Small Food Vendors
(1) “Small Food Vendor” means any site-built or prefabricated structure that is used for the purpose
of preparing, processing or converting food for immediate consumption as a drive-in, drive-through,
curb or walk-up service that is a maximum size of 128 square feet and is located on one site or tax
lot for any period of 24 hours or more.
(2) Small food vendors shall be permitted in the C-S/P, C-N, C-C, C-H, C-R, I-L, and I-G zoning
districts and subject to the following standards:
A. The exterior length and width dimension of the small food vendor unit (“unit”), when
multiplied, shall enclose no more than 128 square feet. If the unit exceeds 128 square feet, the
application must be reviewed and approved by either the Site Plan and Architectural
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 105/144
Commission or the Landmarks and Historic Preservation Commission as a standard restaurant
under this chapter and is not subject to these provisions. (Effective Dec. 1, 2013.)
B. All applications subject to this section shall be subject to administrative review by the
Planning Director, or by a person designated by the Planning Director to make such review,
and shall obtain a building permit upon approval of the administrative review.
C. For the administrative review, the applicant shall submit a site plan drawn to scale, including
the dimensions of the unit. The site plan may also be used as part of the building permit
application. The site plan shall show the following items:
(a) Unit square footage;
(b) Paved vehicular access (i.e., asphalt or concrete) including driveway location, offstreet
parking, and drive-through window stacking;
(c) A minimum of three available (3) paved off-street parking spaces on the same lot as
the unit, or on an abutting lot, and their location. Parking spaces are available if such
spaces exceed the minimum parking requirements of any existing use pursuant to MLDC
10.741. Joint use of parking spaces shall be established pursuant to MLDC 10.744.
(d) Drive-through window stacking allowing for a minimum of 100 feet for each service
window.
(i) Stacking means the location in which vehicles await service as measured from
the back edge of the sidewalk along the arterial or collector street to the service
window as measured from the most direct driving route. Where the site abuts an
unimproved arterial or collector street, the stacking distance is to be measured from
a point ten (10) feet beyond the currently paved street. Where a unit is situated
such that vehicles stack onto private property rather than directly from the public
right-of-way, the 100 foot minimum does not apply.
(ii) 100 feet stacking need not be in a straight line. The applicant may propose to
reconfigure the location of the unit on the site or offer other design modifications to
meet the minimum 100 foot stacking requirement. Such remedies may include, but
are not limited to, closing one service window, painting lanes on the site for
circulation, and posting directional signs.
(e) For units located on unimproved lots with street frontage, the street frontage shall be
landscaped with at least the minimum landscaping requirements pursuant to Article V of
this Chapter 10. Any units on sites abutting a different zone shall be required to meet
applicable bufferyard landscaping requirements pursuant to Article V of this Chapter 10.
For units located on previously improved lots, no street frontage landscaping
requirements shall be imposed;
(f) A trash receptacle that is enclosed pursuant to Article V of this Chapter 10;
(g) If a unit does not have its own toilet facilities displayed on the site plan, then a letter of
agreement with the property owner must be filed establishing the use of such facilities for
employees during business hours that are either located in the building or in a building
adjacent thereto on the same property. The agreement must contain terms requiring that
the restrooms be available for use by employees during all hours in which the vendor unit
is in business.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 106/144
(h) The vendor units, whether site-built or prefabricated, shall be placed on a permanent
foundation. The foundation shall be in compliance with the prescriptive requirements of
the Oregon Structural Specialty Code, chapter 18. As an alternative, the foundation may
be designed by an Oregon licensed architect or engineer in conformance with the
Oregon Structural Specialty Code. The foundation shall include a stem wall of masonry
or concrete or skirting matching the siding material, which extends from the building floor
to the finished grade; and
(i) Outdoor seating shall be allowed subject to the following:
(i) Seating is limited to a maximum of six patrons.
(ii) Seating shall be located such that it does not impede traffic, nor utilize any
of the required parking spaces.
(iii) Where the unit abuts, or is adjacent to a residential zone, outdoor seating
shall only be allowed between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(iv) At least one restroom shall be available for use by patrons. The restroom
shall be in the same unit or conveniently located in a building adjacent thereto
on the same tax lot. The restroom shall be available to patrons during all
hours in which the Small Vendor Unit is open for business. The restroom shall
meet all requirements of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code, the Oregon
Plumbing Specialty Code, County and State Health requirements, Americans
with Disabilities Act requirements, and any other Federal requirements. An
agreement must be filed with the City establishing the use of the restroom if it
is not owned by the applicant.
D. Before being moved to any site, a prefabricated unit must have a valid State of Oregon
Prefabricated Structure “medallion” attached.
E. All units must have underground electrical service, except as otherwise permitted under
MLDC 10.555.
F. All units must be connected to the sanitary sewer in a manner approved by the Building
Safety Director. Permits will be required for the sewer connection and installation of any
plumbing fixtures.
G. All units must have plumbing connections for fresh water and must comply with the State of
Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code.
H. Applications for building permits submitted under this section shall include a drainage plan,
described below, for review and approval by the Engineering and Development Division of
Public Works prior to the issuance of a building permit.
(a) If the unit is to be constructed or placed on an existing paved site, the drainage plan
shall show the entire tax lot with sufficient spot elevations to determine the direction of
existing runoff and to ensure that the new structure will not inhibit or otherwise adversely
affect the storm drainage for the parcel.
(b) If the unit is to be constructed or placed on a site which was previously unpaved, the
drainage plan shall show the entire project site with sufficient spot elevations to
determine the direction of runoff to the storm drainage system, as well as elevations on
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 107/144
the drainage system. All roof drains and foundation drains shall be connected directly to
a storm drain system.
(c) If the unit is to be constructed or placed on a site which was previously unpaved and
the site lies within either the Elk Creek or Midway Drainage Basins, the drainage plan
shall be designed for a controlled storm water release of no more than 0.25 C.F.S. per
acre of development. An engineer registered in the State of Oregon shall prepare the
design. This plan shall show the entire project site with sufficient spot elevations to
determine the direction of runoff to the storm drainage system as well as elevations on
the drainage system. All roof drains and foundation drains shall be connected directly to
a storm drain system. Upon completion of the project, the applicant’s design engineer
shall certify that the construction of the controlled storm water release drainage system
was constructed per plan. These requirements are per the Comprehensive Medford Area
Drainage Master Plan as adopted by the Medford City Council in 1995.
I. If the unit is located on or adjacent to a privately owned walkway, the minimum remaining
unobstructed walkway width shall be six (6) feet.
J. All food must be in a ready-to-eat condition when sold.
K. The applicant shall obtain all state and county health and sanitary licenses.
(3) System Development Charges (SDCs). All applicants will be subject to all applicable SDCs.
(4) Utility Rates. All applicants will be required to pay all applicable water, sewer, storm drain, street
utility or other applicable fees pursuant to the City of Medford Code.
(5) Signage. All signs must meet the requirements of MLDC 10.1000 et seq.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2001-166, Sept. 6, 2001; Amd. Sec. 23, Ord. No. 2013-131, Sept. 5, 2013.]
10.824 Wireless Communication Facilities
A. Purpose and Intent.
The purpose of this section is to establish standards regulating the placement, appearance, and
impact of wireless communication facilities while allowing citizens to access and adequately utilize
the services provided by such facilities. The standards are intended to preserve the character of the
City’s zoning districts and Historic Overlay districts by protecting them from the visual and aesthetic
impacts associated with wireless communication facilities.
B. Exemptions.
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from these standards except as otherwise
provided herein:
(1) Any repair, reconstruction, or maintenance of an existing Wireless Communication Facility.
(2) Amateur radio station towers, citizen band transmitters and antennas.
(3) Microwave and satellite dishes accessory to a permitted use and/or unrelated to a wireless
telecommunication service system.
(4) All military, Federal, State, and local government communication facilities, and public
safety communication towers.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 108/144
(5) Cells-on-Wheels (COW), which are permitted as a temporary use in non-residential zones
for a period not to exceed 14 days. During a period of emergency as declared by the City,
County, State, or Federal government, cells-on-wheels are permitted throughout the length of
the declared emergency period.
(6) Modifications to existing wireless communication facilities that do not result in a substantial
change to the dimensions of the facility. For purposes of this section a “substantial change”
includes:
(a) Mounting of a proposed antenna on a Wireless Communication Support Structure
which increases the existing height of the support structure by more than twenty feet.
(b) Adding a fixture to a Wireless Communication Support Structure that would protrude
from the edge of the structure more than twenty feet, or more than the width of the
support structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater.
(c) Installing more than four new equipment cabinets to the current site.
(d) Any excavation or deployment outside the current site.
(e) Any modifications which would defeat the concealment elements of the support
structure.
C. Permitted Use.
Wireless Communication Facilities that do not include a Wireless Communication Support Structure
are permitted in the following locations subject to the design standards in Section 10.824(F) and
approval of a building permit:
(1) Commercial and Industrial Zones;
(2) Parcels containing legally established non-residential uses within the SFR and MFR zones;
(3) Any property owned by the City of Medford.
D. Conditional Use.
Approval of a Conditional Use Permit is required for new Wireless Communication Support
Structures (as defined in Section 10.012), and Wireless Communication Facilities within the public
right-of-way (ROW) in residential zones or Public Parks zones (as outlined in Section 10.824(G),
subject to the Conditional Use Permit procedural requirements of Section 10.184.
E. Application Requirements.
All applications for new Wireless Communication Facilities shall demonstrate compliance with the
applicable design standards contained in Section 10.824(F), and include the following
documentation:
(a) A site plan indicating all structures, land uses, and zoning designations within 150 feet of
the facility boundaries; or 300 feet if the height of the support structure is greater than 80 feet.
(b) Exterior elevations of the proposed wireless communication facility that include a set of
manufacturer’s specifications for any support structure(s), Wireless Communication Systems
Antennas, and accessory buildings or equipment, with a listing of all materials and colors being
proposed.
(c) A landscape plan, when required per Section 10.824(F)(3).
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 109/144
(d) Photosimulations of the overall facility at its proposed location, and a photo of each of the
major components from a similar installation.
(e) An explanation of the stealth capabilities being proposed for any WirelessCommunication
Facility Support Structure(s), and the methods of concealment from public view, if any, that are
to be utilized for the remainder of the facility.
(f) Details and specifications for exterior lighting, when required or proposed.
(g) A map that includes the following information:
i. the coverage area of the proposed wireless communication facility;
ii. all other wireless communication facilities within 1,250 feet of the proposed site, and all
residential development within 300 feet of the proposed site;
iii. the existing and approved wireless communication system facilities operated by the
applicant within a 5-mile radius of the proposed site;
(h) A written explanation of collocation issues per Section 10.824(F)(4).
(i) Written findings addressing each of the design standards in Section 10.824(F).
(j) A copy of the lease agreement for the proposed site demonstrating that the agreement does
not preclude collocation.
(k) Documentation detailing the capacity of the Wireless Communication Facility Support
Structures in terms of the number and type of Wireless Communication Systems Antennas it is
designed to accommodate.
F. Design Standards.
All wireless communication facilities shall be located, designed, constructed, treated, and maintained
in accordance with the following:
(1) Preferred Designs:
(a) The co-location of new equipment at existing wireless communication facility sites
shall be the preferred option, wherever possible.
(b) If (a) above is not feasible, an attempt shall be made to attach to existing structures.
(c) If (a) or (b) above are not feasible, alternative structures shall be used, and shall
include design features that conceal, obscure, or mitigate the visual impacts created by
the proposed facility. All new Wireless Communication Facility Support Structures shall
include stealth capabilities. In most cases, monopole Wireless Communication Support
Structures are not considered to incorporate stealth capabilities.
(d) If (a), (b), or (c) listed above are not feasible, a monopole design shall be used with
the attached Wireless Communication Systems Antennas positioned in a flush-mounted,
vertical manner. Platform designs may be used, if approved by the Planning
Commission, upon a finding that the use of an alternate attached Wireless
Communication Systems Antenna design is not feasible.
(e) Relief from collocation and attachment of Wireless Communication Systems
Antennas to existing Wireless Communication Support Structures under this section may
be granted, at the discretion of the approving authority, upon submittal of either a
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 110/144
mutually agreeable third party professional verification of provider's data or mutually
agreeable third party engineering evaluations that support one or more of the following:
i. Existing Wireless Communications Facilities or existing structures do not fall
within location tolerances based upon Radio Frequency mapping.
ii. Existing site(s) do not meet minimum height requirements based upon Radio
Frequency engineering data.
iii. Existing Wireless Communications Facilities do not meet structural integrity
requirements for the proposed Wireless Communication Systems Antenna array.
iv. Placement of the proposed Wireless Communications Facility and/or Wireless
Communication Systems Antenna array would impair, or be impaired by, the
emission of Radio Frequencies.
v. The owners of existing Wireless Communication Support Structures or structures
within 1,250 feet will not allow the applicant to place its telecommunications facility
thereon, or such owners are requiring payment that substantially exceeds
commercially reasonable rates.
(f) Applicants are encouraged to place the facilities on City owned or other publicly
owned property.
(g) Should it be deemed necessary in their review of a Conditional Use Permit for a
Wireless Communication Support Structure, the Planning Commission may
require additional design measures to mitigate the visual impact of the facility. Such
measures may include, but are not limited to: additional concealment materials and
designs, specific colors and materials, and landscaping.
(h) Wireless communication facilities within a Historic (H) Overlay District must be
concealed and are subject to the Historic Review procedural requirements of Section
10.188.
(2) General Requirements:
(a) All facilities shall be installed and maintained in compliance with the requirements of
the current Oregon Structural Specialty Code. Building Permit applications shall include
written statements from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Oregon Aeronautics
Division, and the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) that the proposed wireless
communication facility complies with regulations administered by that agency, or that the
facility is exempt from regulation.
(b) When facilities are located within a C-N, C-S/P, or any residential zone, all associated
transmittal equipment shall be housed in an all-weather equipment cabinet, or in the
alternative, an equipment building, above or below ground level, which must be designed
to achieve minimal visual impact with the surrounding environment.
(c) Any ground-mounted accessory equipment shall be enclosed by a security fence or
wall subject to Sections 10.731 through 10.735. Such barriers shall be landscaped in a
manner that provides a natural sight-obscuring screen around the barrier to a minimum
height of six feet.
(d) Wireless Communication Support Structures shall not exceed a height of 135 feet as
measured from the finished grade at the base of the tower.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 111/144
(e) New wireless communication support structures must be set back from any
residentially zoned property a distance equal to the overall height of the Wireless
Communication Support Structure. The setback requirement may be reduced if, as
determined by the Planning Commission, it can be demonstrated through findings of fact
that increased mitigation of visual impact can be achieved within the setback area. In no
case shall a new Wireless Communication Support Structure be setback less than the
minimum requirement of the underlying zone. Underground accessory equipment is not
subject to the setback requirement.
(f) For wireless communication facilities co-located on an existing support structure, the
design of any accessory structures or equipment shall use materials, colors and textures
that will match the existing support structure to which the equipment of the collocating
provider is being attached, subject to the concealment standards of Section 10.782
(g) When Wireless Communication Systems Antennas are attached to the exterior of an
existing building, they shall be architecturally integrated into the existing building, and
shall have a non-reflective finish and color that blends with the color and design of the
structure to which it is attached. Roof-Mounted Wireless Communication Facilities shall
be concealed, subject to the standards of Section 10.782.
(h) Any proposal that has elements that deviate from the standards of (f) and/or (g)
above may be approved by the Site Plan and Architectural Commission or Landmarks
and Historic Preservation Commission through a Type III Land Use Review Action, based
upon evidence showing that the standards cannot otherwise be met and that the degree
of relief approved by said Commission, is the minimum necessary to allow for facility
operation.
(i) Any modification of an existing Wireless Communication Support Structure that would
result in a "substantial change" as outlined in Section 10.824(b)(6) must be approved by
the Planning Commission as a new Conditional Use Permit in accordance with Section
10.184.
(j) Signage for wireless communication facilities shall consist of a maximum of two nonilluminated
signs, not to exceed two square feet in area each, stating the name of the
facility operator and a contact phone number, and any other applicable FCC and OSHA
required information.
(k) No lighting shall be permitted except as required by the Oregon Aeronautics Division,
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), or other state or federal agency.
(3) Landscaping: The following standards apply to all facilities with any primary or accessory
equipment located on the ground and visible from any public right-of-way or from an abutting
residential use.
(a) The perimeter security fence or wall shall have a minimum 5-foot wide landscaped
area that will screen the facility from public view.
(b) The selected vegetation shall be fast-growing and reasonably expected to form a
continuous hedge with a minimum height of six feet within two years of planting.
(c) The landscaped area shall be irrigated and maintained to provide for proper growth
and health of the vegetation.
(4) Wireless Communication Facility Co-location:
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 112/144
(a) All new Wireless Communication Support Structures shall be constructed so as to
allow a second user to co-locate on the facility, unless limited by aesthetics as
determined by the Planning Commission.
(b) Relief from co-location under this section may be granted, at the discretion of the
approving authority, upon submittal of either a mutually agreeable third party professional
verification of provider's data or mutually agreeable third party engineering evaluations
that support one or more of the following:
i. Existing Wireless Communications Facilities do not fall within location tolerances
based upon Radio Frequency mapping.
ii. Proposed site(s) does not meet minimum height requirements based upon Radio
Frequency engineering data.
iii. Existing Wireless Communications Facilities do not meet structural integrity
requirements for the proposed Wireless Communication Systems Antenna array.
iv. Placement of the proposed Wireless Communications Facility and/or Wireless
Communication Systems Antenna array would impair, or be impaired by, the
emission of Radio Frequencies.
v. That the owners of existing Wireless Communication Support Structures or
structures within 1,250 feet will not allow the applicant to place its
telecommunications facility thereon, or such owners are requiring payment that
substantially exceeds commercially reasonable rates.
G. Public Right-of-Way.
Applications for Wireless Communication Facilities within the public right-of-way (ROW) shall be
required to enter into a Franchise Agreement with the City, and to obtain a right-of-way permit from
the Public Works Department. Such applications shall be approved by the Planning Director as a
Type I Land Use Action if the facility is located within a commercial or industrial zone and it complies
with all of the following design standards. Facilities located within residential or Public Parks zones,
and/or facilities that do not comply with the design standards are subject to approval of a Conditional
Use Permit pursuant to Section 10.824(D).
(1) Design Standards:
(a) Wherever possible, the facility shall be attached to an existing utility support
structure. Such structure may be replaced with a new utility support structure so long as
the replacement structure is at the same location and is of the same design as the
original structure.
(b) No more than one wireless communication facility shall be installed on a single utility
support structure.
(c) The installation of wireless communication facilities on decorative street light fixtures
is prohibited.
(d) All transmission and power cables shall be contained within the utility support
structure or concealed within a single conduit line or housing that is flush-mounted to the
structure. Where the National Electric Safety Code (NESC) requires separation from the
support structure, installations at the NESC required separation shall be considered
flush-mounted.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 113/144
(e) Any accessory equipment shall be placed underground to the maximum extent
possible. Accessory equipment that is attached to the utility support structure shall be
enclosed in cabinets with no one dimension exceeding 30 inches.
(f) In commercial and industrial zones, antenna arrays shall be mounted within six inches
of the utility support structure or contained in a covering cylinder that is a continuation of
the diameter of the utility support structure. The antenna array shall be painted to match
the utility support structure.
(g) If (d) above is not feasible, antenna arrays in commercial and industrial zones may be
attached to horizontal support arms no greater than five feet in length measured from the
center of the utility support structure. The antennas shall be placed within a covering
cylinder.
(h) In residential zones, antenna arrays shall be contained within the utility support
structure, or contained in a covering cylinder that is a continuation of the diameter of the
utility support structure. The array shall be painted to match the utility support structure.
Antenna arrays shall not project more than 36 inches above the existing utility support
structure.
(i) Any facility involving the use of a City-owned street light, or the installation of a new
utility support structure, shall be subject to the following conditions:
i. The location of the support structure shall be subject to the approval of the City
Engineer, or their designee.
ii. Installations shall not be allowed on traffic signal poles.
iii. The applicant shall submit plans and calculations, stamped and signed by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of Oregon, which identify the location of
the proposed facilities and verify the structural capacity of supports and
foundations. The City Engineer may request additional information as needed.
iv. The City may require a street light arm and fixture be included as part of a new
utility support structure, at the discretion of the City Engineer or their designee.
v. Installation on City-owned street light poles shall meet all the requirements of the
NESC, including power cut-off requirements.
vi. If a combined street light and cellular facility is proposed that does not use the
City’s standard street light pole, the applicant shall maintain the pole and cellular
facilities in a safe condition. The City shall maintain the street light fixture.
vii. The applicant shall pay the on-going power costs associated with the facility.
This may include the costs to power the street light if the power sources and billing
cannot be separated.
viii. The City shall have access to the power cut-off.
H. Prohibited.
The following wireless communication facilities are prohibited:
(1) Wireless Communication Support Structures that exceed 40 feet in height in the Airport-
Radar (A-R) Overlay District.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 114/144
(2) Wireless Communication Facilities utilizing a support structure within 300 feet of a Historic
(H) Overlay District.
(3) Wireless Communication Facilities in a riparian corridor as identified in Section 10.926.
(4) Placement on a Wireless Communication Support Structure of satellite and microwave
dishes that are not part of the Wireless Communication System.
I. Abandonment.
All wireless telecommunications facilities, which are not in use for six consecutive months, shall be
removed by the wireless telecommunications facility owner. This removal shall take place within
three months of the end of such six-month period. Upon removal, the site shall be revegetated to
blend with the existing surrounding vegetation. Landscaping that is established and viable may
remain.
(1) Removal extension: Upon written application, prior to the expiration of the six-month period,
the Planning Director may, in writing, grant a six-month time extension for reuse of the facility.
Additional extensions beyond the first six-month extension may be granted by the Planning
Director subject to any conditions required to bring the project or facility into compliance with
current regulation(s) and make it compatible with surrounding development.
[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8349, May 1, 1997; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 1998-146, June 18, 1998;
Replaced, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2008-04, Jan 3, 2008; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2013-30, Feb. 21, 2013;
Amd. Sec. 24, Ord. No. 2013-131, Sept. 5, 2013; Amd. Sec. 20, Ord. No. 2018-52 June 7, 2018
(effective July 9, 2018); Amd. Sec. 165, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018;
Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2018-106, Sept. 6, 2018; Amd. Sec. 21, Ord. No. 2018-133, Dec. 6, 2018.]
10.826 Single-Family Dwelling in Multiple-Family Residential Zones
A single-family dwelling may be constructed in an MFR-15, MFR-20 or MFR-30 zone when any of
the following conditions exist:
(1) The existing tax lot is nonconforming because it has less than the minimum lot area, lot
width or lot depth.
(2) The existing tax lot would be made nonconforming as a result of a required street
dedication that would come from review of a multi-family project on the site.
(3) Accessory Dwelling Units may be constructed on lots that have a primary dwelling(s)
meeting the standards of Section 10.821.
[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 7790, Dec. 15, 1994; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2018-132, Dec. 20, 2018.]
10.827 Mines, Quarries, Gravel Pits
Extractions from deposits of rock, stone, gravel, sand, earth, minerals, or building or construction
materials shall not be construed to be a permitted use in any district established by this code unless
a conditional use permit shall first have been obtained as provided in Article II Section 10.184,
except for on-site improvement project. The Planning Commission shall have power to grant
conditional use permits which are valid for a specified period of time, or are revocable, to permit
extractions from deposits of rock, stone, gravel, sand, earth, minerals, or building or construction
materials. It shall be clearly demonstrated by the applicant that odor, dust, noise, or drainage will not
adversely impact adjacent properties.
[Amd. Sec. 166, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.828 Bed and Breakfast Service
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 115/144
The intent is to provide temporary travelers' accommodations and breakfast in a single family
residence for a fee, on a daily or weekly room rental basis, not to exceed fourteen (14) consecutive
days.
(1) Standards.
(a) Minimal outward modification of the structure or grounds may be made only if such
changes are compatible with the character of the area or neighborhood and the intent of
the zoning district in which it is located.
(b) Off street parking shall be provided. The front yard shall not be for off-street parking
for temporary guests unless the parking area is screened, not visible from the street, and
found to be compatible with the neighborhood.
(c) The number of guests shall generally be limited to six persons at any one time, except
where sanitation facilities and neighborhood standards would otherwise allow more.
Health and sanitation facilities shall be inspected annually by Jackson County.
(d) Two (2) on-premise signs may be approved by the approving agency (Planning
Commission) provided that each sign is compatible with residential uses and is not more
than six (6) square feet in size and not exceeding an overall height of six (6) feet.
(e) All necessary state and county permits, certifications, or requirements shall be
obtained as a condition of approval of a bed and breakfast service.
[Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2011-32, Mar. 3, 2011.]
10.829 [Repealed, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2013-82, June 6, 2013.]
Repealed
10.830 Public Utility Service Facilities
(A) The erection, construction, alteration, maintenance, or termination by public utility or municipal
or other governmental agencies of public utility service facilities including, but not limited to:
underground and overhead electrical, gas, steam, or water transmission or distribution systems;
communication, collection, supply or disposal systems, including poles, towers (including public
safety communication towers), wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm
boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories in
connection therewith, but not including buildings, shall be permitted in any zoning district.
(B) Utility transmission and distribution lines, poles, and towers, and public safety communication
towers may exceed the height limits otherwise provided for in this Chapter.
(C) A wireless communication facility as defined in Section 10.012 is not a public utility service
facility for the purposes of this section.
(D) Public safety communication towers are subject to the setback standards for the underlying
zoning district.
[Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2008-04, Jan. 3, 2008; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2013-30, Feb. 21, 2013.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 116/144
10.831 Outdoor Storage, Display and Sales of Merchandise; Permit Required
(1) By permit issued under direction of the City Manager, outdoor storage, display and sales of
merchandise shall be permitted on private property in all commercial zones within the city, and on
public sidewalks which are adjacent to a structure normally occupied for business purposes in the CB
district.
(2) Applications for permits authorized hereunder shall be made on forms prescribed by the City
Manager and shall be accompanied by a fee of $10.00 for each such permit.
(3) No permit issued hereunder shall authorize outdoor storage, display or sale of merchandise for a
period longer than three (3) consecutive calendar days on public sidewalks, or ten (10) consecutive
calendar days on private property. Applications shall be filed not less than fifteen (15) calendar days
prior to the commencement of the planned activity.
(4) No more than a total of four (4) permits shall be issued to any applicant for the outdoor storage,
display or sale of merchandise upon public sidewalks or private property at the same business
location within any calendar year. The second and subsequent permits issued to any applicant within
any calendar year shall not authorize commencement of outdoor storage, display and sales of
merchandise unless at least fifteen (15) calendar days shall have elapsed from the termination date
of the previous permit.
(5) Applicants shall verify that they are the owners of such property, a purchaser under a recorded
land sale contract, or have a leasehold interest in such property, which lease shall have been in
effect for a period of not less than 45 days prior to the date of the application. Sidewalk and outdoor
sale merchandise shall be limited to the normal and customary inventory of the business adjacent to
the location of the sale.
(6) Outdoor Sales on Private Property.
(a) Applications shall specify the private property to be utilized for the outdoor storage, display
and sales of merchandise, and shall be accompanied by a scale drawing of any off-street
parking facilities proposed to be utilized in connection with activity authorized hereunder, and
such drawing shall depict the parking area, public streets and alleys adjacent thereto,
driveways for ingress and egress, and such other pertinent information as may be required by
the form prescribed by the City Manager.
(b) Outdoor storage, display and sales of merchandise conducted entirely upon privatelyowned
property, may include off-street parking facilities. If off-street parking facilities are to be
utilized in connection with activity authorized hereunder, no more than thirty-five percent of the
total area available and required by provisions of this code for off-street parking may be
devoted to such use.
(7) Outdoor Sales on Public Sidewalks.
(a) A clear space of at least four (4) feet shall be maintained for pedestrian circulation along all
sidewalks. Failure to maintain such clear space shall constitute a violation of Section 6.360 of
the City Code and shall be grounds for revocation of sidewalk sale permit eligibility for the
violating business for one calendar year from the date of violation. Building ingress and egress
points shall remain unrestricted during sale hours.
10.832 Garage Sales and Yard Sales
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 117/144
Garage sales or yard sales as defined in Article I, Section 10.012, Specific Definitions, of this code
shall be permitted in any residential zone subject to the following:
(1) Limited to the sale of household goods and equipment, plants, clothing, furniture, and the
like.
(2) Limited to three (3) such sales per year.
(3) The duration of an individual sale shall not exceed two (2) days.
(4) The hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
10.833 Restaurants - Outdoor Eating Areas
Outdoor eating areas shall be allowed for restaurants in all commercial, industrial, and public
parks zoning districts subject to the following:
(1) Compliance with all other provisions of this chapter.
(2) Historic Review or Site Plan and Architectural Review as applicable and approval when the
outdoor eating area includes seating for more than 15 patrons. (Effective Dec. 1, 2013.)
(3) Where adjacent or abutting a residential zone, outdoor activity shall only be allowed
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
[Amd. Sec. 17, Ord. No. 8285, Feb. 6, 1997; Amd. Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2012-32, March 1, 2012; Amd.
Sec. 25, Ord. No. 2013-131, Sept. 5, 2013, effective Dec. 1, 2013; Amd. Sec. 21, Ord. No. 2018-52,
June 7, 2018 (effective July 9, 2018).]
10.834 [Repealed, Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2013-31, Feb. 21, 2013.]
Repealed
10.834A Craft Alcohol Production
The following provisions apply to all craft alcohol production businesses.
(1) Such use(s) shall not exceed 5,000 square feet of floor area devoted to the production of
alcoholic beverages.
(2) Such uses, when within the Central Business Overlay, shall hold a full on-premises sales license
in accordance with ORS 471.175.
(3) The growing and cultivating of grapes, hops and similar agricultural products shall be prohibited
with the craft alcohol production use.
(4) All production activities within a craft alcohol production business, including storage (except for
grain silos), must be contained entirely inside the building walls of such uses.
(5) Grain silos are permitted outside the walls of a craft alcohol production facility and are not
considered outside storage.
(6) A grain silo may have a sign, logo or other design feature that is permitted in accordance with
Chapter 10. The permitted sign types for grain silos shall be a wall sign or a wall graphic.
(7) The diameter of a grain silo may be added to the linear business frontage when calculating the
aggregate sign area for a craft alcohol producer. The total permitted signage shall then be calculated
per Section 10.1700 (2)(a)-(b).
(8) If a grain silo is a part of a craft alcohol production business, it shall not occupy any parking
spaces, off-street loading berths, landscaping, or other required on–site improvements as required
per Chapter 10.
[Added, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2016-151, Dec. 15, 2016.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 118/144
10.835 Residence for Caretaker or Watchman
One single-family residence for a caretaker, owner, operator, manager, or security guard is allowed
for any industrial or public parks use for purposes of security and protection of the principle use.
[Amd. Sec. 18, Ord. No. 8285, Feb. 6, 1997; Amd. Sec. 22, Ord. No 2018-52, June 7, 2018
(effective July 9, 2018).]
10.836 Residential Facility
A residential facility licensed by the State is allowed within residential districts provided, as per ORS
197.667(4), the applicant supplies the city with a copy of the entire application and supporting
documentation for state licensing of the facility, except for information which is exempt from public
disclosure under ORS 192.410 to 192.505.
[Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 7167, July 16, 1992; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2012-58, May 3, 2012.]
10.837 Dwelling Units in Commercial Districts
Dwelling Units shall be allowed in all commercial districts except the Neighborhood Commercial (CN)
zone subject to the dwelling type standards established for housing within the MFR-30 district. In
addition, single family dwelling units shall be allowed in all commercial districts when attached to a
commercial building and approved by the Site Plan and Architectural Commission or Landmarks and
Historic Preservation Commission as applicable. In the Neighborhood Commercial (C-N) district
single family and multiple family residential uses are permitted only when the total residential use is
attached, accessory, and subordinate to the primary commercial use.
[Added Sec. 8, Ord. No. 5873, May 21, 1987; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord No. 7862, Apr. 20, 1995; Amd. Sec.
19, Ord. No. 8285, Feb. 6, 1997; Amd. Sec. 26, Ord. No. 2013-131, Sept. 5, 2013, effective Dec. 1,
2013.]
10.838 Accessory Uses in Group (Congregate) Living Facilities
Incidental personal services including barber shops, beauty shops, automated banking services,
travel agents and pharmacies may be provided in group (congregate living) facilities under the
following conditions:
(1) No more than ten percent of the total gross floor area of the facility may be used for such
accessory uses.
(2) No signs shall be visible from a public right-of-way.
(3) Use of the facilities shall be only for employees and tenants of the group housing facility
and guests of tenants.
[Added, Section 2, Ord. No. 7035, December 5, 1991.]
10.839 Marijuana-Related Businesses
10.839 Marijuana-Related Businesses.
A. General Provisions. The following provisions apply to any marijuana-related business.
(1) All marijuana-related businesses will conduct operations inside secure, enclosed structures. No production,
processing, storage, or sales may be conducted out of doors.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 119/144
(2) No marijuana-related business shall cause or allow an offensive odor of marijuana items to emanate from a
structure or property.
(3) No marijuana-related business shall permit trespass or glare from security or other lighting beyond its property line.
In addition, lighting must be “full cutoff” according to Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IES)
definitions and standards.
(4) The hazardous fence and wall provisions in Section 9.560 apply.
(5) Marijuana items may not be displayed in a manner that is externally visible to the public.
(6) All marijuana-related businesses shall be licensed by the state, and comply with all applicable state laws and
regulations.
B. Processing
(1) Processors using high-heat extraction methods are allowed only in the I-G and I-H zoning districts.
C. Conflict of Laws
(1) When this section imposes a greater restriction upon a marijuana-related business than that imposed by a state law
or regulation, the greater restriction shall control.
D. Ban on Sale of Limited Marijuana Retail Product
(1) Pursuant to section 3 of Senate Bill 460 (2015), the City of Medford hereby prohibits the sale of limited marijuana
retail product in any area subject to the jurisdiction of the City of Medford as described in section 2 of Senate Bill 460
(2015).
(2) The ban imposed by this section will be effective until December 31, 2016, or until the Legislature ends sales of
limited marijuana retail product by medical marijuana dispensaries, whichever comes later.
(3) If a medical marijuana dispensary violates the ban on the sale of limited retail marijuana product, the City of
Medford may enforce the ban as follows: i) impose a violation penalty upon the medical marijuana dispensary pursuant
to the Medford Code; ii) initiate a business license revocation proceeding against the medical marijuana dispensary
pursuant to Chapter 8 of the Medford Code; iii) seek declaratory, provisional and permanent injunctive relief in the
Jackson County Circuit Court as provided by the Medford Code and Oregon law; and iv) seek any other relief available
as provided by either the Medford Code or Oregon law.
[Repealed, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2001-166, Sept. 6, 2001; Replaced, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2015-104, October 15, 2015.]
10.840 Temporary Uses and Structures
A. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to accommodate reasonable requests for interim, temporary, or
seasonal uses and structures within the City.
B. Applicability.
In addition to the provisions of this section, the following other licenses and permits may apply:
(1) Permits for use of City-owned property and public right-of-way, pursuant to Chapter 2 and
Chapter 6;
(2) Business license provisions of Chapter 8;
(3) Building permit provisions of Chapter 9; and
(4) Sign permit provisions of Article VI of this Chapter 10.
C. General Provisions.
(1) Temporary uses and structures are characterized by their short-term or seasonal nature,
and by the fact that permanent improvements associated with the temporary use are not made
to the site.
(2) Temporary uses and structures are permitted only as expressly provided in this Code.
(3) The principal use or structure, together with any temporary uses or structures, shall not
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 120/144
jointly exceed the development standards contained in Article V.
(4) No signs in connection with a temporary use shall be permitted except in accordance with
the provisions of Article VI.
(5) Nothing contained in this section is intended to authorize the placement or use of movable
structures or vehicles without all necessary permits first being obtained.
(6) Removing the wheels or setting the movable structure or vehicle on posts or footings shall
not exempt the movable structure or vehicle from the provisions of this section and may cause
the structure to be subject to the development standards Article V.
D. Types of Temporary Uses and/or Temporary Structures.
The following types of temporary uses and/or temporary structures are permitted subject to
compliance with this section.
(1) Seasonal and Short-Term Events of Public Interest on Private Property.
a. Events of Public Interest.
1. Application Requirements.
A business license pursuant to Chapter 8 shall be required, except for events of
public interest sponsored by, and located at, a public or private school.
2. Standards.
i. An event of public interest is permitted in the following zoning districts: C-C,
C-R, C-H, or any industrial zoning district, except, if the event is sponsored by
an institutional use located in a residential zone, the event may be located at
its facilities.
ii. The maximum length of the event shall be 30 days.
iii. The event shall be confined to the dates specified on the business license,
if applicable.
iv. No temporary structures or equipment shall be located within 200 feet of
any dwelling on property not associated with the event.
v. Permanent or temporary lighting shall be installed in compliance with
applicable electrical permits and inspections from the Building Safety
Department.
vi. The site shall be cleared of all debris at the closing of the event and
cleared of all temporary structures within ten (10) days after the closing of the
event.
vii. Adequate vehicular and bicycle parking shall be provided. It is the
responsibility of the applicant to guide traffic to these parking areas and to
prevent patrons from unlawful parking.
viii. Traffic control arrangements required by the Police Department in the
vicinity shall be made by the applicant.
b. Christmas Tree Sales.
1. Application Requirements.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 121/144
A business license pursuant to Chapter 8 shall be required.
2. Standards.
i. Christmas tree sales is permitted in any commercial or industrial zoning
district on private property, and shall not be located within the public right-ofway.
ii. The clear view of intersecting streets standards of Section 10.735 shall be
met.
iii. The maximum length of display and sales shall be 45 days in any calendar
year.
iv. Each lot occupied by temporary Christmas tree sales shall be limited to
one (1) temporary movable structure or vehicle if entirely self-contained or if
lawful sanitation facilities on the lot are available to the occupants.
c. Live Crab Sales.
1. Application Requirements.
A business license pursuant to Chapter 8 shall be required.
2. Standards.
i. Live crab sales is permitted in any commercial or industrial zoning district
on private property and shall not be located within the public right-of-way.
ii. The clear view of intersecting streets standards of Section 10.735 shall be
met.
iii. The maximum length of display and sales shall be 45 days in any calendar
year.
iv. Each lot occupied by temporary live crab sales shall be limited to one (1)
temporary movable structure or vehicle if entirely self-contained or if lawful
sanitation facilities on the lot are available to the occupants.
v. Discharges resulting from activities associated with the sale of live crab
shall not be allowed to flow into the storm drain system, but shall be directed
into the sanitary sewer system in accordance with City and State standards.
(2) Temporary Real Estate Sales Office, Model Home, or Contractor’s Office and/or
Construction Equipment Shed.
a. Temporary Real Estate Office Standards.
1. A temporary real estate sales office shall be located within the boundaries of the
subdivision or tract of land where the real property is to be sold.
2. The property used for a temporary sales office shall not be permanently
improved for that purpose.
3. The temporary sales office shall not contain sleeping or cooking
accommodations.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 122/144
4. The temporary sales office shall be removed upon completion of the
development.
b. Temporary Model Home Standards.
1. A model home may be used as a temporary real estate sales office.
2. The model home shall be located within the boundaries of the subdivision or
tract of land where the real property is to be sold.
3. The model home shall be a permanent structure that meets all applicable code
and permit requirements.
c. Temporary Contractor’s Office and/or Construction Equipment Shed Standards.
1. A temporary contractor’s office and/or construction equipment shed is permitted
in any zoning district where the use is incidental to a construction project.
2. The temporary contractor’s office and/or construction equipment shed shall be
removed upon completion of the construction project.
3. Only one (1) temporary office and one (1) temporary shed shall be permitted per
project site.
4. The temporary office and/or shed shall not include sleeping or cooking
accommodations.
(3) Temporary Mobile Vendors.
a. Temporary Food Vendors (Outdoor).
1. Application Requirements.
i. A business license pursuant to Chapter 8 shall be required.
ii. In addition to the requirements of Chapter 8, the applicant shall submit a
site plan drawn to scale indicating the following:
(a) Length of the temporary mobile food vendor unit (Measurement of
the length of a mobile food vendor is explained in Figure 10.840 - 1).
(b) Location of the temporary food vendor unit on the site.
(c) Paved vehicular access, including driveway location(s).
(d) Off-street vehicular parking spaces.
(e) A trash receptacle located within ten (10) feet of the temporary food
vendor unit.
(f) Dimensions of the area to be occupied by the temporary food vendor
unit, including any table(s), seating, and other exterior items, if
applicable; and
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 123/144
(g) Location of utility connections, if any.
2. Standards.
i. Locational and Size Standards.
(a) Temporary food vendors are permitted in the following zoning
districts: C-S/P, C-N, C-C, C-H, C-R, I-L, I-G, P-1.
(b) When within both the Central Business (C-B) and Historic
Preservation (H) Overlays:
(1) The exterior length shall not exceed 16 feet (See Figure
10.840 - 1 for measurement guidance).
(2) Outdoor equipment, such as tables and chairs, shall not be
permitted. Outdoor equipment shall include seating, tables, grills,
and other items used for preparing food or accommodating
guests.
(c) In all other zones:
(1) The exterior length shall not exceed 20 feet (see Figure
10.840 - 1 for measurement guidance).
(2) An additional 170 square feet is allowed for outdoor
equipment. Outdoor equipment shall include seating, tables, grills,
and other items used for preparing food or accommodating
guests.
(d) On City-owned property and right-of-way, temporary food vendor
units shall obtain a permit pursuant to Chapter 2, and are exempt from
the standards of 10.840(D)(3).
(e) At an Event of Public Interest, temporary food vendors per
10.840(D)(1) are exempt from the standards of 10.840(D)(3).
ii. General Standards.
(a) If the temporary food vendor unit is located on or adjacent to a
privately-owned walkway, the minimum remaining unobstructed
walkway width shall be five (5) feet.
(b) All food must be in a ready-to-eat condition when sold.
(c) Required parking spaces or access to required parking spaces shall
not be displaced or obstructed.
(d) The temporary food vendor unit shall be located outside any
required setbacks.
(e) Attached awnings are permitted if smaller than the size of the
temporary food vendor unit.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 124/144
(f) The temporary food vendor unit and all outdoor equipment shall be
located on an improved surface.
(g) Temporary food vendors shall obtain an operational permit from the
Fire Department.
(h) Any utility connections require a building permit from the Building
Safety Department.
b. Temporary Medical Services (Human or Animal) Vendors and Temporary Nonprofit
Vendors (Outdoor).
1. Application Requirements.
i. A business license pursuant to Chapter 8 shall be required.
ii. In addition to the business license requirements of Chapter 8, the applicant
shall submit a site plan drawn to scale, indicating the following:
(a) Dimensions of the temporary vendor unit.
(b) Location of temporary vendor unit on the site.
(c) Paved vehicular access, including driveway location(s).
(d) Off street vehicular parking spaces.
(e) Location of utility connections, if any.
2. Standards.
i. Locational and Size Standards:
(a) Temporary vendors shall be permitted in the following zoning
districts: C-S/P, C-N, C-C, C-H, C-R, I-L, I-G, P-1.
(b) When within both the Central Business (C-B) and Historic
Preservation (H) Overlays, the exterior length and width of the
temporary vendor unit, when multiplied, shall be no more than 128
square feet, including any slide-outs, and excluding trailer tongue and
bumper.
(c) In all other zoning districts, the exterior length and width of the
temporary vendor unit, when multiplied, shall be no more than 300
square feet, including any slide-outs, and excluding trailer tongue and
bumper.
ii. General Standards.
(a) If the temporary vendor unit is located on or adjacent to a privatelyowned
walkway, the minimum remaining unobstructed walkway width
shall be five (5) feet.
(b) The temporary vendor unit shall be located on an improved surface.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 125/144
(c) Required parking spaces or access to required parking spaces shall
not be displaced or obstructed.
(d) The temporary vendor unit shall be located outside any required
setbacks.
(e) Attached awnings are permitted if smaller than the size of the
temporary vendor unit.
(f) Outdoor equipment such as tables and chairs shall not be permitted.
(g) Any utility connections require a building permit from the Building
Safety Department.
(4) Temporary Residential Uses of Movable Structures and Vehicles.
(a) Existing Movable Structures and Vehicles.
Existing movable structures and vehicles regularly used or occupied on February 2,
1961, or in lawful regular use and occupancy on the property at the time of annexation
are permitted.
(b) Conventions.
Members of an established organization are permitted to occupy movable structures or
vehicles for temporary use on private property at a convention or other like-activity
subject to the following:
1. The maximum length of stay shall be one (1) week.
2. The members of the organization shall be responsible for policing the area used
and for correcting any violation of State or City health or safety regulations.
Violations of any of these regulations will result in eviction.
(c) City-Sponsored Recreation Programs.
Movable structures or vehicles utilized temporarily as part of City-sponsored recreation
programs, such as swim meets and softball tournaments may be permitted.
1. A permit shall be obtained from the Parks and Recreation Department pursuant
to Chapter 2.
2. Any applicable permits from the Building Safety Department, pursuant to
Chapter 9, shall also be obtained.
(d) Temporary Residence.
When fire or natural disaster has rendered a single-family residence unfit for human
habitation, the temporary use of a recreational vehicle located on the single-family lot
during rehabilitation of the original residence or construction of a new residence is
permitted subject to the following:
1. A building permit for the temporary residence shall be obtained from the Building
Safety Department, pursuant to Chapter 9.
2. Required water and sanitary facilities shall be provided.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 126/144
3. The maximum length of the permit shall be six (6) months, but may be extended
for a period not to exceed 60 days in the event of circumstances beyond the control
of the owner.
4. Application for the extension shall be made at least 15 days prior to expiration.
(5) Temporary Governmental Agency Use of Movable Structures and Vehicles.
Governmental agencies may temporarily use a movable structure or vehicle pursuant to
Chapter 9.
(6) Portable Storage Containers
(a) Applicability.
1. A temporary Portable Storage Container permit is a Type III land use action
(Section 10.168(B)) and is required for placement of any portable storage
container, except for the following:
i. Truck trailers parked on a street for 24 hours or less;
ii. Portable storage containers that will remain on a property for no more than
five days;
iii. Portable storage containers that have been approved as a permanent
portion of an approved site plan; and
iv. Portable storage containers used for primary use businesses in the
following Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) groupings: 15, 16, 17, 40
and 42 (see Section 10.337).
2. When a temporary Portable Storage Container permit is required, placement of
portable storage containers, as defined herein and as a temporary use, is permitted
only on private property in C-R, C-H, I-L, I-G and I-H zoning districts.
3. Portable storage containers shall not be placed within the public right-of-way,
except as permitted in Chapter 6 of this Code.
4. Temporary Portable Storage Container permits will only be issued for the use of
temporary portable storage containers as a period, intermittent, or recurring use
accessory to a permitted primary use.
(b) Location Standards.
1. In no case shall storage containers be located in required yards, landscape
areas, open space, retention basins, drive aisles, required parking spaces and
loading areas, or fire lanes, or any other location that may cause hazardous
conditions, constitute a threat to public safety, unreasonably interfere with the use
and enjoyment of neighboring property, or be incompatible with uses and
development that exist on adjacent land.
2. Portable storage containers shall be placed outside of required setback areas
and shall be placed a minimum of 10 feet from all property lines.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 127/144
3. The placement of portable storage containers shall comply with Section 9.520,
Conditions for Temporary Structures, with the exception that only one 30-day
extension shall be available.
4. Portable storage containers shall be placed on a surface consistent with Section
9.550, Parking Lot Specifications.
5. Whenever possible portable storage containers should be screened from view
from public rights-of-way and neighboring properties by placing the containers out
of view behind existing structures, landscaping, walls, or fencing.
6. Portable storage containers must be in good condition with no visible damage,
rust, or graffiti.
7. Applicants are encouraged to acquire portable storage containers of similar
color to existing structures on the property and of similar color to each other.
(c) Time and Number Limitations.
1. A maximum of one temporary Portable Storage Container permit may be issued
per individual primary use during any 12-month period. A temporary Portable
Storage permit shall allow for the placement of portable storage containers for a
period of no more than 90 days. One 30-day extension may be granted subject to
Section 9.520.
2. A maximum of 20 storage containers shall be allowed for an individual primary
use.
(d) Permit Process.
1. To obtain a temporary Portable Storage Container permit, an application must
be filed with the Planning Department. The application shall include the appropriate
filing fee and the information required on the form.
2. Permit applications are subject to the routing and notification procedures
for Type II land use review. The approving authority shall base its decision on the
application’s compliance with the standards under (6)(b) and (6)(c), above, which
constitute the criteria for decision making.
3. In the event of a denial, the applicant may resubmit one time without having to
pay another application fee. However, the decision time prescribed in 10.168(B) will
reset to the starting point.
[Repealed, Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2013-31, Feb. 21, 2013; Replaced, Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2013-81, June 20,
2013; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2014-104, Aug. 21, 2014 (effective through June 30, 2015); Amd. Sec.
5, Ord. No. 2015-75, July 2, 2015; Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2015-90, Sept. 3, 2015; Amd. Sec. 1,
Ord. No. 2017-67, June 15, 2017; Amd. Sec. 23, Ord. No. 2018-52, June 7, 2018 (effective July 9,
2018); Amd. Sec. 167, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018); Amd. Sec. 8, Ord.
No. 2018-113, Sept. 20, 2018.]
IMAGES FOR THIS CODE
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 128/144
(Click on an image to see a larger version)
10.841 [Repealed, Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2013-81, June 20, 2013.]
Repealed
10.842 [Repealed, Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2013-81, June 20, 2013.]
Repealed
10.843 [Repealed, Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2013-81, June 20, 2013.]
Repealed
10.845 [Repealed, Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2013-81, June 20, 2013.]
Repealed
10.846 [Repealed, Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2013-81, June 20, 2013.]
Repealed
10.847 [Repealed, Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2013-81, June 20, 2013.]
Repealed
10.848 [Repealed, Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2013-81, June 20, 2013.]
Repealed
10.849 [Repealed, Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2013-81, June 20, 2013.]
Repealed
10.850 [Repealed, Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2013-81, June 20, 2013.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 129/144
Repealed
10.851 [Repealed, Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2013-81, June 20, 2013.]
Repealed
10.857 [Repealed, Sec. 17, Ord. No. 2013-81, June 20, 2013.]
Repealed
10.858 [Repealed, Sec. 18, Ord. No. 2013-81, June 20, 2013.]
Repealed
10.859 Location and Use of Movable Structures or Vehicles Outside of Mobile Home,
Manufactured Dwelling, or Recreational Vehicle Parks
No person shall use or occupy, or rent or offer for rent, a house trailer, mobile home, trailer coach,
travel trailer, manufactured dwelling, recreational vehicle, or other similar movable structure or
vehicle within the city at any location other than a mobile home park, a manufactured dwelling park,
or a recreational vehicle park, as defined in this Code, operating under a conditional use permit,
except as allowed in Section 10.840(D)(4) Temporary Residence, and Section 10.900 Manufactured
Housing.
[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2000-88, May 4, 2000; Amd. Sec. 19, Ord. No. 2013-81, June 20, 2013;
Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2018-113, Sept. 20, 2018.]
10.860 Mobile Home Parks and Manufactured Dwelling Parks
The purpose of this code is to encourage the most appropriate use of land for mobile home park and
manufactured dwelling park purposes; to establish minimum design standards which will assist in
the creation of a pleasing appearance and living environment for both the occupant and the general
public; to provide sufficient open space for light, air and recreation purposes; to provide adequate
access and parking for mobile home and manufactured dwelling sites; to provide adequate utility
service, including sanitary sewer, storm drainage, and water; to assure that acceptable traffic
circulation is maintained; to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the city. Existing
mobile home parks and new manufactured dwelling parks will, hereafter in Sections 10.864 - 10.897,
be referred to as “park(s)”.
[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2000-88, May 4, 2000.]
10.861 [Repealed, Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2000-88, May 4, 2000.]
10.862 [Repealed, Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2000-88, May 4, 2000.]
10.864 Conditional Use Permit Required
No park shall be developed, enlarged or otherwise modified without first obtaining a conditional use
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 130/144
permit as required herein.
[Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2000-88, May 4, 2000.]
10.870 Park Uses
For uses other than mobile home spaces and manufactured dwellings, the specific land use
proposed within the park must be approved as part of the conditional use permit and be accessory
to the primary use. This includes uses typically allowed in a residential zone.
[Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2000-88, May 4, 2000.]
10.871 [Repealed, Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2000-88, May 4, 2000.]
10.873 Application; New Parks or Extensions
Application for a new park or modification of an existing park shall be filed with the Planning
Department on forms provided by the City and accompanied by the documents required in the
Conditional Use Permit application. No development permit shall be approved for a park unless the
area for which the park is proposed is zoned to permit the same and the conditional use permit
required by this chapter has been granted.
[Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2000-88, May 4, 2000; Amd. Sec. 168, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018
(effective July 23, 2018).]
10.874 Preliminary Site Plans
In addition to the standard application requirements of a conditional use permit, the application for a
park shall be accompanied by the following information:
(1) A legal description of the area to be occupied by the park.
(2) A plot plan drawn to a scale of not less than 1" = []50' for new construction or extensions,
and 1" = 100' for existing parks.
(3) Name of the person who prepared the plan.
(4) Name of property owners and developers.
(5) Scale and north point of plan.
(6) Vicinity map showing relationship of the park to adjacent properties.
(7) Boundaries and dimensions of the park and all existing property lines within the boundary
of the park.
(8) Location of existing and proposed buildings.
(9) Location and dimension of mobile home or manufactured dwelling spaces.
(10) Location and width of access streets, any proposed emergency access, and overall
neighborhood circulation plan with an explanation of how traffic circulation through the area will
be maintained.
(11) Location and width of private walkways and public sidewalks.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 131/144
(12) Location of recreational areas and buildings including details of recreation area
development.
(13) Location and concealment of garbage receptacles.
(14) Location of any proposed bicycle parking.
(15) Location and type of fencing and/or walls.
(16) Location of utility connections for the park.
(17) A space detail plan of a typical mobile home or manufactured dwelling space, at a scale of
1 inch equals 10 feet, showing location of dwelling, patio, enclosed storage space , parking,
sidewalk, typical landscape plan, and utility connections. A typical detail plan shall be provided
for each shape of space proposed.
(18) A landscape plan for all common areas including the location, type, and size of landscape
plant materials and indication of type of irrigation system and/or screening and model number
and location of an approved backflow prevention device.
(19) Location of any intended future expansion.
(20) An indication as to whether the site is located adjacent to Exclusive Farm Use (EFU)
zoning and/or adjacent to or includes a flood plain.
[Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2000-88, May 4, 2000.]
10.875 Final Plans
Prior to issuance of building permits for a park, the applicant shall submit detailed plans and
construction drawings in compliance with the approval of the preliminary plans. The final plans shall
show the following:
(1) All access points including emergency access.
(2) New structures.
(3) Utility and storm drainage plans.
(4) Street and sidewalk construction.
(5) Recreation area improvements.
(6) A landscape plan with location, type, and size of plant materials, indication of type of
irrigation system, and location and model number of an approved backflow prevention device.
The plans shall be submitted to the Planning Department. The Planning Department shall
determine whether the final plans and construction drawings, as submitted, conform with the
approved preliminary plans, and the conditions of approval, and with the requirements of law. If
they do, the Planning Department shall approve the same and shall issue a development
permit for the park. If substantial revisions are proposed, a reapplication of the permit will be
necessary.
[Amd. Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2000-88, May 4, 2000.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 132/144
10.876 [Repealed, Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2000-88, May 4, 2000.]
10.877 [Repealed, Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2000-88, May 4, 2000.]
10.878 Delegation of Authority, Mobile Home and Manufactured Dwelling Parks
The Planning Commission may review and approve landscape plans and recreational area details
as part of the conditional use permit review, or delegate the review of these features to the Site Plan
and Architectural Commission or Landmarks and Historic Preservation Commission as applicable.
Approval of any delegated review to one of these Commissions shall be subject to a Type III
procedures as set forth in Article II.
[Added, Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2000-88, May 4, 2000; Amd. Sec. 27, Ord. No. 2013-131, Sept. 5, 2013,
effective Dec. 1, 2013; Amd. Sec. 169, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.880 Site Requirements for New Parks or Expansion or Major Modification Of Existing
Parks
The following shall be the minimum site requirements for new parks or for the area of an expansion
of an existing park:
(1) The minimum total area for a park shall be one acre.
(2) The project density shall be within the density range permitted within the underlying zoning
district.
(3) Each mobile home space or manufactured dwelling space shall front along or be connected to a
public street by a street having one of the following minimum paved widths: 20 feet without on-street
parking; 30 feet with on-street parking on one side, or; 34 feet with on-street parking on both sides.
All streets providing access to and within a manufactured dwelling park shall be constructed to
specifications of OAR 918-600-0050(8). All private streets within the project shall have a standard 6-
inch curb per City of Medford standard details with a minimum corner radii of 20 feet.
(4) A minimum five (5) foot wide concrete sidewalk shall be constructed on at least one side of all
streets within the park and connected to any adjoining sidewalk outside of the park. If an adjacent
public street sidewalk does not exist, the sidewalk shall be so aligned as to allow for a future
connection. Sidewalks within the park may be located adjacent to the curb if approved by the
Planning Commission.
(5) In parks with forty (40) or more spaces, the internal private street shall be designed to
accommodate a school bus for loading and unloading within the park, or space must be made
available on the adjacent public street to allow school bus loading and unloading outside of the
travel lanes.
(6) A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each manufactured dwelling as
follows: One off-street parking space shall be provided on each mobile home space or manufactured
dwelling space. The additional parking space may be provided either on-site or on the street.
(7) Each manufactured dwelling space shall be connected to the street on which it fronts by a
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 133/144
concrete walkway not less than 5 feet wide.
(8) A sight-obscuring fence or wall six feet high, with no openings other than required entrances,
shall be constructed surrounding the park, unless an alternative plan is approved by the Planning
Commission. Chain-link fencing with slats is prohibited for this purpose. Within ten feet of any
adjoining street, the fence or wall shall be not more than three feet high when measured from the top
of the curb of the street. Fences and walls shall be maintained in good, safe and attractive condition
by the operator of the park.
(9) When the mobile home spaces or manufactured dwelling spaces back up to an adjoining public
street, the minimum setback along the street shall be ten (10) feet. The ten (10) foot setback area
shall be landscaped consistent with the minimum frontage landscape requirements for multi-family
development contained in Section 10.797 Street Frontage Landscape Requirements. When the
mobile home spaces or manufactured dwelling spaces front onto a street within the park, the
minimum front yard setback shall be ten (10) feet. When the mobile home spaces or manufactured
dwelling spaces front onto a street adjoining the park, the minimum front yard shall be twenty (20)
feet.
(10) All landscaping shall be consistent with Section 10.780 General Landscape and Irrigation
Requirements. Use of rock, gravel, or bark, between plants, as a replacement for ground cover,
within individual dwelling spaces or within common planter areas or recreation areas, is prohibited
except where pea gravel may be utilized in a children’s play area.
(11) All storage in a mobile home space or manufactured dwelling space shall be in an enclosed
building or structure with flooring, except for automobiles, campers, travel trailers, trailered items, or
motor homes.
(12) Common storage areas for recreational vehicles, including boats, campers, and other wheeled
vehicles, and trailered items, shall not be located adjacent to any public street adjoining the park.
(13) Common outdoor recreation area(s) totaling 2500 square feet per park or 250 square feet per
dwelling space, whichever is greater, shall be provided. The recreation space(s) shall be
conveniently located and easily accessible from all parts of the park. Consideration shall be given to
accommodation of differing age groups. The recreation area(s) shall include improvements to satisfy
the recreational needs of the various age groups and shall be subject to Planning Commission
approval. No portion of the required recreation area(s) may be used as storm water detention areas.
[Amd. Ord. No. 7027, Nov. 21, 1991; Amd. Sec. 17, Ord. No. 2000-88, May 4, 2000.]
10.885 Mobile Home Space and Manufactured Dwelling Space Requirements
(1) The minimum mobile home or manufactured dwelling space width shall be forty (40) feet.
(2) The minimum separation between a mobile home or manufactured dwelling and other mobile
homes or manufactured dwellings shall be ten (10) feet. When a double carport or a garage is used
to serve two adjacent mobile homes or manufactured dwellings, a minimum three (3) foot separation
shall be provided between the carport and any adjacent structure, mobile home or manufactured
dwelling, or accessory structure. In lieu of the three (3) foot separation a one-hour fire separation
may be provided through the center of the carport serving adjacent mobile home or manufactured
dwellings.
(3) No mobile home or manufactured dwelling shall be permitted to extend into any required setback
area or otherwise overhang or obstruct any required street, access way, or walkway.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 134/144
(4) Mobile homes or manufactured dwellings shall not be located closer than six (6) feet from a
perimeter fence and/or property line.
[Amd. Sec. 18, Ord. No. 2000-88, May 4, 2000.]
10.890 [Repealed, Sec. 19, Ord. No. 2000-88, May 4, 2000.]
10.895 [Repealed, Sec. 20, Ord. No. 2000-88, May 4, 2000.]
10.896 General Regulations
Permanent accessory additions built onto or becoming a part of any dwelling in any park shall be
limited to the following:
(1) Skirting.
(2) Cabanas, patios, awnings, ramadas (carport), garages, or porches.
(3) Enclosure for storage purposes: not to exceed 10 percent of the square foot area of the dwelling.
[Amd. Sec. 21, Ord. No. 2000-88, May 4, 2000.]
10.897 Conditions of Approval, Mobile Home and Manufactured Dwelling Parks
The Planning Commission may include conditions of approval as listed for conditional use permits in
Section 10.184, or for Site Plan and Architectural Commission approval as listed in Section
10.200(F), or for Historic Review pursuant to Section 10.188. The Commission may also require
more than a single access point onto public streets. The Commission can also require a warning
statement, to be a part of the lease or rental agreement, notifying prospective tenants of adjacent
agricultural uses pursuant to Section 10.801 Agricultural Buffering, or other land uses that may have
an impact on residential development.
[Added, Sec. 22, Ord. No. 2000-88, May 4, 2000; Amd. Sec. 28, Ord. No. 2013-131, Sept. 5, 2013,
effective Dec. 1, 2013; Amd. Sec. 170, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.900 Manufactured Housing
Manufactured housing, except when located within an approved mobile home park, shall meet the
following minimum standards:
(1) The manufactured home must be multisectional and enclose at least 1,000 square feet; and
(2) Must be located not more than 12 inches above grade on an excavated and back-filled
foundation which is enclosed at the perimeter. All foundation skirting shall be completed prior to
certificate of occupancy and shall be of the same material as the exterior siding; and
(3) Have a minimum roof slope of 3:12 with either a composition, wood (shingle or shake) or tile roof;
and
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 135/144
(4) Have exterior siding consisting of painted or stained wood, aluminum, or fiber glass, with lapped
siding, board and batt, or board and board motif; and
(5) The manufactured home shall be certified by the manufacturer to have an exterior thermal
envelope meeting performance standards which reduce heat loss levels equivalent to the
performance standards required of single-family dwellings constructed under the state building code
as defined in ORS 455.010; and (6) The manufactured home shall have a garage or carport
constructed of like materials.
[Amd - Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6783, Dec. 20, 1990.]
10.920 Riparian Corridors, Purposes
The purposes of establishing riparian corridors are:
(1) To implement the goals and policies of the “Environmental Element” and the “Greenway” General
Land Use Plan (GLUP) designation of the Medford Comprehensive Plan and achieve their purposes.
(2) To protect and restore Medford’s waterways and associated riparian areas, thereby protecting
and restoring the hydrologic, ecologic, and land conservation functions these areas provide for the
community.
(3) To protect fish and wildlife habitat, enhance water quality, control erosion and sedimentation, and
reduce the effects of flooding.
(4) To protect and restore the natural beauty and distinctive character of Medford’s waterways as
community assets.
(5) To provide a means for coordinating the implementation of the Bear Creek Greenway and other
greenways or creek restoration projects within the City of Medford.
(6) To enhance the value of properties near waterways by utilizing the riparian corridor as a visual
amenity.
(7) To enhance coordination among local, state, and federal agencies regarding development
activities near waterways.
[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 1999-215, June 1, 2000.]
10.921 Riparian Corridors, Definitions
The following definitions shall apply to Sections 10.920 through 10.928, “Riparian Corridors”:
Fish-bearing stream - A stream inhabited at any time of the year by anadromous or game fish
species, or fish that are listed as threatened or endangered species under the federal or state
Endangered Species Act.
Riparian area - The area adjacent to a stream consisting of the area of transition from the aquatic
ecosystem to a terrestrial ecosystem.
Riparian vegetation - Native ground cover, shrubs, trees, and other vegetation predominately
influenced by their association with water.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 136/144
Top-of-bank - The two-year recurrence interval flood elevation.
[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 1999-215, June 1, 2000; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2011-124, Oct. 6, 2011.]
10.922 Riparian Corridors, Applicability
A. The provisions of Sections 10.920 through 10.928, “Riparian Corridors,” shall be applied to:
(1) Those waterways, or portions thereof, identified by the Medford Comprehensive Plan as
being fish-bearing streams, and any other waterways, or portions thereof, specified in the
Medford Comprehensive Plan as having riparian areas determined to be significant.
(a) Those portions of streams designated fish-bearing in the Comprehensive Plan
include: Bear, Elk, Swanson, Lone Pine, Lazy, Larson, Gore, and Crooked Creeks.
Specifically:
i. Bear Creek: all of Bear Creek in the city limits of Medford.
ii. Elk Creek: from Beall Lane south 0.05 miles.
iii. Swanson Creek: from Crater Lake Highway west 0.38 miles.
iv. Lone Pine Creek: from Bear Creek east 1.8 miles to Temple Drive.
v. Lazy Creek: from Bear Creek east 1.68 mil
vi. Larson Creek: from Bear Creek east 3.9 miles to North Phoenix Road, and
the south fork of Larson Creek from North Phoenix Road east 1.2 miles.
vii. Gore Creek: from Bear Creek southwest 0.82 miles.
viii. Crooked Creek: from Bear Creek southwest 2.08 miles.
(2) The provisions shall apply regardless of whether or not a building permit, development
permit, or land use approval is required, and do not provide any exemption from state or
federal regulations.
(3) Where riparian corridors are located within the Southeast (S-E) overlay zoning district, the
provisions of Sections 10.920 through 10.928, “Riparian Corridors,” shall take precedence.
(4) When a locally significant wetland is located within or adjacent to a riparian corridor, the
riparian corridor setback will be applied, and shall be measured from the boundary of the
wetland.
B. Applications for land use review (except Annexations), development permits, or building permits,
and plans for proposed public facilities on parcels containing a riparian corridor, or a portion thereof,
shall contain a to-scale drawing that clearly delineates the top-of-bank and riparian corridor
boundary on the entire parcel or parcels.
C. When reviewing land use applications or development permit applications for properties
containing a riparian corridor, or portion thereof, the approving authority should consider the purpose
statements in section 10.920, “Riparian Corridors, Purposes” in determining the extent of the impact
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 137/144
on the riparian corridor.
D. The Planning Commission shall be the approving authority for applications for exceptions to the
provisions herein pertaining to Riparian Corridors. In addition to the provisions of Section 10.186
such a request shall be submitted to the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife for a habitat
mitigation recommendation pursuant to O.A.R. 635-415 “Fish and Wildlife Habitat Mitigation Policy.”
E. In lieu of the provisions of this section, the significance of individual stream reaches may be
determined per the provisions in OAR 660-023-0090. Such a proposal shall be pursued through a
Comprehensive Plan Amendment, consistent with Sections 10.214 - 10.228.
[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 1999-215, June 1, 2000; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2011-124, Oct. 6, 2011;
Amd. Sec. 171, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.923 Riparian Corridors, Location
A. The riparian corridor of 50 feet shall be measured horizontally from the top-of-bank, as defined
herein, on both sides of those waterways meeting the following criteria:
(1) Identified in Section 10.922A. “Riparian Corridors, Applicability,” and in the the
Comprehensive Plan as being fish-bearing; and
(2) Having an average annual stream flow of less than 1,000 cubic feet per second (cfs), and
(3) Waterways having riparian areas determined to be significant in the Comprehensive Plan.
B. The 50-foot riparian corridor may be reduced if a request to reduce the setback has been
approved according to Section 10.927, “Riparian Corridors, Reduction or Deviation.”
C. Where the top-of-bank has been relocated as part of an approved waterway restoration project,
at the request of affected property owners, the riparian corridor shall extend 50 feet from the original
top-of-bank.
D. In lieu of the provisions of Sections 10.924 and 10.928, the degree of protection for significant
riparian corridor reaches may be determined per the provisions of OAR 660-023-0050. Such a
proposal shall be pursued through a Comprehensive Plan Amendment, consistent with Sections
10.214 - 10.228.
[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 1999-215, June 1, 2000; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2011-124, Oct. 6, 2011;
Amd. Sec. 172, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.924 Permitted Activities within Riparian Corridors
A. Any use, sign, or structure, and the maintenance thereof, lawfully existing on the date of adoption
of the provisions herein, is permitted within a riparian corridor. Such use, sign, or structure may
continue at a similar level and manner as existed on the date of adoption of the provisions herein.
The maintenance and alteration of pre-existing ornamental landscaping is permitted within a riparian
corridor as long as no additional riparian vegetation is disturbed. The provisions of this section shall
not be affected by any change in ownership of properties containing a riparian corridor.
B. The following activities, and maintenance thereof, are permitted within a riparian corridor, subject
to obtaining applicable permits, if any, from the Oregon Department of State Lands and the U.S.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 138/144
Army Corps of Engineers. All plans for development and/or improvements within a riparian corridor
shall be submitted to the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife for a habitat mitigation
recommendation pursuant to O.A.R. 635-415 “Fish and Wildlife Habitat Mitigation Policy.”
(1) Waterway restoration and rehabilitation activities such as channel widening, realignment to
add meanders, bank grading, terracing, reconstruction of road crossings, or water flow
improvements.
(2) Restoration and enhancement of native vegetation, including the addition of canopy trees;
cutting of trees which pose a hazard due to threat of falling if the tree is left in the riparian area
after felling; or removal of non-native vegetation if replaced with native plant species at the
same amount of coverage or density.
(3) Normal farm practices, other than structures, in existence at the date of adoption of the
provisions herein, on land zoned for Exclusive Farm Use.
(4) Normal flood control channel maintenance practices within a waterway, other than
structures, necessary to maintain flow.
(5) Replacement of a permanent legal nonconforming structure in existence at the date of
adoption of the provisions herein with a structure in the same location, if it does not disturb
additional riparian area, and in accordance with the provisions of Sections 10.032 through
10.037 “Non-Conformities.”
(6) Expansion of a permanent legal nonconforming structure in existence at the date of
adoption of the provisions herein, if the area of the expansion is not within the riparian corridor,
and in accordance with the provisions of Sections 10.032 through 10.037 “Non-Conformities.”
(7) Perimeter mowing and other cutting necessary for hazard prevention.
(8) Improvements to, and maintenance of, the Medford International Airport and its runway
protection zone, to meet the Federal Aviation Administration's regulations, advisory circulars,
and guidelines.
C. New fencing may be permitted subject to consideration by the Planning Director or designee in
consultation with the Director of Public Works and applicable state and federal agencies. An
application for new fencing within a riparian corridor shall contain a to-scale drawing that clearly
delineates the top-of-bank and riparian corridor boundary on the entire parcel or parcels, and shall
indicate why the proposal is necessary and how it minimizes intrusion into the riparian corridor.
[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 1999-215, June 1, 2000; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2011-124, Oct. 6, 2011.]
10.925 Conditional Uses within Riparian Corridors
The following activities, and maintenance thereof, are allowed within a riparian corridor if compatible
with Section 10.920, “Riparian Corridors, Purposes,” and if designed to minimize intrusion. Such
activities shall be subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit, which may be considered
separately or in conjunction with another land use review. The approving authority must determine
that the proposal complies with at least one of the Conditional Use Permit criteria. Applicable
permits, if any, from the Oregon Department of State Lands and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
shall subsequently be obtained. All development and improvement plans shall be submitted to the
Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife for a habitat mitigation recommendation pursuant to O.A.R.
635-415 “Fish and Wildlife Habitat Mitigation Policy.”
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 139/144
(1) Water-related or water-dependent uses, such as drainage facilities and irrigation pumps.
(2) Utilities or other public improvements.
(3) Streets, roads, or bridges where necessary for access or crossings.
(4) Multi-use paths, accessways, trails, picnic areas, or interpretive and educational displays and
overlooks, including benches and outdoor furniture.
[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 1999-215, June 1, 2000; Amd. Sec. 172, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018
(effective July 23, 2018).]
10.926 Prohibited Activities within Riparian Corridors
The following activities are prohibited within a riparian corridor, except as permitted in Sections
10.924 “Permitted Activities within Riparian Corridors” and 10.925 “Conditional Uses within Riparian
Corridors.”
(1) Placement of new structures or impervious surfaces.
(2) Excavation, grading, fill, stream alteration or diversion, or removal of vegetation except for
perimeter mowing for fire protection purposes.
(3) Expansion of areas of pre-existing non-native ornamental landscaping such as lawn, gardens,
etc.
(4) Dumping, piling, or disposal of refuse, yard debris, or other material.
(5) Wireless communication facilities.
[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 1999-215, June 1, 2000; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2008-04, Jan. 3, 2008.]
10.927 Riparian Corridors, Reduction or Deviation
A request to reduce or deviate from the riparian corridor boundary provisions of this section may be
submitted to the Planning Director or designee for consideration. A deviation request may be
approved as long as equal or better protection of the riparian area will be ensured through a plan for
restoration, enhancement, or similar means. Such a plan shall be submitted to the Oregon
Department of Fish and Wildlife for a habitat mitigation recommendation pursuant to O.A.R. 635-415
“Fish and Wildlife Habitat Mitigation Policy.” In no case shall activities prohibited in Section 10.926
(1) through (3), “Prohibited Activities within Riparian Corridors” be located any closer than 25 feet
from the top-of-bank. The Planning Commission shall be kept advised of the outcome of deviation or
reduction requests. Any decision of the Planning Director may be appealed to the City Council as
provided in Chapter 10 of the Code of Medford.
[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 1999-215, June 1, 2000.]
10.928 Conservation and Maintenance of Riparian Corridors
When approving applications for the following land use actions: Land Divisions, Planned Unit
Developments, Conditional Use Permits, and Exceptions, or for development for properties
containing a riparian corridor, or portion thereof, the approving authority shall assure long term
conservation and maintenance of the riparian corridor through one of the following methods:
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 140/144
(1) The area shall be protected in perpetuity by a conservation easement recorded on deeds and
plats prescribing the conditions and restrictions set forth in Sections 10.920 through 10.928,
“Riparian Corridors,” and any imposed by state or federal permits; or,
(2) The area shall be protected in perpetuity through ownership and maintenance by a private nonprofit
association by conditions, covenants, and restrictions (CC&R’s) prescribing the conditions and
restrictions set forth in Sections 10.920 through 10.928, “Riparian Corridors,” and any imposed by
state or federal permits; or,
(3) The area shall be transferred by deed to a willing public agency or private conservation
organization with a recorded conservation easement prescribing the conditions and restrictions set
forth in Sections 10.920 through 10.928, “Riparian Corridors,” and any imposed by state or federal
permits; or, (4) The area shall be protected through other appropriate mechanisms acceptable to the
City of Medford which ensure long-term protection and maintenance.
[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 1999-215, June 1, 2000; Amd. Sec. 174, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018
(effective July 23, 2018).]
10.929 thru 10.932 [Repealed - Sec. 1, Ord. No. 5918, July 16, 1987.]
10.929 Hillside Ordinance, Purpose; Applicability
Sections 10.929 to 10.933 establish procedural requirements for development on Slopes in excess of fifteen
percent (15%) to decrease soil erosion and protect public safety. Sections 10.929 to 10.933 apply in addition
to all other requirements set forth by ordinance. In the case of conflict between Sections 10.929 to 10.933 and
other requirements set forth by ordinance, Sections 10.929 to 10.933 shall govern.
[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2009-193, Aug. 20, 2009, effective Oct. 15, 2009.]
10.930 Hillside Ordinance, Definitions
When used in Sections 10.929 to 10.933, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed:
Slope. The natural earth’s surface expressed as a ratio of the change, i.e. the delta (?) in horizontal (H)
distance to the change (?) in vertical (V) distance. Slopes are expressed as a percentage. Slope refers to a
given rise in elevation over a given run in distance, multiplied by 100, i.e. (?V ÷ ?H) ´ 100 = Slope. For
example, a 40-foot rise in elevation over a distance of 100 feet is a 40% Slope, i.e. (40’ ÷ 100’) ´ 100 = 40%
Slope.
Slope Analysis. A topographical contour map to scale of the lot or parcel which depicts the slope, and which
satisfies the following requirements:
(1) Contours are depicted at no greater than ten-foot (10’) intervals and the map differentiates between
areas of a lot or parcel with Slopes of: (a) between fifteen percent (15%) and thirty-five percent (35%);
and (b) Slopes greater than thirty-five percent (35%).
(2) Slopes shall, as near as practical, be measured perpendicular to the map’s contour lines.
(3) Land or natural features comprising less than two hundred (200) horizontal square feet with Slopes
greater than of fifteen percent (15%) shall not be included in the Slope Analysis.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 141/144
(4) Man-made features including, but not limited to, ditches, canals, existing retaining walls, and
existing buildings, which necessarily will be relocated, placed underground, or otherwise removed as
part of future urban development, shall not be included in the Slope Analysis.
(5) Portions of lots or parcels which are undevelopable, including (but not limited to) jurisdictional
wetlands and riparian setback areas, shall not be included in the Slope Analysis.
[Added. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2009-193, Aug. 20.2009, effective Oct. 15, 2009.]
10.931 Hillside Ordinance, General Standards
A. Application of Provisions.
(1) Sections 10.929 to 10.933 apply to any proposed development containing an area of at least onethousand
(1,000) square feet with Slopes in excess of fifteen percent (15%), if the Slope Analysis
demonstrates that development, including streets, will occur on those portions of the proposed
development area with Slopes in excess of fifteen percent (15%).
(2) Sections 10.929 to 10.933 shall not apply to any proposed development containing an area of less
than one-thousand (1,000) square feet with Slopes in excess of fifteen percent (15%), or if the Slope
Analysis demonstrates that development on that proposed development area, including streets, will not
occur on Slopes in excess of fifteen percent (15%).
(3) Type III land use reviews (except for zone changes) shall comply with Sections 10.929 to 10.933;
building permit applications shall comply with Sections 10.929 to 10.931.
B. Requirement for Slope Analysis.
For parcels containing Slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%), as shown on the 2009 City of Medford Slope
Map, a copy of which is maintained on file in the Planning Department, a Slope Analysis is required to be
submitted with:
(1) Type III land use applications (except for zone changes); and,
(2) Building permit applications, if a Slope Analysis of the parcel was not previously submitted with a
development application.
The Slope Analysis shall be reviewed by the City Director of Public Works or designee.
C. Pre-Existing Approvals of Development on Slopes of Fifteen Percent (15%) or Greater.
(1) Unexpired Type III Land Use Approvals. Unexpired Type III land use approvals granted prior to
enactment of Sections 10.929 to 10.933 (“Pre-Existing Approvals”) shall not be subject to Sections
10.929 to 10.933. Subsequent Type III land use applications related to a Pre-Existing Approval and filed
after enactment of Sections 10.929 to 10.933 shall be subject to Sections 10.929 to 10.933, provided that
the application of Sections 10.929 to 10.933 to the subsequent Type III land use application does not
result in an irreconcilable conflict with the Pre-Existing Approval. For purposes of this Section, an
irreconcilable conflict includes, but is not limited to, the following:
(i) the creation of unbuildable lots; or,
(ii) the reduction in density for the subject phase of five percent (5%) or more.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 142/144
(2) Previously Submitted Development Applications. Development applications submitted prior to
enactment of Sections 10.929 to 10.933 shall be governed by the Land Development Code in effect on
the date of submission of the development application.
D. Excavation and Grading Permits.
Issuance of an Excavation and Grading permit shall be required prior to any excavation or grading, except for
the types of excavation or grading exempted in Appendix J of the 2007 Oregon Structural Specialty Code, a
copy of which is maintained on file in the Planning Department. The permit application shall be reviewed and
approved by the City Building Official or designee. An application for an Excavation and Grading Permit
shall be subject to the requirements set forth in Sections 10.727 and 10.728.
E. Standards for Streets, Private Access Drives and Other Vehicular Ways.
(1) Grading on Slopes in excess of fifteen percent (15%) for streets, private access drives, and other
vehicular ways shall be designed to reduce the extent of cuts and fills necessary for installation of the
roadways, curbs, gutters, planter strips, sidewalks and utilities. Landscaping and other design elements
may be incorporated to accomplish this objective where the approving authority finds the proposed
design elements will serve this end.
(2) For streets other than arterial or collector streets in areas with Slopes in excess of fifteen percent
(15%), the approving authority may modify public street improvement standards to solve special hillside
functional problems. Modifications may include:
(a) Narrower streets;
(b) Streets that provide access to the downhill side only;
(c) Planter strip waivers;
(d) Modification of surface drainage treatment standards;
(e) Modification of sidewalk standards;
(f) Allowing through-lots abutting any street classification if the approving authority approves
streets that provide access to the downhill side only; or,
(g) Placing utilities within the public right-of-way.
(3) Modifications to public street improvement standards shall comply with the following:
(a) Minimum curb-to-curb paved width for residential streets, with the exception of Residential
Lanes, shall be no less than twenty-eight feet (28’) if including parking on only one side of the
street.
(b) When sidewalks are authorized to be provided on only one side of the street, they shall be
provided on the side of the street where parking is provided.
(c) Street Slopes shall comply with standards in the 2004 American Association of State Highway
Transportation Officials’ manual, A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, a
copy of which is maintained on file in the Planning Department.
(4) To request modifications to street improvement standards, the applicant shall submit proposed
findings addressing:
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 143/144
(a) Why the modifications are needed; and,
(b) How the proposed modifications are safe and function properly; and
(c) How the proposed modifications minimize soil erosion and protect the natural character of the
site.
(5) To approve modifications to street improvement standards, the approving authority shall, based on
findings addressing 10.931(E)(4), conclude that:
(a) The proposed modifications are needed; and,
(b) The proposed modifications will be safe and function properly; and
(c) The proposed modifications will minimize soil erosion and protect the natural character of the
site.
F. Standards for Erosion Control.
All disturbed soil surfaces on Slopes in excess of fifteen percent (15%) shall be covered from November 1 to
April 1. If planned impervious surfaces (i.e., streets, access drives, etc.) are not installed prior to November 1,
a temporary treatment adequate to prevent erosion shall be installed on disturbed soil surfaces until the
impervious surfaces are installed or April 1, whichever is sooner. Alternatively, for disturbed soil surfaces in
areas in which impervious surfaces are not planned to be installed, a temporary treatment adequate to prevent
erosion shall be installed on disturbed soil surfaces or such surfaces shall be replanted with plants and/or trees
with erosion control characteristics that are listed in the August 2006 version of the Oregon State University
Extension Service publication Fire-Resistant Plants for Oregon Home Landscapes, a copy of which is
maintained on file in the Planning Department.
[Added, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2009-193, Aug. 20, 2009, effective Oct. 15, 2009; Amd. Sec. 175, Ord. No. 2018-64,
June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.932 Hillside Ordinance, Pre-Application Conference Requirement
A pre-application conference is required for all Type III land use applications, except for zone changes, for
development on Slopes of greater than thirty-five percent (35%). In addition to the items listed on the preapplication
conference form, the following additional items shall be submitted: a Constraints Analysis required
by Section 10.933; a Slope Analysis required by Section 10.931(B); and a conceptual site plan. A preapplication
conference shall be conducted by the Planning Department within twenty-eight (28) business days
of receipt of the pre-application conference form and additional materials required by this Section. The
Planning Department shall notify the applicant of the recommendations regarding the development proposal
within ten (10) business days following a pre-application conference.
[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2009-193, Aug. 20, 2009, effective Oct. 15, 2009; Amd. Sec. 176, Ord. No. 2018-64,
June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.933 Hillside Ordinance, Constraints Analysis
Prior to submitting a Type III land use application (except for zone changes), a Constraints Analysis
identifying physical constraints and proposing mitigation measures shall have been submitted and deemed
“complete” by the City Engineer or designee within 10 working days of submission. A “complete” Constraints
Analysis is one that contains all items in Sections 10.933(A) (1)-(7) and 10.933(B) (1)-(4).
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 144/144
A. Geology and Soils Report.
A Geology and Soils Report shall be prepared by both an Oregon-licensed geotechnical engineer, and either an
Oregon-licensed geologist or engineering geologist. The geotechnical engineer shall focus on appropriate
grading and foundation design; the geologist or engineering geologist shall focus on mitigation of geologic
hazards. The report shall include:
(1) The purpose and scope of the investigation;
(2) A description of the geological characteristics of the site;
(3) A description of the nature, distribution, and strength of the existing soils on the site relative to their
adequacy for the proposed development;
(4) A determination of the suitability of the geology and soils on the site for the proposed development;
(5) A determination of geological hazards that present a risk to life and property or adversely affect the
use or stability of a public facility or utility;
(6) A determination of grading procedures needed to assure minimal disturbance to the natural state of
the soils on the site;
(7) Conclusions and mitigation measures, if necessary.
B. Hydrology and Grading Report.
A Hydrology and Grading Report shall be prepared by an Oregon registered civil engineer and shall include:
(1) A description of the hydrological conditions of the site;
(2) A determination of the effect of the hydrologic conditions on the proposed development and
adjoining lands;
(3) A determination of hydrological and erosion hazards that present a risk to life and property or
adversely affect the use or stability of a public facility or utility; and,
(4) A grading plan as required by Sections 10.727 and 10.162(D), including proposed grades, and cuts
and fills for streets.
[Added, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2009-193, Aug. 20, 2009, effective Oct. 15, 2009; Amd. Sec. 18, Ord. No. 2012-137,
Sept. 6, 2012; Amd. Sec. 177, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 1/28
10 Article 6-Signage (10.1000 to 10.2010)
10.1000 Purpose of Article VI
It is the purpose of this article to regulate signs in a manner which recognizes and balances the
commercial need for signs with other visual, aesthetic and safety concerns of the community. Such
regulation shall include but not be limited to the placement, number, height and size of signs.
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987.]
10.1010 Definitions
Awning. A temporary or removable shelter supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building and
composed of non-rigid materi-als except for the support framework.
Building face or wall. All window and wall area of a building on one plane or elevation.
Business frontage. The lineal footage of a building or portion thereof, devoted to a specific business
or enterprise.
Change of face/copy. Where an existing sign is modified by change of message or design on the
sign face, without any change to size or shape of the sign framework or structure, excluding
marquee, electronic message boards, menu boards, and approved changeable copy signs.
Facade, principal. The side(s) of the building facing a street.
Facade, secondary. Any side of a building not facing a street.
Indirect illumination. A source of illumination directed toward a sign so that the beam of light falls
upon the exterior surface of the sign.
Shopping Center or Business Complex. A group of five or more commercial establishments having
common parking facilities.
Sign. Any message, identification, description, illustra-tion, symbol, device, or sculptured matter,
including forms shaped to resemble any human, animal or product, which is affixed directly or
indirectly upon a building, vehicle, structure, or land. This definition is not to include architectural
facades, or lighting features.
Sign, abandoned. A sign that no longer contains legible visual images or text.
Sign, alteration. Any change in the size, shape, method of illumination, position, location, material,
construction, or support-ing structure of a sign.
Sign, area of.
(1) The area of a ground or projecting sign shall be calculated by adding the outer dimensions of all
the faces presenting a sign message. Pole covers, and columns shall not be included in the area of
the measurement if they do not bear advertising copy. Double-faced signs will be calculated as one
sign only when placed back to back and separated by no more than forty (40) inches. See example
at botton of page (showing top of sign structure).
(2) The area of a wall sign without a border shall be computed by enclosing the entire sign within
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 2/28
sets of parallel lines touching the outer limits of the sign message. (see graphic image at bottom of
screen)
Sign, electronic message. Any sign, or portion of a sign, that displays an electronic image or video,
which may or may not include text, where the rate of change is electronically programmed and can
be modified by electronic processes. This definition includes television screens, plasma screens,
digital screens, LED screens, video boards, holographic displays, and other similar media.
Sign, fin. A sign which is supported partly by a pole and partly by a building or structure. (see
graphic image at bottom of screen)
Sign, flashing. A sign incorporating intermittent electri-cal impulses to a source of illumination or
revolving in a manner which creates the illusion of flashing, or which changes colors or intensity of
illumination. This definition is not to include elec-tronic message signs.
Sign, freeway. A sign as described in Section 10.1710(1).
Sign, ground. A sign erected on a free-standing frame, mast, or pole and not attached to any
building. Also known as a free-standing sign. (see graphic image at bottom of screen)
Sign, height of. The distance measured from the average elevation of the ground adjacent to the
structure that the sign is mounted on or nearest public sidewalk or street curb, when such are
adjoining the site, to the maximum height of the face of the sign.
Sign, nonconforming. An existing sign, lawful at the time of the enactment of this ordinance, which
does not conform to the requirements of this code.
Sign, portable. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground, a building, or other structure.
Sign, projecting. Signs other than wall signs, which are attached to and project from a structure or
building face, at a 90 degree angle.
Sign, structure. The supports, uprights, braces, framework and other structural components of the
sign.
Sign, temporary. Any sign, including supporting structure, to be maintained for a continuous period
of less than thirty (30) days, except those temporary signs permitted without a sign permit per
Section 10.1022(9) that have differing durations. Temporary signs permitted without a sign permit
include, but are not limited to, holiday displays, real estate signs, and political campaign signs.
Sign, wall. Any sign placed or painted directly against a building with the exposed face of the sign in
a plane approximately parallel to the plane of said wall and projects outward from the wall not more
than eighteen inches.
Wall, graphic. Any mosaic, mural, painting, or graphic art technique applied, implanted or placed
directly onto a wall and containing no copy, advertising/hallmark symbols, lettering or refer-ences to
any product, service, or goods sold on or off the premises. (see graphic image at bottom of screen)
[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7134, May 21, 1992; Amd. Sec.
1, Ord. No. 2010-16, Feb. 4, 2010; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2011-237, Dec. 1, 2011; Amd. Sec. 19,
Ord. No. 2012-137, Sept. 6, 2012; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2014-64, May 15, 2014.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 3/28
IMAGES FOR THIS CODE
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 4/28
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 5/28
(Click on an image to see a larger version)
10.1012 Terminology
Terms used to describe types of signs, such as "freeway sign", "shopping center sign", "construction
sign", etc., do not limit the content of the sign message, but are intended to refer to the location of
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 6/28
the sign or the type of use on the lot where the sign is permitted.
[Added Sec. 24, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987.]
10.1020 Permits Required; Violation
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct,
erect, alter or relo-cate a sign, or direct an employee or agent to do same within the city without first
obtaining a permit for each separate sign from the Planning Department as required by this chapter.
(2) No person shall construct, erect, alter or relocate a sign except as authorized in Article VI of this
chapter.
[Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987.]
10.1022 Exceptions to Permit Requirements
The provisions of Article VI shall not apply to:
(1) Traffic signs and all other signs erected or maintained by a municipal or governmental body or
agency, including danger signs, railroad crossing signs, and signs of a non-commercial nature
required by public laws, ordi-nances or statutes.
(2) Signs on a truck, bus, car, boat, trailer or other motorized vehicle and equipment provided all the
following conditions are adhered to:
(a) Primary purpose of such vehicle or equipment is not the display of signs.
(b) Signs are painted upon or applied directly to an integral part of the vehicle or equipment.
(c) Vehicle/equipment is in operating condition, currently registered and licensed to operate on
public streets when applicable, and actively used in the daily function of a business/or use.
(d) Vehicles and equipment are not used as static displays, advertising a product or service, for
more than two (2) days in any location, nor utilized as storage, shelter or distribution points for
commercial products or services for the general public.
(e) During periods of inactivity exceeding five work days, such vehicle/equipment is not so
parked or placed that the signs thereon are dis-played to the public. Vehicles and equipment
engaged in active construction projects and the on-premise storage of equipment and vehicles
offered to the general public for rent or lease shall not be subjected to this condition.
(3) Signs on Temporary Portable Storage Containers permitted through Section 10.840.D(6),
provided all of the following conditions are adhered to:
(a) The primary purpose of such vehicle or equipment is not the display of signs.
(b) Signs are painted upon or applied directly to an integral part of the vehicle or equipment
(the “sign” is a regular part of the portable storage container). Hanging banners, roof signs
and/or attached sign structures are not allowed.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 7/28
(c) Vehicle/equipment is in operating condition, currently registered and licensed to operate on
public streets when applicable, and actively used in the daily function of a business/or use.
(This section (3) effective through June 30, 2015.)
(4) Signs not exceeding three (3) square feet in area located in a commercial or industrial zone not
to exceed four (4) signs for each business frontage.
(5) Signs not exceeding six (6) square feet in area and an overall height of six (6) feet in the Single-
Family Residential Zoning Districts - (SFR 2, 4, 6, 10), the Multiple-Family Residential Districts -
(MFR 15, MFR 20, MFR 30), and the Public Parks Zoning District - (P-1), not to exceed two (2) signs
per parcel.
(6) National and State flags. National and state flags shall be flown and displayed in a manner
whereby they are not construed as attraction-gaining devices to advertise a product or use, or in a
manner to otherwise draw attention of the traveling public to an establishment or sales office. Such
displays shall conform to the criteria established in House Document 209 of the 91st Session of
Congress.
(7) Signs Located in the Interior of any Building. Signs located in the interior of any building or within
an enclosed lobby or court of any group of buildings, which are designed and located to be viewed
by patrons only. Such signs may be illuminated and are not subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(8) Change of face. Where an existing sign is modified by change of message or design on the sign
face, without any change to size or shape of the sign framework or structure. In Historic
Preservation Overlay Zoning Districts, only the message may be changed without Historic Review.
(9) Window Signs. Signs located in windows, if they are mounted or painted upon the inside of
windows within all commercial or industrial zoning districts.
(10) These types of Temporary Signs, which are in addition to any of the signs in subsections 1-8
above:
(a) Holiday Displays. Decorations or displays celebrating the occasion of traditionally accepted
patriotic or religious holidays.
(b) Real Estate Signs. Signs erected on private property for the period of time that a site or
structure is for sale, lease or rent. In all residential zones such signs shall be limited to six (6)
square feet in area and a maximum height of six (6) feet. In all commercial and industrial zones
such signs shall be limited to thirty-two (32) square feet in area. Temporary real estate signs shall
be limited to one (1) sign per frontage.
(c) Political Campaign Signs. Signs erected on private property no earlier than eight (8) weeks prior
to any federal, state or local election and removed no later than seven (7) days after the applicable
election. In all residential zones such signs shall be limited to six (6) square feet in area and a
maximum height of six (6) feet per sign. In all commercial and industrial zones such signs shall be
limited to thirty-two (32) square feet in area per sign.
(d) Signs not exceeding 32 square feet in area which are located in public parks and advertise public
events. Such signs are limited to no more than one sign per street frontage. Signs shall be
removed within 7 days after the event.
(e) All other Temporary or Portable Signs require a permit.
[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987; Amd. Sec. 21, Ord. No. 2006-199, Sept. 7, 2006; Amd.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 8/28
Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2010-16, Feb. 4, 2010; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2014-64, May 15, 2014; Amd. Sec. 3,
Ord. No. 2014-104, Aug. 21, 2014 (effective through June 30, 2015); Amd. Sec. 24, Ord. No. 2018-
52, June 7, 2018 (effective July 9, 2018).]
10.1028 [Repealed Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987.]
10.1030 Application
Application for a permit shall be made to the Planning Department upon a form provided by the City
and shall include the following:
(1) Two sets of drawings to scale, including the following information with regard to the signs:
(a) The written or graphic content.
(b) Location of the sign on the building or building site.
(c) Dimensions of the sign.
(d) Construction materials.
(e) Method of attachment and character of structural members to which attachment is to be made.
(f) Electrical wiring and components or U.L. approved number.
(g) If an electronic message sign, the frequency at which the text changes.
(2) The Building Safety Official may also require that a licensed engineer furnish information
concerning structural design and proposed attachments.
[Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2010-16, Feb. 4, 2010.]
10.1035 Issuance of Permits
City personnel shall examine applications for permits within two (2) working days after filing. If it
appears from the applica-tion, drawings, and specifications therewith that the requested sign(s) and
all existing signs on the premises conform with all the provisions of this chapter, a permit shall be
issued. But, if City personnel find that any requested or existing sign(s) directly related to the
application violates this chapter or any other chapter of the City code or ordinance related thereto, a
permit shall not be issued until necessary corrections are made.
No additional permits shall be issued for signs on businesses or uses with signs not already in
compliance with this section, including overdue sign regulation fees or unpaid inspection charges.
All signs, except for signs painted directly upon a building, are also subject to Building Department
requirements.
[Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987.]
10.1040 [Repealed, Ord. No. 2006-278, Jan. 4, 2007.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 9/28
10.1045 Indemnification of City
As a condition to the issuance of a sign permit as required by this chapter, all persons engaged in
the hanging or painting of signs, which involves, in whole or in part, the erection, alteration,
relocation, maintenance, or other sign work in, over, or immediately adjacent to a public right-of-way
or public property if used or encroached upon by the sign hanger or painter in the said sign work,
shall agree to hold harmless and indemnify the City, its officers, agents, and employees from liability
for damages resulting from said erection, alteration, relocation, maintenance or other sign work.
[Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987.]
10.1046 Definition of Nonconforming Signs
All signs that do not conform to the specific standards of this Code may be considered legal
nonconforming pursuant to Section 10.032, if the sign was erected in conformance with a valid
permit and complied with all applicable laws at the time of the sign’s installation. All nonconformities
shall be subject to the requirements of Sections 10.033 through 10.037.
[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2010-16, Feb. 4, 2010.]
10.1100 Prohibited Signs For All Districts
The following signs are prohibited for all zoning districts:
(1) Signs on a truck, bus, car, boat, trailer, or other motorized vehicle and equipment are prohibited,
except as provided in Section 10.1022(3).
(see graphic image at bottom of screen)
(2) Traffic hazards: No sign shall be permitted at the intersection of a street or driveway in such a
manner as to obstruct free and clear vision of motor vehicle operators or at any location where by
reason of its position, shape, or color it may interfere with or be confused with any authorized traffic
sign, signal, or device, or which makes use of a word, symbol or phase, shape or color in such a
manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic.
(see graphic image at bottom of screen)
(3) Animated, scintillating, flashing, blinking, strob-ing, and traveling lights or any design created to
give the illusion of motion are prohibited. This prohibition does not include electron-ic message
signs.
(4) Anchored balloon signs are prohibited.
(see graphic image at bottom of screen)
(5) Moving or rotating signs are prohibited.
(6) Fin signs are prohibited.
(7) Paper signs are prohibited.
(8) Any ground sign that is to be installed as to extend through a portion of a building or roof, with
the sign being mounted above the roof, and appearing similar to a roof sign is prohibited.
(9) Any sign not listed as a permitted sign within a district is prohibited in that district, unless it is
exempt under Section 10.1022.
[Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 10/28
IMAGES FOR THIS CODE
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 11/28
(Click on an image to see a larger version)
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 12/28
10.1120 Abandoned Signs
(1) Any abandoned sign, as defined herein, and supporting structure shall be removed by the owner
of the sign or owner of the premises within twelve (12) months following the date of abandonment.
(2) Any owner of an abandoned sign which is otherwise in conformance with this chapter may apply
to the Planning Director for an extension of the removal date. If the Planning Director determines
that the continued maintenance of the sign is consistent with the purpose of Article VI of the Land
Development Code, an extension of up to one (1) year may be granted.
(3) Any nonconforming, abandoned sign must be removed within six (6) months. No extension is
available.
[Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987; Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2011-237, Dec. 1, 2011.]
10.1130 Certain Signs Declared A Nuisance
Any abandoned, dangerous, defective, illegal, or prohibited sign, or any sign which is not in
accordance with the drawings, specifications and details of the permit application is hereby declared
a nuisance and may be abated as prescribed in sections 5.520 - 5.535 of the Medford Code.
This is in addition to any other remedy provided by law or ordinance.
[Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987.]
10.1131 [Repealed Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987.]
10.1140 [Repealed Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987.]
10.1150 [Repealed Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987.]
10.1160 Signs in the Public Parks (P-1) Zoning District: Basic Regulations
Signs shall be permitted only as follows in the P-1 zoning district:
(1) Ground Signs: Each parcel is permitted one (1) non-illuminated ground sign per vehicular
entrance on a street, subject to the following limitations:
(a) Maximum Square Footage: 60 square feet per sign
(b) Maximum Height: 5 feet
(c) Minimum Setback: 15 feet from any property line
(d) Exempt: Ground signs within public parks and recreational facilities that are placed and
located so as not to be viewed from the street are exempt from these provisions.
(e) Electronic Message Signs are permitted as a ground sign subject to the following
limitations:
(i) Each parcel of land is permitted one (1) electronic message sign if the sign is 150 feet
or farther from any residential zoning district. An electronic message sign located less
than 150 feet from any lot in a residential zoning district shall require the approval of a
Conditional Use Permit. Such sign must meet the other provisions of this section.
(ii) All text displayed on an electronic message sign must be static for a minimum of five
seconds. The continuous scrolling of text is prohibited. This restriction shall not apply to
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 13/28
animated images and images which move, or give the appearance of movement.
(iii) All electronic message signs shall have automatic dimming capabilities that adjust
the brightness to the ambient light at all times of day and night.
(iv) The conversion of an existing, conforming ground sign to an electronic message sign
is permitted.
(v) The conversion of an existing, nonconforming ground sign to an electronic message
sign is prohibited.
(2) Wall Signs (non-illuminated):
(a) Maximum Square Footage: The aggregate area of all signs shall not exceed one square
foot for each linear foot of building frontage.
(b) Maximum Height: No part of any wall sign shall be higher than the building height as
defined in Section 10.705.
(c) Exempt: Wall signs within public parks and facilities which are placed and located so as to
not be in view, from the street are exempt from these provisions.
(3) Electronic Message Signs: Electronic message signs are permitted as a wall sign subject to the
following limitations:
(i) Each parcel of land is permitted one (1) electronic message sign if the sign is 150 feet or
farther from any residential zoning district. An electronic message sign located less than 150
feet from any lot in a residential zoning district shall require the approval of a Conditional Use
Permit. Such sign must meet the other provisions of this section.
(ii) All text displayed on an electronic message sign must be static for a minimum of five
seconds. The continuous scrolling of text is prohibited. This restriction shall not apply to
animated images and images which move, or give the appearance of movement.
(iii) All electronic message signs shall have automatic dimming capabilities that adjust the
brightness to the ambient light at all times of day and night.
(iv) The conversion of an existing, conforming wall sign to an electronic message sign is
permitted.
(v) The conversion of an existing, nonconforming wall sign to an electronic message sign is
prohibited.
[Added Sec. 25 Ord. No. 2018-52, June 7, 2018 (effective July 9, 2018); Amd. Sec. 22, Ord. No.
2018-133, Dec. 6, 2018.]
10.1170 Public-Parks District (P-1): Additional Special Signs
Additional Special Signs shall be permitted as follows:
(1) Freeway Signs:
(a) Freeway signs shall be permitted only on parcels or portions thereof that are located within
the Freeway Overlay District per Section 10.365, and as shown on the official zoning map of
the City of Medford.
(b) One (1) sign not exceeding 250 square feet in area and 50 feet in height shall be permitted
on a parcel located within the Freeway Overlay District. Each parcel is also permitted one (1)
sign not exceeding 150 square feet in area and 20 feet in height.
(2) Construction Sign: One non-illuminated sign may be installed on each construction site after a
building permit has been obtained for a construction project, and must be removed not later than two
years after issuance of the building permit or upon comple tion of the project, whichever occurs
sooner. The sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in area, and 14 feet in height.
(3) Temporary Sign: One temporary sign on each street frontage is allowed. Display period is
limited to 30 days and is renewable upon application, but shall not exceed four (4) permits in one (1)
calendar year. The area of each temporary sign shall not exceed 32 square feet. No part of any
sign shall be higher than the building height as defined in Section 10.705.
[Added. Sec. 26, Ord. No. 2018-52, June 7, 2018 (effective July 9, 2018).]
10.1200 Signs in Single-Family Residential Zoning Districts (SFR-00,2,4,6,10)
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 14/28
Signs shall be permitted only as follows in the single-family residential zoning districts:
(1) Undeveloped Subdivision/Planned Unit Development Signs: Two non-illuminated ground signs,
not exceeding 50 square feet in area, and 14 feet in height and setback a minimum of 20 feet from
any property line are permitted within an undeveloped subdivision/ planned unit development. Such
signs may be installed on the undeveloped subdivision/planned unit development property after
approval of the tentative plat by the Planning Commission. However, the sign must be removed no
later than 2 years after installation, unless the Planning Commission, upon due application prior to
expiration of the 2 year period, determines that the continued maintenance of the sign is consistent
with the purpose of this code, in which case an extension for an additional year may be granted.
Electronic message signs are prohibited.
(2) Institutional uses, as defined in Section 10.012, are permitted 40 square feet of signage per
street frontage. Signs shall not be internally illuminated except as provided in (c) below. Each street
frontage is permitted: (a) a maximum of one ground sign measuring a maximum of 20 square feet,
and a maximum of one wall sign measuring a maximum of 20 square feet; or (b) a maximum of two
ground signs or two wall signs, each measuring a maximum of 20 square feet. The square footage
of the two permitted signs per street frontage may not be combined to create a larger sign. In cases
of properties with more than one street frontage, the signage from one street frontage may not be
transferred to another street frontage. Signs shall also comply with the following provisions:
(a) Ground Signs:
(i) Maximum Size: 20 square feet per sign
(ii) Maximum Height: 5 feet
(iii) Minimum Setback: 15 feet from any property line
(iv) Exempt: Ground signs within public parks, schools, or stadiums that are placed and
located so as not to be viewed from the street are exempt from these provisions.
(b) Wall Signs:
(i) Maximum Size: 20 square feet per sign
(ii) Maximum Height: No part of any wall sign shall be higher than the building height as
defined in Section 10.705.
(iii) Exempt: Wall signs within public parks, schools, or stadiums which are placed and located
so as not to be viewed from the street are exempt from these provisions.
(c) Electronic Message Signs: Electronic message signs are a conditional use. A Conditional Use
Permit may authorize institutional uses to have one electronic message sign as a permitted ground
or wall sign. Regardless of the number of street frontages, one of the permitted ground or wall signs
may be an electronic message sign, provided it complies with the following provisions:
(i) Electronic message signs shall apply for and receive approval for a Conditional Use Permit
pursuant to Section 10.184.
a. The electronic message sign shall be considered as an element of the CUP for the
use.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 15/28
b. Existing conditional uses shall apply for an amendment to their existing approved CUP
to request an electronic message sign, pursuant to Section 10.184.
c. The expiration of a CUP shall require the removal of the electronic message sign.
(ii) Maximum Size: 20 square feet
(iii) Maximum Height: 5 feet if a ground sign. If a wall sign, shall not be higher than the building
height as defined in Section 10.705.
(iv) All text displayed on an electronic message sign must be static for a minimum of five
seconds. The continuous scrolling of text is prohibited. This restriction shall not apply to
animated images and images which move, or give the appearance of movement.
(v) All electronic message signs shall have automatic dimming capabilities that adjust the
brightness to the ambient light at all times of day and night, consistent with Section 10.764,
Glare.
(vi) The conversion of an existing, conforming ground or wall sign to an electronic message
sign is permitted.
(vii) The conversion of any existing, nonconforming ground or wall sign to an electronic
message sign is prohibited.
(3) Planned Unit Development Signs: Residential Planned Unit Developments are permitted two (2)
non-illuminated ground signs, subject to the following limitations:
(a) Maximum Height: 4 feet
(b) Maximum Square Footage: 20 square feet per sign
(c) Minimum Setback: 5 feet from any public right-of-way
(d) Such signs may be installed after approval of the signs, and the Planned Unit Development
by the Planning Commission.
(e) Electronic Message Signs are prohibited.
[Amd. Sec. 13, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2003-258, Sept. 18, 2003;
Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2010-16, Feb. 4, 2010; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2014-141, Dec. 4, 2014; Amd.
Sec. 178, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.1300 Signs in Multiple-Family Residential Districts (MFR-15), (MFR-20) and (MFR-30)
Signs shall be permitted only as follows in the MFR-15, MFR-20 and MFR-30 zones:
(1) New Development/Project Sign: One non-illuminated ground sign, not exceeding 50 square feet
in area, and 14 feet in height is permitted on the premises of each proposed building or development
project. Such sign may be installed after a building permit has been obtained for the construction
project and must be removed not later than two years after issuance of the building permit for the
project or upon completion of the project, whichever is first. No more than one such sign shall be
erected for each construction project and such sign shall be subject to the same setback
requirements as are imposed for structures in this zone. Electronic Message Signs are prohibited.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 16/28
(2) Multiple-family Dwelling Sign: For multiple-family dwellings containing four or more dwelling units,
one sign not more than 10 square feet in area, either affixed to the building or free-standing is
permitted. If free-standing, the sign shall not be located in any required yard area and shall not
exceed 4 feet in height and shall be mounted within a landscaped area or decorative planter. If
affixed to the building, the sign may not project into a required yard area more than 18 inches. No
part of any such sign shall be higher than the building height as defined in Section 10.705.
Electronic Message Signs are prohibited.
(3) Institutional uses, as defined in Section 10.012, are permitted 40 square feet of signage per
street frontage. Signs shall not be internally illuminated except as provided in (c) below. Each street
frontage is permitted: (a) a maximum of one ground sign measuring a maximum of 20 square feet,
and a maximum of one wall sign measuring a maximum of 20 square feet; or (b) a maximum of two
ground signs or two wall signs, each measuring a maximum of 20 square feet. The square footage
of the two permitted signs per street frontage may not be combined to create a larger sign. In cases
of properties with more than one street frontage, the signage from one street frontage may not be
transferred to another street frontage. Signs shall also comply with the following provisions:
(a) Ground Signs:
(i) Maximum Size: 20 square feet per sign
(ii) Maximum Height: 5 feet
(iii) Minimum Setback: 15 feet from any property line
(iv) Exempt: Ground signs within public parks, schools, or stadiums that are placed and
located so as not to be viewed from the street are exempt from these provisions.
(b) Wall Signs:
(i) Maximum Size: 20 square feet per sign
(ii) Maximum Height: No part of any wall sign shall be higher than the building height as
defined in Section 10.705.
(iii) Exempt: Wall signs within public parks, schools, or stadiums which are placed and located
so as not to be viewed from the street are exempt from these provisions.
(c) Electronic Message Signs: Electronic message signs are a conditional use. A Conditional Use
Permit may authorize institutional uses to have one electronic message sign as a permitted ground
or wall sign. Regardless of the number of street frontages, one of the permitted ground or wall signs
may be an electronic message sign, provided it complies with the following provisions:
(i) Electronic message signs shall apply for and receive approval for a Conditional Use Permit
pursuant to Section 10.184.
a. The electronic message sign shall be considered as an element of the CUP for the
use.
b. Existing conditional uses shall apply for an amendment to their existing approved CUP
to request an electronic message sign, pursuant to Section 10.184.
c. The expiration of a CUP shall require the removal of the electronic message sign.
(ii) Maximum Size: 20 square feet
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 17/28
(iii) Maximum Height: 5 feet if a ground sign. If a wall sign, shall not be higher than the building
height as defined in Section 10.705.
(iv) All text displayed on an electronic message sign must be static for a minimum of five
seconds. The continuous scrolling of text is prohibited. This restriction shall not apply to
animated images and images which move, or give the appearance of movement.
(v) All electronic message signs shall have automatic dimming capabilities that adjust the
brightness to the ambient light at all times of day and night, consistent with Section 10.764,
Glare.
(vi) The conversion of an existing, conforming ground or wall sign to an electronic message
sign is permitted.
(vii) The conversion of any existing, nonconforming ground or wall sign to an electronic
message sign is prohibited.
(4) Planned Unit Development Signs: Residential Planned Unit Developments are permitted two (2)
non-illuminated ground signs, subject to the following limitations.
(a) Maximum Height: 4 feet
(b) Maximum Square Footage: 20 square feet per sign
(c) Minimum Setback: 5 feet from any public right-of-way
(d) Such signs may be installed after approval of the signs, and the Planned Unit Development
by the Planning Commission.
(e) Electronic Message Signs are prohibited.
[Amd. Sec. 14, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2010-16, Feb. 4, 2010; Amd.
Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2014-141, Dec. 4, 2014; Amd. Sec. 179, Ord. No. 2018-64 June 21, 2018 (effective
July 23, 2018).]
10.1400 Signs in Service Commercial and Professional Offices (C-S/P); Basic Regulations
Signs shall be permitted only as follows in the C-S/P district:
(1) Ground Signs: Each parcel of land is permitted one (1) ground sign per street frontage, subject to
the following limitations:
(a) Maximum Height: 9 feet
(b) Maximum Square Footage: 32 square feet per sign.
(c) Minimum Setback: 5 feet from any lot in a residential zoning district or from a street right-of-way.
(d) Electronic Message Signs are permitted as a ground sign subject to the following limitations:
(i) Each parcel of land is permitted one (1) electronic message sign if the sign is 150 feet or farther
from any residential zoning district. An electronic message sign located less than 150 feet from any
lot in a residential zoning district shall require the approval of a Conditional Use Permit. Such sign
must meet the other provisions of this section.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 18/28
(ii) All text displayed on an electronic message sign must be static for a minimum of five seconds.
The continuous scrolling of text is prohibited. This restriction shall not apply to animated images and
images which move, or give the appearance of movement.
(iii) All electronic message signs shall have automatic dimming capabilities that adjust the brightness
to the ambient light at all times of day and night.
(iv) The conversion of an existing, conforming ground sign to an electronic message sign is
permitted.
(v) The conversion of an existing, nonconforming ground sign to an electronic message sign is
prohibited.
(2) Wall Signs: Wall signs are permitted subject to the following limitations:
(a) Principal Facade: The aggregate area of all signs shall not exceed one square foot for each
linear foot of business frontage. No part of any sign shall be higher than the building height as
defined in Section 10.705.
(b) Secondary Facade: The aggregate area of all signs shall not exceed one-half square foot for
each linear foot of business frontage. No part of any sign shall be higher than the building height as
defined in Section 10.705.
(c) Electronic Message Signs are permitted as a primary or secondary facade wall sign subject to
the following limitations:
(i) The electronic message sign or electronic reader board must be 150 feet, or farther, from any lot
in a residential zoning district. An electronic message sign located less than 150 feet from any lot in
a residential zoning district shall require the approval of a Conditional Use Permit. Such sign must
meet the other provisions of this section.
(ii) All text displayed on an electronic message sign must be static for a minimum of five seconds.
The continuous scrolling of text is prohibited. This restriction shall not apply to animated images and
images which move, or give the appearance of movement.
(iii) All electronic message signs shall have automatic dimming capabilities that adjust the brightness
to the ambient light at all times of day and night.
(iv) The conversion of an existing, conforming wall sign to an electronic message sign is permitted.
(v) The conversion of an existing, nonconforming wall sign to an electronic message sign is
prohibited.
(3) Projecting Signs: Prohibited.
(4) Awning/Canopy/Marquee Signs: No sign shall project into public right-of-way. All such signs shall
be assessed against the aggregate wall signage for the facade.
[Amd. Sec. 15, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987; Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2010-16, Feb. 4, 2010; Amd.
Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2013-180, Dec. 5, 2013; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2014-141, Dec. 4, 2014; Amd. Sec.
13, Ord. No. 2014-161, Dec. 22, 2014.]
10.1410 Service Commercial and Professional Office (C-S/P: Additional Special Signs
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 19/28
Additional special signs shall be permitted as follows in the C-S/P district:
(1) New Development/Project Sign: One non-illuminated ground sign, not exceeding 50 square feet
in area, and 14 feet in height is permitted on the premises of each proposed building or development
project. Such sign may be installed after a building permit has been obtained for the construction
project and must be removed not later than two years after issuance of the building permit for the
project or upon completion of the project, whichever is first. No more than one sign shall be erected
on the premises of each construction project and such sign shall be subject to the same setback
requirements as are imposed for structures in this zone.
(2) Hospital Signs: Signs exceeding the dimensional standards of Article VI may be approved
subject to Section 10.184 Conditional Use Permit. In addition, such approval shall be based on
review and approval of an integrated sign program for the entire facility and on a determination that
the signs proposed to exceed the standards of Article VI are the minimum necessary to facilitate
proper identification of hospital activities. In no case shall ground signs exceed 15 feet in height
or 100 square feet in area, nor shall this provision allow an increase in the numbers of signs
otherwise allowed by this section. For the purpose of this section, "hospitals" are those that are
licensed for at least 150 inpatient beds, and emergency services.
[Added Sec. 25, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987; Amd. Ord. No. 6333, Apr. 20, 1989; Amd. Ord. No.
2007-92, May 3, 2007; Amd. Sec. 180, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23, 2018).]
10.1500 Signs In Neighborhood Commercial District (C-N): Basic Regulations
Signs shall be permitted as follows in the C-N district:
(1) Ground Signs: Not more than one ground sign may be placed on each lot or parcel subject to the
following limitations:
(a) Maximum Height: 9 feet
(b) Maximum Square Footage: 36 square feet per sign
(c) Minimum Setback: 10 feet from a lot in a residential zone or from a street right-of-way
(d) Electronic Message Signs are permitted subject to Section 10.184, and the following
criteria:
(i) Each parcel of land is permitted one (1) electronic message sign if the sign is 150 feet
or farther from any residential zoning district.
(ii) All text displayed on an electronic message sign must be static for a minimum of five
seconds. The continuous scrolling of text is prohibited. This restriction shall not apply to
animated images and images which move, or give the appearance of movement.
(iii) All electronic message signs shall have automatic dimming capabilities that adjust the
brightness to the ambient light at all times of day and night.
(iv) The conversion of an existing, conforming ground sign to an electronic message sign
is permitted.
(v) The conversion of an existing, nonconforming ground sign to an electronic message
sign is prohibited.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 20/28
(2) Wall Signs: Wall signs are permitted subject to the following limitations:
(a) Principal Facade: The aggregate area of all signs shall not exceed one and one-half square
feet for each linear foot of business frontage, except if the building is set back more than 20
feet from the right-of-way, in which the aggregate area of all signs shall not exceed two square
feet for each linear foot of business frontage. No part of any sign shall be higher than the
building height as defined in Section 10.705.
(b) Secondary Facade: The aggregate area of all signs shall be limited in area to two square
feet for each linear foot of business frontage and shall be placed flat against the building
supporting the sign. No part of any sign shall be higher than the building height as defined in
Section 10.705.
(c) Electronic Message Signs are permitted as a primary or secondary facade wall sign subject
to Sections 10.184, Conditional Use Permit, and the following criteria:
(i) The electronic message sign must be 150 feet, or farther, from any residential zoning
district.
(ii) All text displayed on an electronic message sign must be static for a minimum of five
seconds. The continuous scrolling of text is prohibited. This restriction shall not apply to
animated images and images which move, or give the appearance of movement.
(iii) All electronic message signs shall have automatic dimming capabilities that adjust the
brightness to the ambient light at all times of day and night.
(iv) The conversion of an existing, conforming wall sign to an electronic message sign is
permitted.
(v) The conversion of an existing, nonconforming wall sign to an electronic message sign
is prohibited.
(3) Projecting Signs: Prohibited
(4) Awning/Canopy/Marquee Signs: No such sign shall extend into the public right-of-way. All such
signs shall be assessed against the facade aggregate for wall signs.
(5) Portable Signs: One additional portable sign not to exceed 12 square feet in area for each
business entrance is permitted. Such signs shall not be located within public right-of-way. The
portable signs shall only be displayed when the business is open.
(6) Shopping Center Sign: In the case of shopping areas which are developed as a unit with
common parking areas, one ground sign per vehicular access on a public street is permitted on the
premises of a shopping center. One (1) ground sign may be up to 100 square feet in area and 20
feet in height. Each additional ground sign shall not exceed 30 square feet in area and 4 feet in
height. The shopping center ground signs allowed by this subsection (6) are in lieu of all other
ground signs permitted in the zoning district, as listed under the Basic Regulations in Subsection (1)
of this section. Such signs shall not project into public right-of-way.
[Amd. Sec. 16, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987; Amd. Sect. 1, Ord. No. 7265, Dec. 3, 1992; Amd. Sec.
20, Ord. No. 8285, Feb. 6, 1997; Amd. Sec. 1. Ord. No. 8449, Aug. 7, 1997; Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No.
2010-16, Feb. 4, 2010; Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2014-141, Dec. 4, 2014; Amd. Sec. 14, Ord. No.
2014-161, Dec. 22, 2014; Amd. Sec. 181, Ord. No. 2018-64, June 21, 2018 (effective July 23,
2018).]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 21/28
10.1510 Neighborhood Commercial District (C-N): Additional Special Signs
Additional Special Signs shall be permitted as follows in the C-N district:
(1) Freeway Signs: Prohibited
(2) Fueling Station Signs: One additional ground sign per street frontage, not exceeding 30 square
feet in area and 9 feet in height is permitted on each parcel of land occupied by a fueling station.
Such signs may not project into public right-of-way.
(3) Drive-up Window Signs: One additional ground sign not to exceed 32 square feet in area and six
feet in height is permitted on each parcel of land occupied by a drive-up window business. Such
signs may not project into public right-of-way.
(4) Construction Sign: One non-illuminated sign may be installed on each construction site after a
building permit has been obtained for a construction project, and must be removed not later than two
years after issuance of the building permit or upon comple-tion of the project, whichever occurs
sooner. The sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in area and no single dimension shall exceed 10
feet. The sign shall not exceed 14 feet in height and shall comply with the setback requirements for
structures within this district.
(5) Temporary Sign: One temporary sign on each street frontage is allowed for each separate
business. Display period is limited to 30 days and is renewable upon application, but shall not
exceed four (4) permits in one (1) calendar year. The area of each temporary sign shall not exceed
32 square feet. No part of any sign shall be higher than the building height as defined in Section
10.705.
[Amd. Sec. 17, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987; Amd. Section 2, Ord No. 7265, Dec. 3, 1992; Amd.
Sec. 21, Ord. No. 8285, Feb. 6, 1997; Amd. Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2012-32, March 1, 2012.]
10.1600 Central Business Overlay (CB): Basic Regulations
Signs shall be permitted as follows in the CB district:
(1) Ground Signs: Each parcel of land is permitted one ground sign per street frontage, subject to
the following limitations:
(a) Maximum Height: 20 feet
(b) Maximum Square Footage: 150 square feet per sign
(c) Minimum Setback: May not project into public right-of-way
(d) Electronic Message Signs are permitted, except where within the Historic Overlay District, as a
ground sign subject to the following limitations:
(i) Each parcel of land is permitted one (1) electronic message sign if the sign is 150 feet or farther
from any residential zoning district.
(ii) All text displayed on an electronic message sign must be static for a minimum of five seconds.
The continuous scrolling of text is prohibited. This restriction shall not apply to animated images and
images which move, or give the appearance of movement.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 22/28
(iii) All electronic message signs shall have automatic dimming capabilities that adjust the brightness
to the ambient light at all times of day and night.
(iv) The conversion of an existing, conforming ground sign to an electronic message sign is
permitted.
(v) The conversion of an existing, nonconforming ground sign to an electronic message sign is
prohibited.
(2) Wall Signs: Wall signs are permitted, subject to the following limitations:
(a) Principal Facade: The aggregate area of all signs shall not exceed one and one-half square feet
for each linear foot of business frontage, except if the building is set back more than 20 feet from the
right-of-way, in which case the aggregate area of all signs shall not exceed two square feet for each
linear foot of business frontage. No part of any sign shall be higher than the building height as
defined in Section 10.705.
(b) Secondary Facade: The aggregate area of all signs shall be limited in area to two square feet for
each linear foot of business frontage and shall be placed flat against the building supporting the
sign. No part of any sign shall be higher than the building height as defined in Section 10.705.
(c) Second Story and Basement Enterprises or Uses: Second story and basement enterprises or
uses, which are maintained exclu-sively on a floor other than that on the street floor, shall be entitled
to additional sign area equal to 60% of the sign area authorized above for each facade. No part of
any sign shall be higher than the building height as defined in Section 10.705.
(d) Electronic Message Signs are permitted, except where within the Historic Overlay District, as a
primary or secondary façade wall sign subject to the following limitations:
(i) The electronic message sign or electronic reader board must be 150 feet, or farther, from any
residential zoning district.
(ii) All text displayed on an electronic message sign must be static for a minimum of five seconds.
The continuous scrolling of text is prohibited. This restriction shall not apply to animated images and
images which move, or give `the appearance of movement.
(iii) All electronic message signs shall have automatic dimming capabilities that adjust the brightness
to the ambient light at all times of day and night.
(iv) The conversion of an existing, conforming wall sign to an electronic message sign is permitted.
(v) The conversion of an existing, nonconforming wall sign to an electronic message sign is
prohibited.
(3) Projecting Signs: Signs not exceeding 20 square feet are permitted.
(4) Awning/Canopy/Marquee Signs: Signs not exceeding 20 square feet placed flat on a marquee,
awning, or canopy are permitted.
[Amd. Sec. 18, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987; Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2010-16, Feb. 4, 2010; Amd.
Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2014-141, Dec. 4, 2014; Amd. Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2014-161, Dec. 22, 2014.]
10.1610 Central Business Overlay (CB): Additional Special Signs
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 23/28
Additional special signs shall be permitted as follows in the CB district:
(1) Fueling Station Signs: One additional ground sign per street frontage, not exceeding 30 square
feet in area and 9 feet in height is permitted on each parcel of land occupied by a fueling station.
Such signs may not project into public right-of-way.
(2) Drive-up Window Signs: One additional ground sign not to exceed 32 square feet in area and 6
feet in height is permitted on each parcel of land occupied by a drive-up window. Such signs may not
project into public right-of-way.
(3) Temporary Sign: One temporary sign on each street frontage is permitted for each separate
business. Display period is limited to 30 days and is renewable upon application, but shall not
exceed four (4) permits in one (1) calendar year. The area of each sign shall not exceed 32 square
feet. No part of any sign shall be higher than the building height as defined in Section 10.705.
(4) Portable Signs: One portable sign not to exceed 12 square feet in area for each business
entrance is permitted. Such signs shall not be located within public right-of-way except under the
following conditions:
(i) The sidewalk width is a minimum of eight feet from face of curb;
(ii) A minimum of four feet of continuous, unobstructed clearance is provided on the sidewalk
along the length of the building; and
(iii) The sign complies with Section 10.735 regarding clear view at intersections.
The portable signs shall only be displayed when the business is open. Historic review is not
required when located within the historic overlay district.
[Amd. Sec. 19, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987; Amd. Sec. 17, Ord. No. 2012-32, March 1, 2012;
Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2016-150, Dec. 15, 2016.]
10.1620 Historic Preservation District Overlay (H): Basic Regulations
Signs in Historic Preservation Overlay Zoning Districts shall be approved through the Historic
Review process. Such signs may differ from specific standards of Article VI if authorized by the
Landmarks and Historic Preservation Commission (LHPC) pursuant to design criteria and/or
guidelines for signs adopted by such Commission, except that electronic message signs shall be
prohibited.
[Added, Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2010-16, Feb. 4, 2010.]
10.1700 Signs in Community Commercial District (C-C) and Heavy Commercial District (C-H,
and Regional Commercial District (C-R): Basic Regulations
Signs shall be permitted as follows in the C-C, C-R, and C-H districts:
(1) Ground Signs: Each parcel of land is permitted one ground sign per street frontage, subject to
the following limitations:
(a) Maximum Height: 20 feet
(b) Maximum Square Footage: 150 square feet per sign
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 24/28
(c) Minimum Setback: Shall not project into public right-of-way.
(d) Electronic Message Signs are permitted as a ground sign subject to the following limitations:
(i) Each parcel of land is permitted one (1) electronic message sign if the sign is 150 feet or farther
from any residential zoning district.
(ii) All text displayed on an electronic message sign must be static for a minimum of five seconds.
The continuous scrolling of text is prohibited. This restriction shall not apply to animated images and
images which move, or give the appearance of movement.
(iii) All electronic message signs shall have automatic dimming capabilities that adjust the brightness
to the ambient light at all times of day and night.
(iv) The conversion of an existing, conforming ground sign to an electronic message sign is
permitted.
(v) The conversion of an existing, nonconforming ground sign to an electronic message sign is
prohibited.
(2) Wall Signs: Wall signs are permitted, subject to the following limitations:
(a) Principal Facade: The aggregate area of all signs shall not exceed one and one-half square feet
for each linear foot of business frontage, except if the building is set back more than 20 feet from the
right-of-way, in which case the aggregate area of all signs shall not exceed two square feet for each
linear foot of business frontage. No part of any sign shall be higher than the building height as
defined in Section 10.705.
(b) Secondary Facade: The aggregate area of all signs shall be limited in area to two square feet for
each linear foot of business frontage and shall be placed flat against the building supporting the
sign. No part of any sign shall be higher than the building height as defined in Section 10.705.
(c) Electronic Message Signs are permitted as a primary or secondary facade wall sign subject to
the following limitations:
(i) The electronic message sign must be 150 feet, or farther, from any residential zoning district.
(ii) All text displayed on an electronic message sign must be static for a minimum of five seconds.
The continuous scrolling of text is prohibited. This restriction shall not apply to animated images and
images which move, or give the appearance of movement.
(iii) All electronic message signs shall have automatic dimming capabilities that adjust the brightness
to the ambient light at all times of day and night.
(iv) The conversion of an existing, conforming wall sign to an electronic message sign is permitted.
(v) The conversion of an existing, nonconforming wall sign to an electronic message sign is
prohibited.
(3) Projecting Signs: No sign shall project more than 18 inches into the public right-of-way except
under the following conditions:
(a) The building is set back less than two feet from public right-of-way, and
(b) The sign is less than 25 square feet in area.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 25/28
(c) No part of any sign shall be higher than the building height as defined in section 10.705.
(4) Awning/Canopy/Marquee Signs: All such signs shall be assessed against the aggregate wall
signage for the facade.
(5) Shopping Center Sign: In the case of shopping areas which are developed as a unit with
common parking areas, one ground sign per vehicular access on a public street is permitted on the
premises of a shopping center. The size of the ground signs shall be determined as follows: For
shopping centers with less than 300,000 square feet of gross floor area, one sign may be up to 150
square feet in area and 20 feet in height. For shopping centers that contain or have master site plan
approval for a gross floor area between 300,000 square feet and 500,000 square feet, one sign may
be up to 200 square feet in area each and 35 feet in height. For shopping centers that contain or
have master site plan approval for a gross floor area that exceeds 500,000 square feet, two signs
may be up to 200 square feet in area each and 35 feet in height, but no less than 1,000 feet apart.
Each additional ground sign shall not exceed 30 square feet in area and 12 feet in height. The
shopping center ground signs allowed by this subsection (5) are in lieu of all other ground signs
permitted in the zoning district, as listed under the Basic Regulations in Subsection (1) of this
section. Such signs shall not project into public right-of-way. Shopping center signs are permitted as
electronic message signs subject to the criteria contained in Section 10.1700(1)(d).
[Amd. Sec. 20, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987; Amd. Section 3, Ord. No. 7265, Dec. 3, 1992; Amd.
Sec. 22, Ord. No. 8285, Feb. 6, 1997; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 8449, Aug. 7, 1997; Amd. Sec. 11, Ord.
No. 2010-16, Feb. 4, 2010; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2014-141, Dec. 4, 2014; Amd. Sec. 16, Ord. No.
2014-161, Dec. 22, 2014.]
10.1710 Community Commercial District (C-C) Heavy Commercial District (C-H) and Regional
Commercial (C-R): Additional Special Signs:
Additional special signs shall be permitted as follows:
(1) Freeway Signs:
(a) Freeway signs shall be permitted only on parcels or portions thereof that are located within the
freeway overlay district per Section 10.365, and as shown on the official zoning map of the City of
Medford.
(b) One (1) sign not exceeding 250 square feet in area and 50 feet in height, shall be permitted on a
parcel located within the freeway overlay district. Each parcel is also permitted one (1) sign not
exceeding 150 square feet in area and 20 feet in height. Such signs are permitted in lieu of all
ground signs permitted in the underlying zoning district, as listed under the Basic Regulations.
(2) Fueling Station Signs: One additional ground sign per street frontage, not exceeding 30 square
feet in area and 9 feet in height for any single parcel of land occupied by a fueling station. Such
signs may not project into public right-of-way.
(3) Drive-up Window Business Sign: One ground sign not to exceed 32 square feet in area and six
(6) feet in height for any single parcel of land occupied by a drive-up window business. Such signs
may not project into public right-of-way.
(4) Construction Sign: Up to two additional non-illuminated signs may be installed after a building
permit has been obtained for a construction project and must be removed not later than two years
after issuance of the building permit for the project or upon completion of the project, whichever is
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 26/28
sooner. Each sign shall have an area not exceeding 100 square feet, and the top of the sign shall
not be more than 20 feet above the general surface of the ground. Not more than two such signs
shall be erected for each construction project and such signs shall be subject to the same setback
require-ments as are imposed for structures in this zone.
(5) Temporary Sign: One temporary sign on each street frontage is allowed for each separate
business. Display period is limited to 30 days and is renewable upon application, but shall not
exceed four (4) permits in one (1) calendar year. The area of each temporary sign shall not exceed
32 square feet. No part of any sign shall be higher than the building height as defined in Section
10.705.
(6) Portable Sign: One additional portable sign not to exceed 12 square feet in area for each
business entrance is permitted. Such signs shall not be located within public right-of-way. The
portable signs shall only be displayed when the business is open.
(7) Miles Field/Professional Baseball Park Signs: One (1) additional freestanding scoreboard sign,
not to exceed 630 square feet in area and 30 feet in height; one (1) time of day/display sign located
above the right field fence, not to be visible from outside the stadium after June 1, 1997, and not to
exceed 30 square feet in area and 25 feet in height; one (1) ground sign not exceeding 150 square
feet in area and 20 feet in height; one (1) wall sign identifying the facility, not to exceed 50 feet in
area; and other additional ground signs located above the outfield fence, not to exceed a total of
3000 square feet and 20 feet in height. These outfield billboard signs shall be permitted until June 1,
1997, at which time they must either be removed or enclosed so that they cannot be viewed from
outside the ball park. Signs permitted in subsection (8) are in lieu of signs permitted in the underlying
zoning district, as listed under the basic regulations.
[Added Sec. 2, Ord. No. 7134, May 21, 1992; Amd Ord. No. 7170, July 16, 1992; Amd. Section 4,
Ord No. 7265, Dec. 3, 1992; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 7957, Sept. 7, 1995; Amd. Sec. 23, Ord. No.
8285, Feb. 6, 1997; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2011-237, Dec. 1, 2011; Amd. Sec. 18, Ord. No. 2012-32,
March 1, 2012.]
10.1800 Signs in Light Industrial (I-L), General Industrial (I-G), and Heavy Industrial (I-H):
Basic Regulations
Signs shall be permitted as follows in the I-L, I-G, and I-H districts:
(1) Ground Signs are subject to the following limitations:
(a) Maximum Height: 24 feet
(b) Maximum Square Footage: 200 square feet per sign
(c) Minimum Setback: Sign shall not project into public right-of-way.
(d) Maximum Number: No more than one free-standing sign shall be permitted on any single lot,
except under the following conditions:
(i) The lot has more than one street frontage, then a lot may be allowed one ground sign for each
frontage over 120 linear feet, and
(ii) No sign shall project into the public right-of-way.
(e) Electronic Message Signs are permitted as a ground sign subject to the following limitations:
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 27/28
(i) Each parcel of land is permitted one (1) electronic message sign if the sign is 150 feet or farther
from any residential zoning district.
(ii) All text displayed on an electronic message sign must be static for a minimum of five seconds.
The continuous scrolling of text is prohibited. This restriction shall not apply to animated images and
images which move, or give the appearance of movement.
(iii) All electronic message signs shall have automatic dimming capabilities that adjust the
brightness to the ambient light at all times of day and night.
(iv) The conversion of an existing, conforming ground sign to an electronic message sign is
permitted.
(v) The conversion of an existing, nonconforming ground sign to an electronic message sign is
prohibited.
(2) Wall Signs:
(a) Principal Facade: The aggregate area of all signs shall not exceed one and one-half square feet
for each linear foot of business frontage, except if the building is set back more than 20 feet from the
right-of-way, in which case the aggregate area of all signs shall not exceed two square feet for each
linear foot of business frontage. NO part of any sign shall be higher than the building height as
defined in Section 10.705.
(b) Secondary Facade: The aggregate area of all signs shall be limited in area to two square feet for
each linear foot of business frontage and shall be placed flat against the building supporting the
sign. No part of any sign shall be higher than the building height as defined in Section 10.705.
(c) Electronic Message Signs are permitted as a primary or secondary facade wall sign subject to
the following limitations:
(i) The electronic message sign must be 150 feet, or farther, from any residential zoning district.
(ii) All text displayed on an electronic message sign must be static for a minimum of five seconds.
The continuous scrolling of text is prohibited. This restriction shall not apply to animated images
which move, or give the appearance of movement.
(iii) All electronic message signs shall have automatic dimming capabilities that adjust the
brightness to the ambient light at all times of the day and night.
(iv) The conversion of an existing, conforming ground sign to an electronic message sign is
permitted.
(v) The conversion of an existing, nonconforming ground sign to an electronic message sign is
prohibited.
(3) Projecting Signs: No sign shall project more than 18 inches into the public right-of-way except
under the following conditions:
(a) The building to which the sign is attached is set back less than two feet from public right-ofway,
and
(b) The sign is less than 25 square feet in area.
(c) No part of any sign shall be higher than the building height as defined in Section 10.705.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 28/28
(4) Awning/Canopy/Marquee Signs: No such sign shall extend into the public right-of-way. All such
signs shall be assessed against the facade aggregate for wall signs.
[Amd. Sec. 22, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987; Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2010-16, Feb. 4, 2010; Amd.
Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2014-141, Dec. 4, 2014; Amd. Sec. 17, Ord. No. 2014-161, Dec. 22, 2014.]
10.1810 Light Industrial (I-L), General Industrial (I-G) and Heavy Industrial (I-H): Additional
Special Signs
Additional special signs shall be permitted as follows in the I-L, I-G, and I-H districts:
(1) Fueling Station Signs: One ground sign per street frontage, not exceeding 32 square feet in area
and 6 feet in height for any single parcel of land occupied by a fueling station. Such signs shall not
project into public right-of-way.
(2) Drive-up Window Signs: One ground sign not to exceed 32 square feet in area and 6 feet in
height for any single parcel of land occupied by a drive-up window business. Such signs shall not
project into public right-of-way.
(3) Temporary Sign: One sign on each street frontage for each separate business. Display period is
limited to 30 days and is renewable upon application, but shall not exceed four (4) permits in one (1)
calendar year. The area of each sign shall not exceed 32 square feet. No part of any sign shall be
higher than the building height as defined in Section 10.705.
(4) Construction Signs: Such a sign may be installed after a building permit has been obtained for a
construction project and must be removed not later than two years after issuance of the building
permit for the project or comple-tion of the project, which-ever is sooner. The non-illuminated sign
shall have an area not exceeding 100 square feet, and the top of the sign shall not be more than 20
feet above the general surface of the ground. Not more than two such signs shall be erected for
each construction project and such sign shall be subjected to the same setback require-ments as
are imposed for structures in this zone.
[Amd. Sec. 23, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987; Amd. Ord. No. 2011-231, Nov. 17, 2011; Amd. Sec.
19, Ord. No. 2012-32, March 1, 2012; Amd. Ord. No. 2012-37, March 15, 2012.]
10.1900 [Repealed Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987.]
10.1910 [Repealed Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987.]
10.2000 [Repealed Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987.]
10.2010 [Repealed Sec. 1, Ord. No. 6021, Nov. 19, 1987.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 1/1
9 Building Code (9.100)
9.100 Adoption of Oregon Structural Specialty Code, as Modified
(1) The 2017 Oregon Structural Specialty Code and State adopted appendices as published and
copyrighted by the International Code Council, as modified and adopted by the Director of the State
Department of Consumer and Business Services and the Oregon State Fire Marshal are hereby
adopted and incorporated as an ordinance of the City of Medford to be administered and enforced
along with such further amendments contained herein, such code to be referred to as the Building
Code. At least one copy of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code and appendices, comprising the
Building Code, are on file in the City of Medford Building Safety Department.
(2) Section 112.1. The Building Safety Director of the City of Medford is hereby authorized to order
and cause the utilities to be terminated and disconnected which serve a building in violation of the
Building Code, or of any other code administered and enforced pursuant to Chapter 9 of the Medford
Code. If the Director must invoke this provision, he shall provide written notice to the owner of record
at least two weeks prior to ordering such discontinuance unless an imminent life hazard exists in
which event the Director shall order such discontinuance immediately.
(3) Section 114.5 of the Building Code is modified by adding the following:
Penalties. Penalties for violations of the Building Code or any other code administered and enforced
pursuant to Chapter 9 of the Medford Code shall be as prescribed in Section 9.661 of the Medford
Code.
(4) Section 3408.1 of the Building Code is modified by adding the following:
"A Change of Occupancy Inspection permit shall be required prior to inspection and issuance of a
certificate of occupancy."
(5) In addition to the appendix chapters listed in Section 101.2.2.1 of the Building Code, Appendix J
is adopted as published.
(6) Table 1-A, including footnotes, is deleted. See Medford Code Section 9.270, Table 9-A, for fees.
[Amd. Ord. No. 2002-216, Dec. 5, 2002; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2007-97, May 17, 2007; Amd. Sec.
1, Ord. No. 2008-159, Aug. 7, 2008; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2011-63, Apr. 7, 2011; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord.
No. 2014-147, Dec. 4, 2014; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-08, Jan. 18, 2018.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 1/1
9 Residential Specialty Code (9.101)
9.101 Adoption of Oregon Residential Specialty Code, as Modified
(1) The 2014 Oregon Residential Specialty Code and State adopted appendices as published and
copyrighted by the International Code Council, Inc., as modified and adopted by the Director of the
State Department of Consumer and Business Services are hereby adopted and incorporated as an
ordinance of the City of Medford to be administered and enforced along with such further
amendments contained herein, such code to be referred to as the Residential Code. At least one
copy of said code is on file in the City of Medford Building Safety Department.
(2) Residential Permit Fees shall be as shown in Medford Code Section 9.270, Table 9-A.
[Added, Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2007-97, May 17, 2007; Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2008-244, Dec. 4, 2008;
Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2011-63, Apr. 7, 2011; Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2014-147, Dec. 4, 2014.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 1/5
9 Affordable Housing Construction Excise Tax (9.280 to 9.295)
9.280 Purpose
The purpose of this section is to establish a construction excise tax of one-third of one percent on
the value of residential, commercial, and industrial improvements to provide funding for affordable
housing in the City.
[Added Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018.]
9.281 Definitions
For purposes of Affordable Housing Construction Excise section, the terms defined below shall
mean the following:
“Area Median Income” (AMI) means median family or household income by household size for
Jackson County as defined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development as
adjusted and published periodically.
“Affordable Housing” means a household’s ability to find housing within their financial means.
Household is divided into three categories: 1) Low-income households (households earning less
than sixty (60) percent of Area Median Income), 2) Moderate-income households (households
earning between sixty (60) and eighty (80) percent of Area Median Income), and 3) Middle-income
households (households earning between eighty (80) and one hundred and twenty (120) percent of
Area Median Income).
“Commercial” means any structure designed or intended to be used, or actually used, for occupancy
for purposes other than residential and includes structures otherwise categorized or described as
industrial.
“Construct” or “Construction” means erecting, constructing, building, assembling, enlarging, altering,
repairing, improving, or converting any building or structure for which the issuance of a building
permit is required pursuant to the provisions of Oregon law.
“Improvement” means a permanent addition to, or modification of, real property resulting in a new
structure, additional square footage in an existing structure, or alteration of an existing structure that
adds living space.
“Living Space” means any floor usable for living purposes, which includes but is not limited to
working, sleeping, eating, cooking, recreating, or a combination thereof.
“Net Revenue” means revenues remaining after the administrative fees are deducted from the total
construction excise tax collected and payment of any refunds of such taxes.
“Residential” means any structure designed or intended to be used, or actually used, for occupancy
for residential purposes including any residential structure, dwelling, or dwelling unit.
“Value of improvement” means the total value of the improvement as determined by the construction
permit(s) or building permit(s), regardless of number of separate permits issued. The City Building
Official shall calculate the total value in accordance with Oregon Administrative Rule 918-050-0100
Statewide Methodologies for Residential and Commercial Permits.
[Added Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]
9.282 Administration and Enforcement Authority
The City Manager or authorized designee is responsible for the administration of the Affordable
Housing Construction Excise Tax as described in this Section.
[Added Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]
9.283 Imposition of Tax
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 2/5
A. Each person who obtains a permit to construct a residential, commercial, or industrial
improvement in the City shall pay a construction excise tax in the amount of one-third of one percent
of the value of the improvement.
B. The construction tax imposed on structures intended for commercial or industrial use may not
exceed $50,000 per building permit or $50,000 per structure, whichever is less.
C. The construction excise tax shall be due and paid at the time of issuance of a building permit.
[Added Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]
9.284 Exemptions
A. The construction excise tax shall not be imposed on the following types of improvements:
1. Any improvement funded by Affordable Housing Construction Excise Tax proceeds, or other
dedicated affordable housing funding through the City’s Community Development Block Grant
program.
2. Private school improvements.
3. Public improvements as defined in ORS 279A.010.
4. Residential housing that is guaranteed to be affordable, under guidelines established by the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, to households that earn no
more than 80 percent of the median household income for the area in which the construction
tax is imposed, for a period of at least 60 years following the date of construction of the
residential housing.
5. Public or private hospital improvements.
6. Improvements to religious facilities primarily used for worship or education associated with
worship.
7. Agricultural buildings, as defined in ORS 455.315 (2)(a).
8. Long term care facilities, as defined in ORS 442.015, operated by a not-for-profit
corporation.
9. Residential care facilities, as defined in ORS 443.40, operated by a not-for-profit
corporation.
10. Continuing care retirement communities, as defined in ORS 101.020, operated by a notfor-
profit corporation.
11. Residential housing guaranteed to be affordable up to 120 percent of Area Median Income
for a period of at least 30 years following the date of construction of the housing. A person
using this exemption and also awarded funds under Section 9.292(C)(1) would receive an
amount less the exempted portion.
B. The City may require any person seeking an exemption to demonstrate the improvements are
eligible for an exemption and to establish all facts necessary to support granting of the exemption.
[Added Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]
9.285 Statement of the Full Value of Improvement
It is a violation of this section for any person to fail to state, or to understate, the full value of the
improvements to be constructed.
[Added Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]
9.286 Failure to Pay
The City shall not issue a building permit for construction of improvements to any person who has
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 3/5
failed to pay the applicable construction excise tax.
[Added Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]
9.287 Failure to Maintain Units as Affordable
A. The exemption for affordable unit(s) provided in Sections 9.284(A)(4) and (A)(11) automatically
terminates if the unit(s) cease to qualify as affordable at any time during the specified period of
affordability. For purposes of this section, affordability shall be calculated using the Area Median
Income determination for the preceding calendar year.
B. The tax shall be immediately due and payable to the City as of the date the unit no longer
qualifies as affordable, together with the penalty described in Section 9.288. The amount of the
construction excise tax shall be calculated using the percentage in effect at the time the unit(s)
ceases to qualify.
C. The person responsible to pay shall be the owner of record of the unit(s) at the time the unit(s)
ceases to qualify. The seller and buyer, jointly and separately, shall be obligated to pay if the unit(s)
ceases to qualify as the result of a sale; including a sale to a person occupying the unit whose
income exceeds the Area Median Income determination for the prior year.
[Added Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]
9.288 Penalty for Failure to Comply
A. A penalty of five percent of the underpayment of construction excise tax shall apply to:
1. Any person who removes a unit from the affordability exemption provided in Section
9.284(A)(4) and (A)(11). The person shall pay a five percent penalty for each unit that is no
longer exempt.
2. Any person who fails to state the full value of the improvement.
B. The penalty shall be due on the entire amount that the City Manager or authorized designee
determines has not been paid. The penalty shall be assessed to the 25th day of the month following
the due date.
[Added Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]
9.289 Enforcement by Civil Action
The construction excise tax, and any assessed penalties due and owing under this Section,
constitutes a debt owing to the City by the person liable for the tax as set forth in Section 9.283.
[Added Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]
9.290 Refunds
A. The City shall issue a refund to any person who has paid a construction excise tax if:
1. The person establishes the tax was paid for improvements that were otherwise eligible for
an exemption under Section 9.284 at the time the permit was issued;
2. The person establishes that construction of the improvement was not commenced and the
associated building permit has been cancelled by the City; or
3. The City Manager or authorized designee determines the amount of construction excise
tax, penalty, or interest was erroneously collected or paid to the City.
[Added Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 4/5
9.291 Appeals
A person who objects to a determination issued by the City applying the provisions of this section
may appeal the determination to the City Council as provided in Section 1.025.
[Added Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]
9.292 Dedication of Revenue
A. The City may retain up to four percent of the tax collected as an administrative fee in order to
recover costs for administering the program.
B. The net revenue from the tax on residential improvements shall be allocated by the City as
follows:
1. Fifteen percent of net revenue shall be remitted to the Oregon Department of Housing and
Community Services to fund home ownership programs.
2. Thirty-five percent of net revenue shall be used to fund programs and incentives of the City
related to affordable housing as defined by the City for purposes of this section and ORS
320.192. Affordable Housing for purposes of this section shall apply to households at or below
eighty (80) percent AMI (Low-income and Moderate-income households).
3. Fifty percent of net revenue shall be used to fund incentives for the development and
construction of affordable housing authorized by the City as provided for in state law.
C. The net revenue from the tax on commercial improvements shall be allocated by the City as
follows:
1. One hundred percent shall be used to fund programs and incentives for the development
and construction of housing that is affordable to households up to 120 percent of Area Median
Income.
[Added Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]
9.293 Review of Program
The City shall review the Affordable Housing Construction Excise Tax program every five (5) years to
evaluate its impact on housing. The Planning Department shall provide a report to the Council
outlining the number of units created, revenue collected, and the types of projects created by the
recipients of the funds.
[Added Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]
9.294 Effective Date
Sections 9.280 through 9.295 shall be effective upon acknowledgement of the City of Medford’s
current proposed Urban Growth Boundary amendment by the Department of Land Conservation and
Development, the Land Conservation and Development Commission, or any government entity
having jurisdiction over the City of Medford’s current proposed Urban Growth Boundary amendment,
without condition, restriction, amendment or modification of any kind.
[Added Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]
9.295 Expiration
The Affordable Housing Construction Excise Tax shall expire on December 31, 2028, unless
renewed by the City Council.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 5/5
[Added Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2018-15, Feb. 15, 2018]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 1/1
9 Manufactured Dwelling Code (9.300)
9.300 Adoption of Oregon Manufactured Dwelling Installation Specialty Code, as Modified
(1) The Manufactured Dwelling Installation Specialty Code, 2010 edition, as modified and adopted
by the Director of the State Department of Consumer and Business Services, is hereby adopted and
incorporated as an ordinance of the City of Medford to be administered and enforced along with
such further amendments as are contained herein, such code to be referred to as the Manufactured
Dwelling Code. At least one copy of said code is on file in the City of Medford Building Safety
Department.
(2) Wherever used in the regulations herein incorporated, the terms "administrator" or "department"
shall refer to the Building Safety Director of the City of Medford or his authorized designee.
(3) Manufactured dwelling placement permit fees shall be as follows:
Manufactured Dwelling Placement: (Includes placement, electrical feeder, water/sewer connection -
$303.00
Reinspection Fee - $50.00
Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated (minimum of one hour) - $50.00 per hour.
[Amd. Ord. No. 2002-220, Dec. 5, 2002; Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2008-244, Dec. 4, 2008; Amd. Sec.
10, Ord. No. 2011-63, Apr. 7, 2011.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 1/3
9 Penalties and Appeal Rights (9.660 to 9.662)
9.660 Violations; Penalties; Remedies
(1) No person, firm, corporation or other entity however organized, shall erect, construct, enlarge,
alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain a building
or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of this chapter.
(2) Violations shall be subject to an administrative civil penalty not to exceed $5,000 or, in the case of a
continuing violation as defined in subsection (3) of this section, not more than $1,000 for each day of the
violation and shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in this code.
(3) Each day that a violation of a provision of this chapter exists constitutes a separate violation.
(4) The penalties and remedies provided in this section are not exclusive and are in addition to
other penalties and remedies available to the City under the Code or other law.
[Added, Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2001-120, June 21, 2001; Replaced, Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2010-33, Feb. 18,
2010; Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2016-56 Dec. 1, 2016.]
9.661 Building Official; Authority to Impose Administrative Civil Penalty
(1) Upon a determination by the building official that a person has violated a provision of this
chapter or a rule adopted thereunder, the building official may impose upon the violator and/or any
other responsible person an administrative civil penalty as provided by this section. A “responsible
person” includes the violator and /or the owner of a building or property.
(2) Prior to imposing an administrative civil penalty under this section, the building official shall
make a reasonable attempt to secure voluntary correction by issuing the responsible person a
Notice of Civil Violation. Upon receiving a Notice of Civil Violation, a responsible person shall have
not less than five (5) days to correct the violation, unless the building official determines that a
shorter time period is required due to an immediate threat to health, safety, environment or public
welfare.
(3) If a violation has not been remedied to the building official’s satisfaction after the time allowed for
correction has expired, the building official may impose an administrative civil penalty by issuing a
Notice of Civil Penalty on each responsible person to whom a Notice of Civil Violation was issued.
(4) The Notice of Civil Penalty shall either be served by personal service or by certified mail, return
receipt requested. A Notice of Civil Penalty shall include:
(a) Reference to the specific code provision or rule involved;
(b) A short and plain statement of the matter(s) asserted or charged;
(c) The specific monetary penalty imposed, supported by the factors set out in subsection six
(6) of this section;
(d) The date on which the Notice of Civil Violation was issued; or if the notice was not given
pursuant to 9.661(5), a short and plain statement stating the basis for concluding the violation
was knowing, intentional or repeated; and
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 2/3
(e) A statement of the responsible person’s right to appeal the civil penalty to the Unified
Appeal Board (“the Board”).
(5) Notwithstanding subsection two (2) of this section, the building official may impose a civil penalty
without issuing a Notice of Civil Violation where the building official determines that the violation was
knowing or intentional or a repeat of a similar violation.
(6) In imposing a monetary penalty authorized by this section, the building official shall determine
the following factors:
(a) The responsible person’s past attempts to remedy the violation;
(b) The gravity of the violation; and
(c) Any prior violations of this chapter.
[Added, Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2010-33, Feb. 18, 2010.]
9.662 Appeal
(1) A person receiving a Notice of Civil Penalty may appeal to the Board. Written Notice of Appeal
along with the appeal fee must be filed with the City Recorder within ten (10) business days of
receipt of the Notice of Civil Penalty. An appeal not timely filed with an appeal fee shall not be
considered, and the civil penalty imposed by the City shall become final.
(2) The Notice of Appeal shall state all of the following:
(a) The name and address of the appellant;
(b) The specific code provision or rule being appealed;
(c) The reason the building official’s determination is incorrect; and
(d) The appellant’s desired outcome on appeal.
(3) Unless the appellant and City mutually agree to a longer period, an appeal shall be heard by the
Board within thirty (30) days after receipt of the Notice of Appeal. At least ten (10) business days
prior to the hearing, the Director of Building Safety shall mail notice of the time and location of the
hearing to the appellant.
(4) The Board shall hear and determine the appeal on the basis of the appellant’s testimony, written
statements or other supporting evidence the Board deems appropriate. The appellant may either
appear personally or through legal counsel. The rules of evidence shall not apply. The appeal shall
be limited to the issues specified in the Notice of Appeal.
(5) The City may present evidence either by testimony or the written report of the building official
that issued either the Notice of Civil Violation or Penalty. The City Attorney may assist the building
official at the hearing.
(6) Upon review, the Board shall limit its review to determining whether there is substantial evidence
to support the decision of the building official, or if errors in law were committed by the building
official. Review shall in any event be limited to those issues set forth in the Notice of Appeal. The
appellant is precluded from raising an issue on appeal to the Board if he or she could
have raised the issue to the building official but failed to do so. The Board shall issue a written
decision within ten (10) business days of the hearing date.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 3/3
[Added, Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2010-33, Feb. 18, 2010.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 1/9
9 Property Maintenance Code
9.900 Adoption of the International Property Maintenance Code
This article shall be known and may be cited as the Property Maintenance Code of Medford,
hereinafter referred to as the “IPMC”, one copy of which is on file in the City of Medford Police
Department, Code Enforcement Division.
[Added Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016]
9.901 Additions to the International Property Maintenance Code
(1) The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, published and copyrighted by
the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted in its entirety, except as added, repealed or
amended below, as an ordinance of the City of Medford, to be administered and enforced along with
such further amendments contained herein.
(2) When the phrase “the code official shall” is used in the IPMC with respect to enforcement, it
refers to the Manager’s discretionary option, rather than a mandatory obligation, to choose the
course of action that would be appropriate when a violation of the code is found. The phrase “code
official shall” does not impose on the city a mandatory duty to implement particular enforcement
procedures.
(3) The following sections are ADDED to the IPMC:
304.13.3 Window Sill Height. Windows in sleeping rooms that are provided to meet emergency
escape or rescue requirements shall meet the requirements of the Oregon Residential Specialty
Code, Section 310.1.
Exception: Window sill heights constructed in accordance with code requirements in place for
sleeping rooms at the time of construction.
304.13.4 Ability to Open. Every window required for ventilation or emergency escape shall be
capable of being easily opened and held open by window hardware and shall meet the requirements
of the Oregon Residential Specialty Code, Section 310.1.4.
304.13.5 Minimum Dimensions. Windows in sleeping rooms that are required to meet emergency
escape or rescue requirements shall meet the requirements of the Oregon Residential
Specialty Code, Section 310.1.1.
Exception: Window dimensions constructed in accordance with code requirements in place for
sleeping room at the time of construction. [Added]
705.1 Carbon Monoxide Detectors. Carbon monoxide alarms shall be installed, maintained and
repaired in residential units in accordance with the Oregon Residential Specialty Code, Section 315.
(4) The following sections of the IPMC are REPEALED in their entirety:
102.6 Historic Buildings.
103.3 Deputies.
103.5 Fees
106 Violations
111 Means of Appeal
304.14 InsectScreens.
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 2/9
(5) The following sections of the IPMC are AMENDED to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code of
the City of Medford, hereinafter referred to as the "IPMC." [Amended]
102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, changes of
occupancy and all other work required under the IPMC shall be done in accordance with the
procedures and provisions of the Oregon Specialty Codes. Nothing in this code shall be construed to
cancel, modify or set aside any provision of Chapter 9 of the Medford Municipal Code. [Amended]
SECTION 103 RESPONSIBILITIES FOR PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTION [Amended]
103.1 General. Property maintenance inspection is hereby the responsibility of the Medford Police
Department. [Amended]
103.4 Liability. The provisions and protections of the Oregon Tort Claims Act, ORS 30.265 et. seq.
shall apply to all city officials, agents and employees charged with the enforcement of the IPMC. The
IPMC shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any non-city agent or
employee, including but not limited to any owner, owner’s agent, builder, contractor, agent or
employee of any builder or contractor, or any person owning, operating or controlling any building,
structure or premises, for any damages to persons or property caused by defects or violations of this
code, nor shall the code enforcement agency or the city be held as assuming any such liability by
reason of the inspections authorized by this code or any permits or certificates issued under this
code. [Amended]
110.1 General. The code official shall order the owner of any premises upon which is located any
structure, which in the code official's judgment after review is so deteriorated or dilapidated or has
become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for human
habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and
remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and
make safe and sanitary, or to board up and hold for future repair or to demolish and remove at the
owner’s option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a
period of more than six months, the code official shall order the owner to demolish and remove such
structure, or board up until future repair. Boarding the building up for future repair shall not extend
beyond six months, unless approved by the building official. [Amended]
111.1 Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a
notice or order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the Unified Board of Appeals,
pursuant to Medford Municipal Code 9.662. [Amended]
112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a
stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or
unsafe condition, shall be considered to be committing a violation and will be subject to a notice of
civil penalty as prescribed in Medford Municipal Code, Chapter 9.660 (2). [Amended]
201.3 Terms Defined in Other Codes. Where terms are not defined in the IPMC and are defined in
the Oregon Specialty Codes and Chapter 9 of the Medford Municipal Code, such terms shall have
the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes. [Amended]
SECTION 202. GENERAL DEFINITIONS
Where terms are not defined in the IPMC or other code section and are defined in the Oregon
Specialty Codes, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes. Where
terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have
ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. Whenever the words “premises,”
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 3/9
“building” or other similar words are stated in the IPMC, they shall be construed as though they were
followed by the words “or any part thereof.” Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms
shall, for the purposes of the IPMC, have the following meanings:
ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE. A condition that can attract children and be detrimental to the health or
safety of children whether in a building, on the premises of a building or upon an unoccupied lot.
This includes, but is not limited to: abandoned buildings, abandoned wells, shafts, basements,
excavations, abandoned freezers or refrigerators with self-latching doors, motor vehicles, structurally
unsound fences or structures, lumber, trash, fences, debris, or water feature that may prove
hazardous for inquisitive minors.
BOARDED BUILDING. An unoccupied or derelict building that has been secured against entry by
material such as plywood, boards or other similar material placed over openings that are designed
for and/or are required for windows and doors, and which is visible off the premises and is not both
lawful and customary to install on an occupied structure.
BUILDING. Any structure occupied or intended for any occupancy.
DERELICT STRUCTURE. Any structure that meets any one of the following:
(1) unoccupied and unsecured,
(2) partially constructed without an active building permit,
(3) maintained in a condition that is an imminent threat to public health and safety.
DETERIORATION. A lowering in quality of the condition or appearance of a building, structure or parts
thereof characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting, or any other
evidence of physical decay, neglect, excessive use, or lack of maintenance.
MANAGER. The City Manager or appointed representative(s) who is responsible for supervising,
administering and enforcing all aspects of this code.
OWNER.
1. The holder of fee title to the property, except the seller on a land sale contract that has not
been foreclosed;
2. A person who is the purchaser of the property on a land sale contract and who has a current
right to possession of the property;
3. A person who is obligated on a mortgage loan or trust deed loan secured by the property and
has a current right to possession of the property;
4. A person who has foreclosed any land sale contract, mortgage, trust deed or lien applicable to
the property and has purchased the property at the foreclosure sale; and
5. Any successor in interest to any of the persons described in subsections (2) through (4) who
has a current right to possession of the property.
PARTIALLY CONSTRUCTED. An occupied or vacant structure, or portion thereof, that has been left
in a state of partial construction for more than six months or after the expiration of any building
permit, or that has not had a required permit inspection within any six-month period.
RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEM. Systems which produce energy from sources that do not use up
finite natural resources. Examples include, but are not limited to, solar, wind, biomass, geothermal,
and micro-hydro systems.
UNOCCUPIED. Vacant or not being used for a lawful occupancy. [Amended]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 4/9
302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant
growth in accordance with Medford Municipal Code 7.410, 7.420, 7.430 and 7.440. [Amended]
Motor Vehicles. Except as provided for in other provisions of the IPMC, no inoperative or unlicensed
motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in
a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled pursuant to
Medford Municipal Code 5.505 (2). [Amended]
302.8 Defacement of Property. The owner or occupant of the property, or person in charge of
property, shall comply with the requirements of Medford Municipal Code 5.519. [Amended]
304.3 Premises identification. Each structure to which a street number has been assigned shall have
such number displayed in a position easily observed and readable from the public right-of-way as
required by the Oregon Fire Code, and maintained. [Amended]
304.13.1 Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes. Glazing with
holes, cracks, or that is partially or wholly missing shall be replaced within thirty (30) calendar days
of the incident that caused the defect. [Amended]
401.3 Alternative devices. In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed in
Sections 402 and 403 of this code, artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with the
Oregon Specialty Codes shall be permitted. [Amended]
403.4 Process ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists
are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system that is in compliance with the Oregon Specialty
Codes shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be exhausted to
the exterior and not be recirculated to any space.
Exception: Range hoods constructed in accordance with code requirements in place at the time of
construction. [Amended]
505.1 General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other
plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved
private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be
supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the provisions of the
Oregon Specialty Codes. [Amended]
505.4 Water heating facilities. Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and
capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory,
bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a temperature of not less than 120°F (49°C). A gas-burning
water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom (or in a closet serving that
room), or any other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is
provided (exception only applies to "other occupied room".) An approved combination temperature
and pressure- relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained
on water heaters. [Amended]
602.2 Residential Occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of
maintaining a room year-round temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms. Cooking
appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section.
Portable space heating devices shall not be used to meet the dwelling heat requirements of this
code. No inverted or open flame fuel-burning heater shall be permitted. All heating devices or
appliances shall be of an approved type. [Amended]
602.3 Heat Supply. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with heating facilities capable of
maintaining a minimum room temperature of 68°F (20°C) at a point 3 feet (914 mm) above the floor
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 5/9
and 2 feet (610 mm) from exterior walls in all habitable rooms at the design temperature. [Amended]
602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat to
maintain a year-round temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) during the period the spaces are
occupied. [Amended]
603.1 Mechanical appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances,
cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a
safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function. Mechanical
ventilation systems for range hoods and bathrooms shall be maintained in sound working order
meeting manufacturer specifications for operation and function. [Amended]
604.2 Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for
determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with the Oregon Specialty Codes.
Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase electrical service having a
rating of not less than 60 amperes. [Amended]
606.1 General. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained in compliance with the
Oregon Elevator Specialty Code. The most current certificate of inspection shall be on display at all
times within the elevator or attached to the escalator or dumbwaiter, be available for public
inspection in the office of the building operator or be posted in a publicly conspicuous location
approved by the code official. The inspection and tests shall be performed at not less than the
periodic intervals listed in the Oregon Elevator Specialty Code, except where otherwise specified by
the authority having jurisdiction. [Amended]
702.1 General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point
in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the Oregon Specialty
Codes. [Amended]
702.2 Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the Oregon Specialty Codes.
[Amended]
702.3 Locked Doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which
egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door
hardware conforms to that permitted by the Oregon Specialty Codes. [Amended]
704.1 General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress
or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times
in accordance with the Oregon Specialty Codes. [Amended]
704.2 Smoke Alarms. Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in
Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated in Group R, regardless of occupant load at all
of the following locations:
1. On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of
bedrooms.
2. In each room used for sleeping purposes.
3. In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and cellars but not including crawl
spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an
intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall
suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the
upper level. Single or multiple–station smoke alarms shall be installed in other groups in accordance
with the Oregon Specialty Codes. [Amended]
[Added Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 6/9
9.902 Responsibility
Unless otherwise provided for, the Manager shall be responsible for the ultimate enforcement of all
of the provisions of the IPMC. The Manager may appoint such enforcement officers, technical
assistants, inspectors and other employees as may be necessary for the administration of the IPMC.
For the purpose of the IPMC, any person so appointed will be deemed a “code official” as defined in
the IPMC. The Manager is authorized to designate an employee who shall exercise all the powers of
the Manager during the temporary absence or disability of the Manager.
Where work is required to be done to correct violations under the IPMC any and all permits required
for such work by the Building Code shall be obtained. All final inspections shall be approved for the
associated permits prior to the violations being considered resolved.
[Added Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]
9.903 Modifications
In the event of extreme hardships involved in carrying out provisions of the IPMC relating to external
conditions and derelict structures, the Manager shall have the right to vary or modify the provisions
of the IPMC upon application of an owner, provided that the spirit and intent of the law is observed
and that the public health and safety is assured.
[Added Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]
9.904 Emergency Repair
The use of tarps or similar material for the purpose of an emergency repair, or temporarily in place of
a customary building component such as a roof, siding or a door, shall not exceed 90 days in any
consecutive 12 month period; provided, however, that this subsection is subject to, and does not
supersede, the requirements of the Building Code and Fire Code. The use of tarps or similar
material in place of a customary building component is not permitted under the Building Code.
[Added Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]
9.905 Weather Proofing and Screens
Where windows and doors have been sealed by plastic or other materials for weather proofing, said
materials shall be maintained in a workmanlike manner. Window and door screens, while not
required by the IPMC, shall be maintained in a sound working condition.
[Added Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]
9.906 Derelict Structures Prohibited
Derelict structures are prohibited.
[Added Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]
9.907 Closing and Securing of Derelict Structures.
The Manager may order appropriate measures to render a derelict structure secure from entry. The
securing of the structure shall be by methods calculated to render entry very difficult, including, but
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 7/9
not limited to, the use of lag screws in the boarding of entry points, instead of nailing. In order to
perform the function or duty authorized or required under this section, city representatives and their
agents shall have the right at reasonable times to enter upon the property and render a derelict
structure secure from entry. If consent to inspect or secure the property is refused, the City shall
apply for an inspection warrant. The costs incurred by the city in boarding or securing a derelict
structure may be assessed to the property owner and collected as costs of abatement under
Medford Municipal Code 5.520.
[Added Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]
9.908 Derelict Structure Registration
(1) The Manager shall maintain a list of derelict structures.
(2) The owner of a derelict structure shall register the structure with the Manager within 10 calendar days of
the Manager’s written direction to register. Registration shall be completed on forms provided by the
Manager, and shall include:
1. The Manager shall maintain a list of derelict structures.
2. The owner of a derelict structure shall register the structure with the Manager within 10
calendar days of the Manager's written direction to register. Registration shall be completed
on forms provided by the Manager, and shall include:
(a) the location of the property;
(b) the ownership of the property, including address, phone number, and email address;
(c) the expected period of its vacancy;
(d) a schedule for inspection and maintenance of the property during the period of
vacancy;
(e) the agent responsible for inspection and maintenance, including address, phone
number, and email address;
(f) a plan for re-occupancy and use of the structure, or its demolition; and
(g) a provision whereby the owner of the structure shall indemnify, defend and hold the
city harmless from any and all claims asserted against the city by third parties stemming
from injuries to persons or to property as a result of the condition or accessibility of the
structure.
(3) The registration and plan are subject to review and approval by the Manager.
(4) Any change in the information provided pursuant to this subsection shall be given to the
Manager within 30 calendar days of the change. When the owner believes the structure is no
longer derelict the owner shall contact the Manager and request an inspection to determine
that the structure is no longer derelict.
[Added Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]
9.909 Temporary Waivers of Enforcement Action
(1) The Manager may issue a temporary waiver of enforcement action, which will give a period of
time that the Manager determines is reasonable, but no longer than six months, to correct the
violations found. The length of time given will depend on several factors, such as the extent and cost
of the repairs, seriousness of the conditions, financial capacity of the owner, and the time of year.
During the waiver period, the affected residential rental unit(s) may not be occupied.
(2) The Manager may revoke the waiver if any of the conditions that allowed the owner to qualify for
a waiver change. Because the waiver is granted to a specific property owner, the waiver
automatically terminates upon change in ownership. The Manager may, assist the owner in
obtaining information regarding financial or other assistance to make the necessary repairs.
[Added Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 8/9
9.910 Hardship Waivers of Enforcement Action
(1) The Manager may issue a hardship waiver of enforcement action only if the owner currently Legally
resides on the property. A hardship waiver may be issued only in those instances when the owner is found by
the Manager to be over 65 years of age, disabled, or classified as “very low income” under the US Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) standards. Hardship waivers shall not exceed three years. The
income level of the owner will be reevaluated before the end of the three year waiver period. Application for a
hardship waiver must be filed with the Manager in writing. The Manager may require the owner to supply all
information necessary to demonstrate the owner’s eligibility for the waiver. The owner must submit a separate
application for waiver for each notice of complaint and violation.
(2) The Manager may revoke the waiver if any of the conditions that allowed the owner to qualify for a
waiver change. Because the waiver is granted to a specific property owner, the waiver automatically terminates
upon change in ownership or tenure of the property.
(3) The owner may reapply for new hardship waivers to become effective at the expiration of the term of any
hardship waiver previously granted.
(4) The Manager may assist the owner in obtaining information concerning financial or other assistance
to make the necessary repairs.
[Added Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]
9.911 Penalty and Appeal Rights
Violation of any section of the IPMC/Oregon Specialty codes shall be subject to the violation,
penalties and remedies of Medford Municipal Code Section 9.660 to 9.662.
[Added Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]
9.912 Liens and Assessments
Abatement costs, late payment charges, reinspection fees, or other fees or charges imposed under
the IPMC, shall be paid within 30 calendar days of imposition of the fees. The City Council may
order that the said charge be imposed as a special assessment against the real property involved. If
the Council orders that the charge be assessed against the property, it shall impose the assessment
by ordinance, cause the same to be entered in the docket of City Liens, and thereafter the said
assessment shall constitute a lien against said property, enforceable in the same manner as liens for
street improvements and shall bear interest at the rate specified in section 3.470(2) of the Medford
Code, beginning 15 days after the entry of the lien in the lien docket.
[Added Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]
9.913 Application of Other Codes
Nothing in the IPMC shall be construed to relieve a person from complying with any federal, state or
local law, including any other provisions of the Oregon Specialty Codes, or the requirement to obtain
all necessary permits and approvals.
[Added Sec. 17, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]
9.914 Coordination of Enforcement
The Manager shall make reasonable effort to arrange for the coordination of enforcement efforts and
7/9/2019 City of Medford Oregon - Municipal Code
www.ci.medford.or.us/code.asp?codeid=3658 9/9
any necessary inspections in an effort to minimize conflicts between the activities of affected city
departments.
[Added Sec. 18, Ord. No. 2016-56, Dec. 1, 2016.]

11 Industrial Waste Pretreatment 

1 Industrial Waste Pretreatment (11.100 to 11.105)

11.100 General Provisions

1.  This ordinance sets forth uniform requirements for users with, discharges of pollutants from nondomestic sources into the wastewater treatment system and enables compliance with all applicable State and Federal laws, including the Clean Water Act, the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403), and Oregon Administrative Rules (OAR) Chapter 340.  The objectives of this ordinance are:

(a) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater treatment system that will interfere with or damage the operation of the treatment system; 

(b)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater treatment system which will pass through the treatment system, inadequately treated, into the Rogue River or its tributaries or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the treatment system;

(c) To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is maintained at a level that allows its beneficial use;  

(d) To protect both municipal personnel who may come into contact with sewage, sludge and effluent in the course of their employment, as well as protecting the general public;

(e) To preserve the hydraulic capacity of the wastewater treatment system;

(f)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the system;

(g) To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvements of the wastewater treatment system; and to provide for the efficient use of the wastewater treatment system for the benefit of the user;

(h) To ensure the Regional Water Reclamation Facility complies with its NPDES permit             conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other Federal or State laws that the      wastewater treatment system is subject to.

2.  This Ordinance provides for the regulation of all users who discharge non-domestic waste into the wastewater treatment system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for all users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs.

3.  The WRD Manager shall initiate contact with the jurisdictional participant regarding any restrictive action within their jurisdiction.  In an emergency, contact shall be initiated with the jurisdictional participant at the earliest practical time.

[Amd. Sec. 1, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 

 


11.101 Administration

Except as otherwise provided herein, the WRD Manager shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this ordinance.  Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the WRD Manager may be delegated by the Manager to a duly authorized City employee.  This ordinance is gender neutral and the masculine gender shall include the feminine and vice versa.  Shall is mandatory; may is permissive or discretionary.  The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its use.
[Amd. Sec. 2, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.102 Connection Approval Required

No industrial waste connection shall be made to the sanitary sewer system without prior approval of the Manager/WRD Manager.  All conditions allowing industrial waste connection to the sewer system defined in the industrial waste Discharge Permit shall be satisfied prior to system connection.  Jurisdictional participants shall assure that the industrial user completes the application for Sewer Use Permit form and forwards same to the WRD Manager and Rogue Valley Sewer Services.
[Amd. Sec. 3, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.103 Sanitary Sewer/Storm Drain

It is unlawful to discharge, permit the discharge, or permit or allow a connection that will result in the discharge of sewage or industrial waste into a storm drain.


11.104 Definitions of Terms Commonly Used

Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this Ordinance shall have the meanings hereinafter set forth in this section, whether appearing in capital or lower case form.

1. Act or "the Act". The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et. seq.

2. Applicable Pretreatment Standards. The most stringent regulation for any specified pollutant regulated by degree or amount by this Ordinance, local limits, State of Oregon Pretreatment Standards, or National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.

3. Approval Authority. The Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ).

4. Authorized Representative of the industrial user.

(1) If the industrial user is a corporation, authorized representative shall mean:

(i) The president, secretary, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation, or

(ii) The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit [or general permit {optional}] requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.

(2) If the industrial user is a partnership, association, or sole proprietorship, an authorized representative shall mean a general partner or the proprietor.

(3) If the individual user is representing Federal, State or local governments, or an agent thereof, an authorized representative shall mean a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility.

(4) The individuals described in paragraphs 1-3 above, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the authorization is submitted to the WRD Manager.

5. Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five (5) days at a temperature of 20 degrees Centigrade, expressed as a concentration (milligrams per liter mg/L). .

6. Best Management Practices (BMP). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in Section 11.201 A and B [40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)]. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.

7. Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Categorical Standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the USEPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial users and which appears in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, incorporated herein by reference.

8. Categorical Industrial User. An Industrial User subject to a categorical Pretreatment Standard or categorical Standard.

9. City. The City of Medford.

10. COD. A measure of the oxygen required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.

11. Control Authority. The City of Medford, Regional Water Reclamation Facility.

12. Combined Sewer or System. A conduit or system of conduits in which both sewage and storm water are transported.

13. Commercial Building. All buildings or premises used for any purpose other than a dwelling unit, but not an industrial user.

14. Compatible Pollutant. The words "compatible pollutant" shall mean biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH, and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants that the treatment plant is designed to treat.

15. Composite Sample. The sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on either an increment of flow or time.

16. Cooling Water. The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, to which the only pollutant added is heat.

17. Daily Maximum. The maximum of any effluent samples for a pollutant collected during a calendar day.

18. Daily Maximum Limit. The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where Daily Maximum Limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where Daily Maximum Limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.

19. Department of Environmental Quality or DEQ. The Oregon Department of Environmental or where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the Director of the Department or other duly authorized official of the Department.

20. Direct Discharge. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Oregon.

21. Discharge. The discharge or the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater treatment system from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act.

22. Environmental Protection Agency or U. S. EPA. The U. S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the Regional Water Management Division Director or other duly authorized official of said agency.

23. Existing Source. Any source of discharge that is not a "New Source."

24. Extra Strength Industrial Waste Discharge. Extra Strength Industrial Waste Discharge shall be defined as industrial, commercial, or hospital industrial wastes discharged into the sewer system containing a total of more than 60 pounds of Biochemical Oxygen Demand, or Suspended Solids in any one day and having an average strength in excess of 300 ppm of Biochemical Oxygen Demand, or Suspended Solids.

25. Garbage. Solid wastes originating from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of foods, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.

26. Grab Sample. A sample that is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.

27. Holding Tank Waste. Any waste, which has been stored in holding tanks, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, or vacuum-pump tank trucks.

28. Indirect Discharge. The introduction of pollutants into a Publicly Owned Treatment Works from any non-domestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act.

29. Industrial user or "user". A source of indirect discharge.

30. Industrial Waste. Any liquid, solid, or gaseous waste discharged into a sanitary sewer, which by characteristic, quantity, or constituent exceeds normal domestic levels. Includes any industrial or commercial discharge that meets the above stated criteria.

31. Industrial Waste Discharge Permit. A permit to discharge industrial wastes into the wastewater collection and treatment system issued under the authority of this Ordinance and which prescribes certain discharge requirements and limitations.

32. Industrial Waste Pretreatment Program. The program approved by the Department of Environmental Quality regulated through the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System Waste Discharge Permits, and administered by the Regional Water Reclamation Facility for the purpose of complying with Federal, State, and Local regulations governing industrial waste discharge to the wastewater treatment system.

33. Interceptor. A sanitary sewer, which receives the flow from a number of trunk, main, or lateral sewers and transports it to a treatment plant or other point of disposal. Generally, an interceptor collects the flow from a number of trunks, mains, or laterals that would otherwise discharge to a natural outlet.

34. Instantaneous Limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.

35. Interference. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources both:

(a) Inhibits or disrupts the wastewater treatment system, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and

(b) Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirements of the City’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued hereunder (or more stringent Federal, State or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)), and including State regulations contained in any State Sludge Management Plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuaries Act.

36. Jurisdictional Participant. The participant that has the legal jurisdiction within certain defined boundaries as now or hereafter constituted.

37. Lateral. A sanitary sewer that will receive the flow from service connections and discharge into a main, trunk, or interceptor.

38. Leachate. A solution or product obtained when a liquid percolates through a material and results in dissolving and transporting of soluble materials.

39. Local Limit. A technically based pollutant limit specific to the ability of the treatment plant to treat the pollutant so it does not upset or inhibit the treatment process, pass through to the Rogue River, or limit or inhibit the beneficial use of sludge and treated effluent.

40. Main. A sanitary sewer which will receive the flow from one or more laterals and which will discharge into a trunk or interceptor.

41. Manager. The legal representative for the jurisdictional participant.

42. Manager/WRD Manager. This notation indicates joint action by the Jurisdictional Participant and the WRD Manager. Both will be cosignatories to the action. The Manager is considered the legal representative for the jurisdictional participant. The WRD Manager is the responsible authority in administering the Industrial Waste Pretreatment Program.

43. "May" is permissive.

44. Medical Waste: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.

45. Monthly Average. The sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month.

46. Monthly Average Limit. The highest allowable average of "daily discharges" over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month.

47. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit. A permit issued by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, which prescribes operating and effluent limitations relating to the treatment of sewage.

48. National Pretreatment Standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 403.5.

49. New Source:

(a) The term "New Source" means any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed Pretreatment Standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:

(i) The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or

(ii) The building, structure, facility or installation completely replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or

(iii) The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.

(b) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of paragraphs (a)(ii), or (a)(iii) of this section but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.

(c) Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has:

(i) Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program:

(1) Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or

(2) Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or

(ii) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment, which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts, which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies, do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph.

50. Participant. A governmental entity that is party to the Regional Sewer Agreement and subsequent amendments, between the Rogue Valley Sewer Services, City of Medford.

51. Pass Through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations, which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the City’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).

52. Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. This definition includes all Federal, State, or local governmental entities.

53. pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in moles per liter of solution.

54. Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, Medical Wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).

55. Pollution. The man-made or man-induced alteration of chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water.

56. Pretreatment or Treatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the wastewater treatment system. The reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological process, or process changes by other means, except intentional dilution as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment.

57. Pretreatment Requirement. Any substantive or procedural requirement, related to pretreatment, other than categorical standards and prohibitive discharge standards, imposed on an industrial user.

58. Pretreatment Standards or Standards. Pretreatment Standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical Pretreatment Standards, and Local Limits.

59. Prohibited Pollutant. Any pollutant contained in the discharge to the wastewater treatment system, which is prohibited in its entirety or regulated, by degree or amount by this Ordinance.

60. Prohibited Discharge Standards or Prohibited Discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain types or characteristics of wastewater as established by EPA, DEQ and/or the WRD Manager.

61. Properly Shredded Garbage. Shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow and conditions normally prevailing in public sewers.

62. Publicly Owned Treatment Works or POTW. A treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1292), which is owned by the City. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.

63. Regional Committee. The Regional Committee is made up of one representative of each participant that collects and discharges wastewater to the Regional Water Reclamation Facility. The primary function of this committee is to review and approve the schedule of charges for wastewater treatment, and to resolve appeals as provided in this ordinance, conduct informational and fact-gathering hearings, both to and from users, staff and the Technical Advisory Group, and such other duties as may be assigned under the terms of this Ordinance, the Regional Sewer Agreement, and any subsequent amendments to that agreement.

64. Regional Water Reclamation Facility (RWRF). That portion of the wastewater treatment system designed to provide treatment of sewage and industrial waste. The wastewater treatment plant and duly authorized representatives.

65. Regional Facilities. The components of the wastewater treatment system used to intercept and treat domestic and industrial wastewater within the boundaries of the contributors to the Regional Water Reclamation Facility.

66. Sanitary Sewer. A pipe or conduit designed or used to transport sewage and to which storm water, surface and ground waters are not admitted intentionally.

67. Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.).

68. Sewer System. All components of the wastewater treatment system used to collect and treat domestic and industrial wastewater within the boundaries of the contributors to the Regional Water Reclamation Facility.

69. Sewer user. Every person using any part of the wastewater treatment system.

70. "Shall" is mandatory.

71. Significant Industrial User.

(a) Except as provided in paragraph b below, the term significant industrial user shall mean:

(i) Industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards, and

(ii) Any other industrial users that:

(1) Discharges an average of 25,000 GPD or more of process wastewater,

(2) Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5%) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant or,

(3) Is designated as significant by the WRD Manager on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for causing pass through or interference.

(b) Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in paragraph (a) (ii) of this section has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the sewer system's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the WRD Manager may in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8 (f) (6), determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user.

72. Slug Load or Slug Discharge. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in Section 11.201 of this ordinance. A Slug Discharge is any Discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch Discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause Interference or Pass Through, or in any other way violate the POTW’s regulations, Local Limits or Permit conditions.

73. Standard Methods. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation.

74. Storm Drain. A conduit designed or used exclusively to transport storm water.

75. Storm Water. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting thereof, including snowmelt.

76. Suspended Solids or Total Suspended Solids (TSS). Solids that either float on the surface, or are in suspension in water, wastewater, or other liquids; and which are removable by laboratory filtering in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.

77. Technical Advisory Group. The Technical Advisory Group is comprised of the Managers and Administrators, or other representatives, of the participants. The primary function of this committee is to make recommendations to the Regional Committee on the following matters: technical information, rates, system development charges, and other matters requested by the Regional Committee.

78. Toxic Pollutants. One of the pollutants or combination of those pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of Section 307 (33 U.S.C. 1317) of the Act. .

79. Treatment Plant. That portion of the Regional wastewater system designed to provide treatment of sewage and industrial waste. The Regional Water Reclamation Facility.

80. Treatment Plant Effluent. Any discharge of pollutants from the wastewater treatment plant into waters of the state. Includes reclaimed, reused, or recycled wastewater that has been treated.

81. Upset. An exceptional incident in which a discharger unintentionally and temporarily is in a state of noncompliance with the discharge requirements set forth in this Ordinance or existing permit due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the discharger, and excluding noncompliance caused by operation error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.

82. User. Any person who contributes, or causes or allows the contribution of sewage or industrial wastewater into the wastewater treatment system, including persons who contribute such wastes from mobile sources.

83. Wastewater. The liquid and water-carried industrial wastes, or sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed to the wastewater treatment system.

84. Wastewater Treatment System or System. The components of the sewer system used to intercept and treat domestic and industrial wastewater within the boundaries of the contributors to, and including, the treatment plant. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.

85. WRD Manager. The City of Medford Water Reclamation Division (WRD) Manager or duly designated representative with authority to administer the Industrial Waste Pretreatment Program and respond to the requirements of regulatory agencies with respect to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit held by the Regional Water Reclamation Facility.

[Amd. Sec. 4, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.105 Abbreviations

The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:

· BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand

· BMP - Best Management Practice

· BMR - Baseline Monitoring Report

· CFR - Code of Federal Regulations

· CIU - Categorical Industrial User

· COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand

· DEQ - Oregon Department of Environmental Quality

· EPA - U. S. Environmental Protection Agency

· gpd - Gallons per day

· IU - Industrial User

· l - Liter

· mg - Milligrams

· mg/l - Milligrams per Liter

· NSCIU - Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User

· NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System

· OAR - Oregon Administrative Rules

· O & M - Operation and Maintenance

· POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works

· RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act

· RWRF - Regional Water Reclamation Facility

· SIC - Standard Industrial Classification

· SIU - Significant Industrial User

· SNC - Significant Non-Compliance

· SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901, et. seq.

· USC - United States Code

· TSS - Total Suspended Solids

· WRD - Water Reclamation Division


11 Prohibitions and Standards (11.201 to 11.209)

11.201 Prohibitive Discharge Standards

A. General Prohibitions.

Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge any wastewater containing pollutants in sufficient quantity (flow or concentration), either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to pass through or interfere with the wastewater system, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process; to interfere with the use of or disposal of treatment plant sludge; to constitute a hazard to humans or animals; to create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the sewer system; to exceed the limitation set forth in a National Pretreatment Standard; or to exceed a local limit established by the WRD Manager.

B. Specific Prohibitions.

No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:

(1) Any pollutant which may, by themselves or by interaction with other substances, create a fire or explosion hazard, or be injurious in any other way to the sewer system. Included in this prohibition are wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Centigrade using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.

(2) Any wastes, wastewaters or substances having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 12.5 , or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the sewer system.

(3) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer system resulting in interference, such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage, solids with particles greater than one-quarter inch (1/4") in any dimension.

(4) Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollution concentration, which will cause interference with the POTW.

(5) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the collection system greater than 190 °F, or which will cause the wastewater treatment plant influent to exceed 104 °F. The WRD Manager may require thermal loading reduction from industrial users with the potential for thermal impact on the sanitary sewer system.

(6) Any pollutant that results in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the sewer system in a quantity that may cause worker health and safety problems.

(7) Any waters or wastes containing sludges or screenings from tank bottom contents, industrial sump bottom contents, grease or oil trap wastes, plating or metal finishing wastes

(8) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewaters, which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.

(9) Any fat, oils or greases, including but not limited to petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.

(10) Any substance that may cause the treatment plant effluent or any other residues, sludges, or scum to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case, shall a substance discharged to the system cause the Regional Water Reclamation Facility to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal regulations, or permits issued under section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or other State requirements applicable to the sludge use and disposal practices being used by the Regional Water Reclamation Facility.

(11) Any wastewater containing any radioactive waste or isotopes except as specifically approved by the WRD Manager in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.

(12) Materials which exert or cause:

(a) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).

(b) Unusual chlorine demand or concentrations in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the treatment plant, or that violate worker health and safety limits.

(13) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, including holding tank wastes, except at discharge points designated by the WRD Manager.

(14) Any medical wastes including, but not limited to recognizable portions of the human or animal anatomy.

(15) Any wastes containing detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances that may cause excessive foaming in the wastewater treatment system.

(16) Storm water, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, cooling water and unpolluted industrial wastewater.

(17) Any material identified as hazardous waste according to 40 CFR Part 261 except as specifically authorized by the WRD Manager.

(18) Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than 5 percent (5%) or any single reading over 10 percent (10%) of the Lower Explosive Limit of the meter.


[Amd. Sec. 5, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.202 National Categorical Pretreatment Standards

Users must comply with the categorical Pretreatment Standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405–471.

A. Where a categorical Pretreatment Standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the WRD Manager may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with Section 11.202(D) and 11.202(E).

B. When the limits in a categorical Pretreatment Standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the WRD Manager may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual Industrial Users.

C. When wastewater subject to a categorical Pretreatment Standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same Standard, the WRD Manager shall impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e).

D. When a categorical Pretreatment Standard is expressed only in terms of pollutant concentrations, an Industrial User may request that the City convert the limits to equivalent mass limits. The determination to convert concentration limits to mass limits is within the discretion of the WRD Manager. The City may establish equivalent mass limits only if the Industrial User meets all the conditions set forth in Sections 11.202.2(D)(1)(a) through 11.202.2(D)(1)(e) below.

(1) To be eligible for equivalent mass limits, the Industrial User must:

(a) Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ, water conservation methods and technologies that substantially reduce water use during the term of its individual wastewater discharge permit;

(b) Currently use control and treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the applicable categorical Pretreatment Standard, and not have used dilution as a substitute for treatment;

(c) Provide sufficient information to establish the facility’s actual average daily flow rate for all wastestreams, based on data from a continuous effluent flow monitoring device, as well as the facility’s long-term average production rate. Both the actual average daily flow rate and the long-term average production rate must be representative of current operating conditions;

(d) Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are not appropriate to control the Discharge; and

(e) Have consistently complied with all applicable categorical Pretreatment Standards during the period prior to the Industrial User’s request for equivalent mass limits.

(2) An Industrial User subject to equivalent mass limits must:

(a) Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the equivalent mass limits;

(b) Continue to record the facility’s flow rates through the use of a continuous effluent flow monitoring device;

(c) Continue to record the facility’s production rates and notify the WRD Manager whenever production rates are expected to vary by more than 20 percent from its baseline production rates determined in paragraph 11.202(D)(1)(c). Upon notification of a revised production rate, the WRD Manager will reassess the equivalent mass limit and revise the limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and

(d) Continue to employ the same or comparable water conservation methods and technologies as those implemented pursuant to paragraphs 11.202(D)(1)(a) so long as it discharges under an equivalent mass limit.

(3) When developing equivalent mass limits, the WRD Manager:

(a) Will calculate the equivalent mass limit by multiplying the actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es) of the Industrial User by the concentration-based Daily Maximum and Monthly Average Standard for the applicable categorical Pretreatment Standard and the appropriate unit conversion factor;

(b) Upon notification of a revised production rate, will reassess the equivalent mass limit and recalculate the limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and

(c) May retain the same equivalent mass limit in subsequent individual wastewater discharge permit terms if the Industrial User’s actual average daily flow rate was reduced solely as a result of the implementation of water conservation methods and technologies, and the actual average daily flow rates used in the original calculation of the equivalent mass limit were not based on the use of dilution as a substitute for treatment pursuant to Section 11.211. The Industrial User must also be in compliance with Section 11.724 regarding the prohibition of bypass.

E. The WRD Manager may convert the mass limits of the categorical Pretreatment Standards of 40 CFR Parts 414, 419, and 455 to concentration limits for purposes of calculating limitations applicable to individual Industrial Users. The conversion is at the discretion of the WRD Superintendent.

F. Once included in its permit, the Industrial User must comply with the equivalent limitations developed in this Section 11.202 in lieu of the promulgated categorical Standards from which the equivalent limitations were derived.

G. Many categorical Pretreatment Standards specify one limit for calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for calculating maximum Monthly Average, or 4-day average, limitations. Where such Standards are being applied, the same production or flow figure shall be used in calculating both the average and the maximum equivalent limitation.

H. Any Industrial User operating under a permit incorporating equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a production-based Standard shall notify the WRD Manager within two (2) business days after the User has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change within the next calendar month. Any User not notifying the WRD Manager of such anticipated change will be required to meet the mass or concentration limits in its permit that were based on the original estimate of the long term average production rate.

[Amd. Sec. 6, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.203 State Pretreatment Standards

State requirements and limitations on dischargers to the treatment plant shall be met by all dischargers which are subject to such standards in any instance in which they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this or any other applicable ordinance.


11.204 Local Limits

The WRD Manager is authorized to establish and revise from time-to-time local limits pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c).  The pollutant limits (local limits) will be established to protect against Pass-Through and Interference.  No significant industrial user (SIU) shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the limits established by the WRD Manager.  The local limit shall have precedence if it is more stringent than the Categorical Pretreatment Standard for the Industrial User, and shall be enforced as the standard at the point of discharge to the Sewer System.  The local limit shall be identified in the Industrial Waste Discharge Permit of the industrial user discharging the pollutant.

The local limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW.  All concentrations for metallic substances are for the total metal unless indicated otherwise.  The WRD Manager may impose mass limitations in addition to concentration based limitations. 
 
All new domestic wastewaters from restrooms, showers, drinking fountains, etc., unless specifically included as part of a categorical pretreatment standard, shall be kept separate from all industrial wastewaters until the industrial wastewaters have passed through a required pretreatment system and the industrial user's monitoring facility.  When directed to do so by the WRD Manager, any industrial user may be required to separate existing domestic wastestreams.  The WRD Manager shall endeavor to keep the Regional Committee apprised of the status of local limits and pollutant levels.
[Amd. Sec. 7, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.205 Denial, Termination, or Limitation of Discharge

The WRD Manager or Manager may deny, condition, or terminate the discharge of industrial wastes to the sewer system where such discharges do not meet the requirements of this Ordinance or other applicable pretreatment standards. 
Notwithstanding prior acceptance of industrial wastes into the treatment plant, if the WRD Manager or Manager finds that an industrial waste from a particular commercial or industrial occupancy or a class of wastes from similar commercial or industrial occupancies constitute a nuisance or may create a hazard to the collection system or treatment plant or receiving waters, or have an adverse effect on reclaimed wastewater, then the WRD Manager or Manager may limit the characteristics or volume of such wastes, or may terminate the acceptance, or may deny acceptance.  Notice of the limitation, termination, or denial, shall be given to the sewer user in the manner as in a notice of violation.  It is unlawful for any person to discharge or permit the discharge of industrial wastes in violation of this notice.
[Amd. Sec. 8, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.206 Best Management Practices

The WRD Manager or Manager may require commercial and/or industrial users to implement best management practices to restrict and/or condition discharges to the sanitary sewer system to meet the requirements of this ordinance or other applicable pretreatment standards or requirements.
[Amd. Sec. 9, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 

 


11.207 Dilution Prohibition

No user shall intentionally increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the National Pretreatment Standards, or in any other pollutant limitation developed by this Ordinance or the State.

It is understood that an industry may vary water usage in the ordinary course of processing. This section is not intended to interfere with this flexibility.


11.208 Right to Revision

The Regional Water Reclamation Facility reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater permits, more stringent limitations or requirements for discharges to the wastewater treatment system, if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in this Ordinance.


11.209 Tenant Responsibility

Any person who shall occupy the industrial user's premises as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance in the same manner as the Owner.

11 Spill Prevention/Slug Control Plan Provisions (11.300 to 11.301)

11.300 Spill Prevention/Slug Control

Each user shall provide protection from accidental spill and slug discharges of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this Ordinance, which may interfere with the wastewater treatment system.  Facilities, equipment, materials, etc., to prevent accidental spills and slug discharges of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user's own cost and expense.
 
Industrial users having a history of, or possessing the potential for accidental spills and/or slug discharges that could upset the treatment plant or cause a violation of the treatment plant's NPDES Permit shall submit and implement a Spill Prevention/Slug Control Program or take such other action that may be necessary to control Slug Discharges  A Spill Prevention/Slug Control Plan shall be submitted to the WRD Manager within ninety (90) days of notification of requirement by the WRD Manager. 
 
Any user who commences contribution to the treatment plant after the effective date of this Ordinance shall not be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental spill/slug discharge procedures have been submitted and approved by the WRD Manager.  Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this Ordinance, or all other laws and regulations governing the use, storage, and transportation of hazardous substances.
The plan shall include at least the following elements and shall be available for inspection at the facility during normal business hours.

1.  A description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;

2.  A description of process chemicals and stored chemicals;

3.  Provisions for immediate notification of the WRD Manager of any accidental and/or slug discharge,      with follow-up written notification within 5 days per 11.301;

4.  A description of the potential points of entry into the sewer system;

5.  A description of the measures or other actions to be taken to prevent entry at the described points           before a spill occurs;

6.  Measures to be taken in the event of a spill of prohibited or restricted materials to contain them;

7.  A description of employee training in the prevention and control of spills.

[Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.301 Spill/Slug Reporting

In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the WRD Manager of the incident.  The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions.  Failure to comply shall cause the user to be in violation of this Ordinance.

1.  Notice to Employees.  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of an upset or accidental discharge.  Employers shall insure that all employees who may cause or allow such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.

2.  Written Notice.  Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the WRD Manager a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences.  Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the wastewater treatment system, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this Ordinance or other applicable law.

3.  Preventive Measures.  Direct or indirect connections or entry points which could allow spills or uncontrolled discharges of prohibited or restricted substances to enter the sewer system shall be eliminated, labeled, or controlled so as to prevent the entry of wastes in violation of this Ordinance.  The Manager/WRD Manager may require the industrial user to install or modify equipment or make other changes necessary to prevent such discharges as a condition of issuance of an Industrial Waste Discharge Permit or as a condition of continued discharge into the sewer system.  A schedule of compliance shall be established by the WRD Manager, which requires completion of the required actions within the shortest reasonable period of time.  Violation of the schedule without an extension of time granted by the WRD Manager is a violation of this Ordinance.

[Amd. Sec. 10, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 

11 Permits (11.400 to 11.412)

11.400 Wastewater Survey

When requested by the WRD Manager, an industrial user shall submit information on the nature and characteristics of their wastewater by completing a wastewater survey.  The WRD Manager is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require industrial users to update the survey.  Failure to complete the survey shall be considered a violation of the Ordinance.
[Amd. Sec. 11, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.401 Permit Authority

The WRD Manager shall have the authority to establish Industrial Waste Discharge Permit limitations to the extent necessary to comply with this Ordinance as well as the National Pretreatment Standards including current Categorical Pretreatment Standards and waste discharge requirements as promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Oregon State Department of Environmental Quality; to protect the public health and safety; to protect the receiving water quality; to protect the sewer system; to protect the ability to reclaim wastewater; and to comply with all other applicable Federal and State laws.
[Amd. Sec. 12, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.402 Requirement for a Permit

It shall be unlawful for a significant industrial user to discharge wastewater into the sanitary sewer system without first applying for and obtaining a wastewater permit from the WRD Manager.  Any violation of the terms and conditions of the wastewater permit shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance and subjects the industrial user to the sanctions set out in this Ordinance.  Obtaining a wastewater permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to obtain other permits required by Federal, State, or local law.
The WRD Manager may require other industrial users to obtain wastewater permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this Ordinance.
[Amd. Sec. 13, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 

 


11.403 Existing Users

The requirements for a permit listed in this Ordinance are applicable to all users.  Existing users that are discharging to the sewer system without an Industrial Waste Discharge Permit may be required to apply for such permit.  The determination for requirement shall be made by the WRD Manager in accordance with the requirements established in this Ordinance.  The user shall be notified in writing of the requirement for a permit and shall be allowed to continue discharging into the sewer system until a permit is issued or denied provided that the characteristics and concentrations of wastes discharged are not in excess of the amounts established in this Ordinance.  Discharges allowed under these conditions shall meet all other applicable requirements of this Ordinance.
A completed application for an Industrial Waste Discharge Permit shall be submitted to the WRD Manager within ninety (90) days after permit requirement notification was received.
[Amd. Sec. 14, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.404 Application for an Industrial Waste Discharge Permit

Any significant industrial user proposing to begin or recommence discharging industrial wastes into the wastewater treatment system must apply for and obtain a wastewater discharge permit prior to beginning or recommencing such discharge.
Application for an Industrial Waste Discharge Permit shall be made to the WRD Manager on forms provided by the Regional Water Reclamation Facility.  The application shall not be considered complete until all information identified on the form is provided, unless specific exemptions are granted by the WRD Manager.
Completed applications shall be submitted to the WRD Manager within ninety (90) days prior to the date the discharge is to begin.
Contents of the permit application shall be subject to the confidentiality conditions of this Ordinance.
[Amd. Sec. 15, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.405 Wastewater Permit Re-issuance/Renewal

A user with an existing permit shall apply for permit re-issuance or renewal by submitting a complete permit application in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance a minimum of forty-five (45) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit.


11.406 Application Information and Baseline Monitoring Report (BMR)

An applicant for an Industrial Waste Discharge permit shall be required to provide the following pertinent information on appropriate forms supplied by the City:

1. Name, address, and location (if different from address); the legal name and owners name, if different; as well as the officer entitled to sign documents on behalf of the business. Contact information.

2. List of all environmental control permits held by or for the business or facility.

3. A description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used at the facility, which are or could accidentally or intentionally be discharged to the sanitary sewer system. Include all products produced by type, amount, and processes.

4. A description of the nature, average production rate, and SIC Code for each of the process operations conducted. Including the identification of applicable pretreatment standards.

5. Schematic process diagram indicating the flow of materials and water from start to completed product for each unit process generating wastewater. Include all sewers, floor drains, and all points of discharge from each process to the sewer system.

6. List of toxic substances or pollutants that potentially could be present in the wastewater discharge. Include substances that could enter due to accidental spill or slug discharge.

7. List of substances or constituents that potentially could be present in the wastewater discharge, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be considered a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Include the name of the hazardous waste, the EPA Hazardous Waste Number, and the type of potential discharge (continuous, batch, or other).

8. Average daily and maximum daily flow rates in gallons per day. Include flow measurement information for process streams regulated by pretreatment standards and include flow information for other waste streams that might be considered dilute waste streams. Also include any routine or seasonal variations, batch discharges, etc., and information regarding waste strengths for the various types of discharges. Also include time and duration of discharges, the location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit;

9. Measurement of Pollutants.

(a) The categorical Pretreatment Standards applicable to each regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for Existing Sources.

(b) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the Standard or by the WRD Manager, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.

(c) Instantaneous, Daily Maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported.

(d) The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 11.604 of this ordinance. Where the Standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the User shall submit documentation as required by the WRD Manager or the applicable Standards to determine compliance with the Standard.

(e) Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 11.602 of this ordinance.

10. Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal of an approved monitoring waiver) for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge based on Section 11.605(3)(B).

11. Provide statement of certification concerning compliance or noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards. The statement shall be reviewed by an authorized representative of the user and certified to by a qualified professional. Measurements of pollutant concentrations to verify compliance if required must be representative of daily operations and include reported values for daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required).

12. Any other information as may be deemed by the WRD Manager to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.

[Amd. Sec. 16, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]

 

 


11.407 Application Signatories and Certifications

A.  All wastewater discharge permit applications, User reports and certification statements must be signed by an Authorized Representative of the User and contain the certification statement in Section11.608.

B.  If the designation of an Authorized Representative is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new written authorization satisfying the requirements of this Section must be submitted to the WRD Manager prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an Authorized Representative.

[Amd. Sec. 17, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 

 


11.408 Issuance of Industrial Waste Discharge Permits

The WRD Manager shall evaluate the data furnished by the user in the Industrial Waste Discharge Permit application and may require the user to provide additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the WRD Manager may issue or deny an Industrial Waste Discharge Permit subject to terms and conditions provided in this Ordinance. Copies of all permits shall be sent to the Manager.

1. General Conditions.

(a) Industrial Waste Discharge Permits shall be issued or denied by the WRD Manager within forty-five (45) days after a completed application is received. If no determination is made within this time period, the application will be deemed denied. Industrial Waste Discharge Permits shall contain conditions that meet the requirements of this Ordinance as well as those of applicable State and Federal laws and regulations.

(b) If pretreatment facilities are needed to meet the discharge requirements in the discharge permit, the permit shall require the installation of such facilities.

(c) Whenever a discharge permit requires installation or modification of treatment facilities or a process change necessary to meet discharge standards or spill control requirements, a compliance schedule shall be included which establishes the date for completion of the changes and any appropriate interim dates. Interim dates for the commencement and completion of major events shall be no more than ninety (90) days apart.

(d) The WRD Manager may deny approval to issue a discharge permit if the discharge will result in violations of local, State, or Federal laws or regulations; will overload or cause damage to any portion of the treatment plant; or will create an imminent or potential hazard to personnel.

(e) Permits shall contain the following elements:

(i) A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit issuance date, expiration date and effective date;

(ii) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the WRD Manager in accordance with Section 11.410 of this ordinance, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;

(iii) Effluent limits, and Best Management Practices based on applicable Pretreatment Standards;

(iv) Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on Federal, State, and local law.

(v) The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the Discharge in accordance with Section 11.605(3)(B).

(vi) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of Pretreatment Standards and Requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable Federal, State, or local law.

(vii) Requirements to control Slug Discharge, if determined by the WRD Manager to be necessary.

(viii) Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the WRD Manager (Section 11.605(3)(B) must be included as a condition in the User’s permit.

2. Specific Permit Conditions.

Industrial Waste Discharge Permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this Ordinance and all other applicable regulations, user charges, and fees adopted by the participants. Permits may contain the following:

(a) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a sewer;

(b) Mass limits of discharge where deemed appropriate;

(c) Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization consistent with the capacity of the collection and treatment system;

(d) Requirements for installation and maintenance of pretreatment facilities, flow measurement devices, inspection and sampling facilities;

(e) Requirements for the submission of reports and compliance schedules;

(f) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports required by the WRD Manager, by provisions of the National Pretreatment Standards or to support monitoring requirements of the Pretreatment Program;

(g) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge and affording authorized representatives access thereto;

(h) Other conditions as deemed appropriate to ensure compliance with this ordinance.

3. Non-discharging Categorical Industrial Users.

Non-discharging industries that have industrial processes that would otherwise be subject to national categorical pretreatment standards and requirements (non-discharging categorical industrial users or NDCIUs) including NDCIUs with zero-discharge categorical limits, that have a potential to discharge, shall be issued no-discharge control mechanisms.

Potential to Discharge means: hard plumbing connected to the POTWs sanitary sewer in the proximity of the industry's processing area and/or in areas where hazardous chemicals or hazardous wastes are stored. This includes plumbing with shut-off valves and plumbing that has been plugged with temporary or removable plugs. Plumbing that is not connected to sanitary sewer, or has been permanently disconnected or cemented shut would not constitute a potential to discharge and issuance of a no-discharge control mechanism would not be required. Examples that constitute potential to discharge include floor drains, clean-up sinks and industrial process discharge lines connected to the sewer.
[Amd. Sec. 18, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.409 Modification of Permits

An Industrial Waste Discharge Permit may be modified for good and valid cause at the written request of the permittee or at the discretion of the WRD Manager. Copies of all permit modifications shall be sent to the Manager. Examples of when a permit may be modified may be including, but not limited to the following reasons:

(a) To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State, or local Pretreatment Standards or Requirements;

(b) To address significant alterations or additions to the User’s operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of the individual wastewater discharge permit issuance;

(c) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;

(d) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the City’s POTW, City personnel, or the receiving waters;

(e) Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual wastewater discharge permit;

(f) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;

(g) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical Pretreatment Standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;

(h) To correct typographical or other errors in the individual wastewater discharge permit; or

(i) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator where requested in accordance with Section 11.410.

1. Permittee modification requests shall be submitted to the WRD Manager and shall contain a detailed description of all proposed changes in the discharge. The WRD Manager may request any additional information needed to adequately prepare the modification or assess its impact. The WRD Manager may deny a request for modification if the change will result in violations of Federal, State, or local laws or regulations; will overload or cause damage to any portion of the sewer system; or will create an imminent or potential hazard to personnel.

2. If a permit modification is made at the direction of the WRD Manager, the Permittee shall be notified in writing of the proposed modification and may have at least thirty (30) days to make appropriate changes. The WRD Manager may require the industrial user to immediately comply with the revised permit.

3. The adjustment of any existing local limit in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance shall necessitate a permit modification for permits containing a previously established local limit. A change in discharge standards may require local limit adjustment.

4. A modification to the Permittee's discharge permit must be issued before any significant increase is made in the volume or level of pollutants in an existing permitted discharge to the sanitary sewer system.

5. Changes in the discharge involving the introduction of wastestream or streams not previously included in the Industrial Waste Discharge Permit application or involving the addition of new pollutants shall be considered a new discharge, requiring submission of a new permit application.
[Amd. Sec. 19, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.410 Permit Transfer

Industrial Waste Discharge Permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation.  A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the WRD Manager and provision of a copy of the existing permit to the new owner/user.  If no changes are made to the operation by the new owner, the approval shall be completed in at least thirty (30) days.  Certification by the new owner or new user that no significant changes in operation have occurred may be required.  If modifications are made in the operation, or if a new use of the premises is planned by the new user, a permit modification or issuance of a new permit shall be required.
[Amd. Sec. 20, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 

 


11.411 Trucked and Hauled Pollutant Permits

The WRD Manager may issue or deny a permit to authorize discharge of trucked and hauled pollutants subject to the terms and conditions provided by this Ordinance.
[Amd. Sec. 21, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 

 

 


11.412 Wastewater Permit Revocation

Wastewater permits may be revoked for any of the following reasons:

1. Failure to notify the Regional Water Reclamation Facility of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;

2. Falsifying self-monitoring reports;

3. Tampering with monitoring equipment;

4. Refusing to allow the Regional Water Reclamation Facility timely access to the facility premises and records;

5. Failure to meet effluent limitations;

6. Failure to pay fines;

7. Failure to pay sewer charges;

8. Failure to meet compliance schedules;

9. Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility;

10. Failure to timely correct a violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of a wastewater discharge permit or this ordinance.

11. Permits may be voided upon nonuse, cessation of operations, or transfer of business ownership. All are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater permit.


11 Pretreatment, Flow Measurement and Sampling Facilities (11.501 to 11.506)

11.501 General

Any requirement contained in this section may be incorporated as part of an Industrial Waste Discharge Permit and made a condition of issuance of such permit; may be required as part of a permit modification; or made a condition of the acceptance of the waste from a facility. Progress reports and compliance schedules shall be provided in accordance with the requirements established in this Ordinance.


11.502 Pretreatment Facilities

1.  If treatment facilities, operation changes, or process modifications at an industrial discharger's facility are needed to comply with any requirements of this Ordinance or are necessary to meet any applicable State or Federal requirements, the Manager/WRD Manager may require that such facilities be constructed or modifications or changes be made within a specified time period, taking into consideration construction time, impact of the untreated waste on the sewer system, economic impact on the facility, impact of the waste on the marketability of the treatment plant sludge or reclaimed wastewater, and any other appropriate factor.

2.  Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the WRD Manager shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense.  Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities, operating procedures, and/or process modifications, shall be submitted to and acceptable to the WRD Manager before construction of the facility.  The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge under the provisions of the Ordinance.  Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the WRD Manager prior to the user's initiation of the changes.

[Amd. Sec. 22, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 

 


11.503 Flow Measurement and Sampling Facilities

If so directed by the WRD Manager or Manager, flow measurement, sampling devices, access facilities, and related equipment shall be installed by the user discharging the waste, at the user's expense, and shall be maintained by the user so as to be in safe condition, in proper operating condition at all times, and readily accessible to the requesting authority during periods of industrial activity of any type.  All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated periodically to ensure their accuracy.
The flow measurement and sampling station shall be located and constructed in a manner acceptable to the requesting authority.  Complete plans on all phases of the proposed installation including all equipment proposed for use, shall be submitted to the WRD Manager for approval prior to construction.
[Amd. Sec. 23, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 

 


11.504 Sampling Manhole

The Manager/WRD Manager may require a discharger to install and maintain at the discharger's expense a suitable manhole in the discharger's branch sewer to allow observation, sampling and measurement of all industrial wastes being discharged into the sewer system.  It shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the WRD Manager and shall be designed so that flow measuring and sampling equipment may be conveniently installed.  Access to the manhole shall be available for monitoring purposes at all times when wastewater is being produced and/or discharged.
[Amd. Sec. 24, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.505 Grease Interceptors and Other Pretreatment

Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided, operated, and maintained when, in the opinion of the WRD Manager or Manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful substances; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users.  All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the requesting authority and shall be located as to be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection.  Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly as needed by the owner at his expense.  All grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be installed in conformance with the most recent revision of the Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code, the rules adopted thereunder, and any statute or rule of general applicability administered by the State of Oregon Building Codes Division.
[Amd. Sec. 25, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.506 Combustible Gas Detection Meter

Industrial users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.

11 Monitoring, Inspection and Reporting (11.601 to 11.613)

11.601 General

The WRD Manager has the authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, and monitoring activities necessary to determine compliance or noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
[Amd. Sec. 26, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.602 Waste Sampling and Monitoring

1. Wastes discharged into the public sewers shall be subject to periodic inspection and a determination of character and concentration. For wastes discharged by users with an effective Industrial Waste Discharge Permit, the determinations shall be made at least annually with the option for more frequent intervals if any pollutant potentially exceeds any limit established by this Ordinance. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of pollutants upon the treatment plant and to determine the existence of hazardous conditions defined elsewhere in this Ordinance.

Samples of wastewater being discharged into the sewer system shall be representative of the discharge and shall be taken after treatment. The sampling method shall be one approved by the WRD Manager and done in accordance with good engineering practice.

Except as indicated below, wastewater samples collected for the purposes of determining industrial user compliance with pretreatment standards and requirements must be obtained using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the WRD Manager may authorize the use of time proportional sampling.

(a) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, toxicity, sulfides, and volatile organic chemicals must be obtained using grab collection techniques.

(b) Samples that are taken by the authority of the WRD Manager for the purposes of determining compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance shall be split with the WRD Manager and the industrial user (or a duplicate sample provided in the instance of fats, oils, and greases) if requested before or at the time of sampling.

2. The Manager/WRD Manager may require waste sampling and monitoring by the user at the user's expense if information and/or data is needed to determine compliance with Pretreatment Standards, determine the treatability of the waste, establish a sewer rate charge, or determine any other factor which is related to the operation and maintenance of the sewer system. The locations, frequencies, and types of sampling and monitoring shall be determined by the WRD Manager.

[Amd. Sec. 27, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]

 


11.603 Inspection and Entry Requirements

The WRD Manager shall have the right to enter the premises of any User to determine whether the User is complying with all requirements of this ordinance and any individual wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the WRD Manager ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.

A. Where a User has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the User shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the WRD Manager shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.

B. The WRD Manager shall have the right to set up on the User’s property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the User’s operations.

C. The WRD Manager may require the User to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the User at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated annually to ensure their accuracy.

D. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the User at the written or verbal request of the WRD Manager and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the User.

E. Unreasonable delays in allowing the WRD Manager access to the User’s premises shall be a violation of this ordinance.

[Amd. Sec. 28, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 2, 2015]

 


11.604 Analytical Requirements

All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a permit application or compliance report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical Pretreatment Standard.  If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the WRD Manager or other parties approved by DEQ and the RWRF.
Industrial user process control data analyses may be performed by methods that are not EPA approved methods, but shall be by methods approved by the WRD Manager.  Analyses performed by non-EPA approved methods may be used for routine process evaluations, but may not be used for compliance verification or reporting.
[Amd. Sec. 29, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.605 Reporting Requirements

Any user may be required to report the status of their wastewater discharge concerning compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance. The frequency of the reports shall be determined by the WRD Manager. If a user subject to reporting requirements monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the WRD Manager, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the required report.

1. Baseline Monitoring Reports.

Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a) (4), whichever is later, existing significant industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the municipal system shall be required to submit to the RWRF a report that contains the information listed in paragraph a), below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, including existing users that have changed their operation or processes so as to become new sources, shall be required to submit to the RWRF a report that contains the information listed in paragraph a). A new source shall also be required to report the method it intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged.

(a) The information required by this section includes:

(i) Identifying Information. The user shall submit the name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owners, contact information, description of activities, facilities, and plant production processes on the premises;

(ii) Permits. The user shall submit a list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility;

(iii) Description of Operation.

(a) The user shall submit a brief description of the nature, average rate of production (including each product produced by type, amount, processes, and rate of production), and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such industrial user. This description should include a schematic process diagram that indicates points of discharge to the system from the regulated processes,;

(b) Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;

(c) Number and type of employees, hours of operation and proposed or actual hours of operation;

(d) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);

(e) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;

(iv) Flow Measurement. The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the system from regulated process streams and other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e), as well as time and duration of discharges;

(v) Measurement of Pollutants.

The user shall indicate the location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit. The user shall also;

(a) The industrial user shall identify the categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process;

(b) In addition, the industrial user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (and/or mass, where required) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long term average concentrations (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be performed in accordance with procedures set out in 40 CFR 136. Where the Standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the User shall submit documentation as required by the WRD Manager or the applicable Standards to determine compliance with the Standard;

(c) A minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. All other pollutants will be measured by composite samples obtained through flow proportional sampling technique. Samples may be obtained through time proportional sampling techniques or through four (4) grab samples if the user proves to the satisfaction of the City that such samples will be representative of the discharge.

(vi) Special Certification. A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and if not, whether additional operations and maintenance (O & M) and/or additional pretreatment is required in order to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements;

(vii) Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O & M. The completion date in this schedule will not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in this Ordinance;

(viii) Signatory Requirement. All baseline-monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance.

2. Compliance Deadline Reports.

Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the municipal wastewater system, any industrial user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirement shall submit to the RWRF a report containing the information described in Section 11.406 and 11.605(1)(a)(v). For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 11.608 of this Ordinance.

3. Periodic Compliance Reports.

(A) All Significant Industrial Users must, at a frequency determined by the WRD Manager submit no less than twice per year (June and December, or on dates specified) reports indicating the nature, concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by Pretreatment Standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the Pretreatment Standard requires compliance with a Best Management Practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the User must submit documentation required by the WRD Manager or the Pretreatment Standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the User.

(B) The City may authorize an Industrial User subject to a categorical Pretreatment Standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a categorical Pretreatment Standard if the Industrial User has demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in the Discharge, or is present only at background levels from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the Industrial User. This authorization is subject to the following conditions:

(1) The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined to be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the facility provided that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an applicable categorical Standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater.

(2) The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the effective period of the individual wastewater discharge permit, but in no case longer than 5 years. The User must submit a new request for the waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent individual wastewater discharge permit. See Section 11.406.

(3) In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the Industrial User must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility’s process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is representative of all wastewater from all processes.

(4) The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed in accordance with Section 11.104(4), and include the certification statement in 11.608

(5) Non-detectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from 40 CFR Part 136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the analysis.

(6) Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the WRD Manager must be included as a condition in the User’s permit. The reasons supporting the waiver and any information submitted by the User in its request for the waiver must be maintained by the WRD Manager for 3 years after expiration of the waiver.

(7) Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the User’s permit by the WRD Manager, the Industrial User must certify on each report with the statement in Section 11.608, that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its wastestream due to activities of the Industrial User.

(8) In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is expected to be present because of changes that occur in the User’s operations, the User must immediately: Comply with the monitoring requirements of Section 11.605(3), or other more frequent monitoring requirements imposed by the WRD Manager, and notify the WRD Manager.

(9) This provision does not supersede certification processes and requirements established in categorical Pretreatment Standards, except as otherwise specified in the categorical Pretreatment Standard.

(C) All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 11.608 of this ordinance.

(D) All wastewater samples must be representative of the User’s discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a User to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the User to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.

(E) If a User subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more frequently than required by the WRD Manager, using the procedures prescribed in Section 11.602 and Section 11.604 of this ordinance, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.

4. Compliance Schedules and Progress Reports.

If additional pretreatment, monitoring equipment, process control, or equipment modification will be required to meet the Pretreatment Standards established under this Ordinance the Manager/WRD Manager may require the user to provide Progress Reports and Compliance Schedules. The compliance schedule shall be subject to WRD Manager approval or may be established by the WRD Superintendent at his discretion. The schedule shall define the shortest schedule to provide the required action. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable Categorical Pretreatment Standard.

The following conditions shall apply to this schedule:

(a) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment requirements. Such events include hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, start up and full operation). Interim dates for major events shall not be more than ninety (90) days apart.

(b) not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a Progress Report to the WRD Manager including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than ninety (90) days elapse between such Progress Reports to the WRD Manager.

[Amd. Sec. 30, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]

 


11.606 Notification of Changed Conditions

Each industrial user is required to notify the WRD Manager of any planned significant changes to the industrial user's operations or pretreatment systems that might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater; this includes any change in spill or slug discharge potential.

1.  The WRD Manager may require the industrial user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition.

2. The WRD Manager may modify an existing wastewater permit to accommodate the change.

3. No industrial user shall implement the planned changed condition(s) until the WRD Manager has responded to the industrial user's notice.

4.  For purposes of this requirement, flow increases of fifteen percent (15%) or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutant shall be deemed significant.

[Amd. Sec. 31, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 

 


11.607 Records Retention and Confidentiality

Industrial users shall retain and make available for inspection and copying, all records and information required to be retained under 40 CFR 403.12(o), this includes information associated with Best Management Practices and any waivers data or information. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years, or at least three years after a waiver has expired.

1. Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, and monitoring programs, and from inspection and sampling activities conducted by the WRD Manager, shall be available to the public without restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the WRD Manager that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable State laws.

(a) Wastewater pollutants, characteristics, and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction.

(b) When requested and demonstrated by the industrial user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to this Ordinance, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.

2. All users subject to this Ordinance shall retain and preserve for no less than three (3) years, all records of information resulting from any monitoring activities (including records associated with Best Management Practices) required by this Ordinance. Such records shall include for all samples; the date, sample location, method, and time of sampling and the names of the person or persons taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques/methods use; and results of such analyses.

3. All records, which pertain to matters that are the subject of any enforcement or litigation activities pursuant hereto, shall be retained and preserved by the user until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals, have expired.

[Amd. Sec. 32, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 

 


11.608 Application Signatories and Certification

Certification of Permit Applications, User Reports and Initial Monitoring Waiver—The following certification statement is required to be signed and submitted by Users submitting permit applications in accordance with Section 11.406; Users submitting baseline monitoring reports under Section 11.605(1); Users submitting reports on compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standard deadlines under Section 11.605(2); Users submitting periodic compliance reports required by Section 11.605(3)(A), and Users submitting an initial request to forego sampling of a pollutant on the basis of Section 11.605(3)(B). The following certification statement must be signed by an Authorized Representative:

"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations."

Certification of Pollutants Not Present

Users that have an approved monitoring waiver based on Section 11.605(3)(B) must certify on each report with the following statement that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its wastestream due to activities of the User.

Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the Pretreatment Standard for 40 CFR _______ [specify applicable National Pretreatment Standard part(s)], I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of ______ [list pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters due to the activities at the facility since filing of the last periodic report under Section 11.605(3).


11.609 Provision on Fraud and False Statements

Any reports required under the authority of this Ordinance and any other documents required to be submitted to the WRD Manager or maintained by the industrial user shall be subject to enforcement provision of this Ordinance, and Municipal and State law relating to fraud and false statements.  In addition, the industrial user shall be subject to:

(a)  The provisions of 18 U.S.C. Section 1001 relating to fraud and false statements;

(b)  The provisions of Section 309(c)4 of the Clean Water Act, as amended governing false statements representation or certification; and

(c)  The provision of Section 309(c)(6) regarding responsible corporate officers.

[Amd. Sec. 33, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.610 Hazardous Waste Notification

All industrial users shall notify the WRD Manager, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State Hazardous Waste Authorities in writing of any discharge into the sewer system of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261.  Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA Hazardous Waste Number and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other).
[Amd. Sec. 34, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.611 Violation Notification

If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the WRD Manager within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation.  The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation.  If sampling performed by the City indicates a violation, the City may require the User to perform the repeat sampling and continue to sample until the User is in compliance.  The analytical results must be submitted to the WRD Manager within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation.
[Amd. Sec. 35, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.612 Potential Problem Notification

All industrial users shall notify the WRD Manager immediately of all discharges that could cause problems to the wastewater treatment system including any slug loadings.
[Amd. Sec. 36, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.613 Seasonal Operation Notification

1.  Any user discharging more than 10,000 gallons per day shall notify the WRD Manager and the Jurisdictional Participant at least seven (7) days prior to commencing discharge to the sewer system if the user has not been discharging wastewater at industrial rates for a thirty (30) day period prior to restarting.  Notification seven (7) days prior to the first discharge allows the treatment plant to prepare the biological system for increased loading.  Information supplied should include, approximate hours of operation, number of shifts, and estimated production rates in gallons per day and strength of waste for the first week of operation.

2.  Any user discharging more than 10,000 gallons per day in a seasonal operation shall notify the WRD Manager and the Jurisdictional Participant at least seven (7) days in advance of a shut down anticipated to be thirty (30) days or greater in duration.

[Amd. Sec. 37, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]

11 Violations (11.701 to 11.724)

11.701 Violations

A violation shall be considered to have occurred when any requirement of this Ordinance has not been met; when a written request of the Manager/WRD Manager, made under the authority of this Ordinance, is not met within the specified time; when a condition of a permit or contract issued under the authority of this Ordinance is not met within the specified time; when effluent limitations are exceeded, regardless of intent or accident; or when false information has been provided by the discharger.
 
The remedies provided for in this ordinance are not exclusive.  The Manager/WRD Manager may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant User.  Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the City’s enforcement response plan.  However, the Manager/WRD Manager may take other action against any User when the circumstances warrant.  Further, the Manager/WRD Manager is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant User.
[Amd. Sec. 38, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.702 Notice of Violation

Upon determination by the WRD Manager that a violation has occurred or is occurring, the Manager/WRD Manager may issue a Notice of Violation to the discharger which outlines the violation and the potential liability as well as any proposed enforcement actions.  The Notice may further require correction of the violation within a specified period of time, and may require written confirmation of the correction and a description of the efforts made to correct the violation.  The notice shall be personally delivered to the user's premises or be sent by certified mail.  In an emergency, notice may be given orally, but shall be confirmed in writing at the earliest practical time.  Notice by mail is presumed to be received by the addressee on the third day after mailing.
[Amd. Sec. 39, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 

11.703 Failure to Correct Violation

Whenever an industrial user continues to violate the provisions of the Ordinance, Permits, or Orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the Manager/WRD Manager shall initiate monetary penalties, grant extensions for correction of the violation, halt or prevent the discharge of the pollutants, or terminate the discharge. Such other action as may be appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief may also be sought by the Manager/WRD Manager including, but not limited to, civil or criminal actions.

1. In the event a user shall fail to correct any violation within the time specified by the Manager/WRD Manager, the Manager/WRD Manager may initiate monetary penalties. The penalties may be initiated with or without the initiation of judicial proceedings. When, in the opinion of the Manager/WRD Manager, it is necessary to initiate monetary penalties, the following shall apply:

(a) For the first, second, third, and fourth calendar months a violation continues beyond the time limit provided for correction thereof, the user shall be assessed the graduated penalties listed below. Any violation occurrence within the calendar month is considered a continuing violation.

(i) First calendar month beyond the time limit for correction, a total of the following applicable amounts:

Volume - $1.65 per 1,000 gallons in excess of the established permit limitations,

plus

BOD and/or SS - $0.17 per pound of BOD and/or suspended solids in excess of the established permit limitation,

plus

pH - $15.00 per occurrence per increment less than a pH of 5.5 or greater than a pH of 10.0 for any excursion that exceeds ten (10) minute duration in any sixty (60) minute period,

plus

Late Reports - $40.00,

plus

Pollutants - standard penalty, $500.00 per pollutant per day that exceeds the daily maximum permit discharge limitation.

(ii) Second calendar month beyond the time limit for correction, a total of the following applicable amounts:

Volume - $3.30 per 1,000 gallons in excess of the established permit limitations,

plus

BOD and/or SS - $0.33 per pound of BOD and/or suspended solids in excess of the established permit limitation,

plus

pH - $30.00 per occurrence per increment less than a pH of 5.5 or greater than a pH of 10.0 for any excursion that exceeds ten (10) minute duration in any sixty (60) minute period,

plus

Late Reports - $80.00,

plus

Pollutants - standard penalty, $1,000.00 per pollutant per day that exceeds the daily maximum permit discharge limitation.

(iii) Third calendar month beyond the time limit for correction, a total of the following applicable amounts:

Volume -$6.60 per 1,000 gallons in excess of the established permit limitations,

plus

BOD and/or SS - $0.68 per pound of BOD and/or suspended solids in excess of the established permit limitation,

plus

pH -$60.00 per occurrence per increment less than a pH of 5.5 or greater than a pH of 10.0 for any excursion that exceeds ten (10) minute duration in any sixty (60) minute period,

plus

Late Reports - $160.00,

plus

Pollutants - Standard penalty, $2,000.00 per pollutant per day that exceeds the daily maximum permit discharge limitation.

(iv) Fourth calendar month beyond the time limit for correction, $4,000 per day for any violation condition.

(b) Penalties for pH shall be assessed in accordance with the following increments:

First increment - 4.5 to 5.5 or 11.0 to 10.0

Second increment - 3.5 to 4.5 or 12.0 to 11.0

Third increment - Less than 3.5 or Greater than 12.0

(c) For situations where permit limitations have not been established for BOD or SS, the penalty may be assessed per pound of BOD and/or Suspended Solids in excess of sixty (60) pounds in any one day.

(d) For situations where permit limitations have not been established for pollutants, the penalty may be assessed for values that exceed requirements established in this Ordinance.

(e) For situations where pollutant violations are excessive, the following shall apply:

(i) Penalties for pollutants may be assessed at two (2) times the standard penalty per pollutant per day that exceeded the daily maximum permit discharge limitation by two (2) times the daily maximum value but less than three (3) times the daily maximum value.

(ii) Penalties for pollutants may be assessed at three (3) times the standard penalty per pollutant per day that exceeded the daily maximum permit discharge limitation by three (3) times or more the daily maximum limitation value.

(f) The continuation of a violation beyond the time limit provided for correction thereof, shall be deemed a separate offense for each day in which any such violation shall occur.

(g) Fines and penalties resulting from failure to correct violations within the time specified by the Manager/WRD Manager are due and payable by the user within fourteen (14) days after receipt of billing. Fines collected shall go into the Trust Fund for Operation and Maintenance of the Treatment Plant.

2. If in the opinion of the WRD Manager conditions warrant and the violation situations are not determined to be emergencies, an extension may be granted to allow additional time to correct the violation. Violation extensions are granted at the discretion of the WRD Manager and may be revoked if any of the violation extension conditions are not met. The following requirements shall be met for any violation extension:

(a) Immediate reduction of pollutant parameters to reasonable levels (levels determined by the WRD Manager).

(b) No later than thirty (30) days after notification of extension, the user shall furnish a schedule developed by a Qualified Professional Engineer of Process Control and/or Equipment Modifications that will achieve consistent compliance with established requirements. Provide a thorough evaluation performed by a qualified Professional Engineer showing wastewater treatment capabilities relative to current and anticipated future loads, include schematic flow diagrams for each major wastewater generating activity, and a complete description of corrective measures planned to achieve consistent compliance with established requirements. The schedule and evaluation shall be submitted to the WRD Manager for review and approval prior to implementation. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge under the provisions of the Ordinance.

(c) No later than forty-five (45) days after notification of extension, the user shall begin implementation of approved Engineer's recommendations.

(d) No later than ninety (90) days after notification of extension, the user shall complete all corrective measures.

3. With or without the initiation of judicial proceedings, the Manager/WRD Manager, may halt or prevent any discharge of pollutants into the sewer system and may physically terminate a discharge into the sewer system when:

(a) The user has failed to correct any violation within the time specified by the WRD Manager in the Notice of Violation or the Notification of Extension;

(b) The user has failed to pay costs or penalties within the time specified which he has been required to pay in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance.

(c) A violation creates an emergency situation; An emergency situation is defined as a situation in which, in the opinion of the WRD Manager, action must be taken as rapidly as possible in order to prevent or reduce a present or potential danger or hazard to the environment, the sewer system or any person or property. Includes any situation that reasonably appears to present an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of persons.

4. A Notice of Termination shall be provided to the Discharger prior to physically terminating the discharge.

(a) In situations that are determined by the WRD Manager not to be emergencies, the Notice of Termination shall be in writing and shall contain the reasons for the termination, the effective date, and notice of the opportunity for an informal hearing before the WRD Manager at least ten (10) days before the effective termination date. The notice shall be personally delivered or sent by certified mail to the business address of the user at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective termination date.

(b) In situations that are determined by the WRD Manager to be emergencies, the initial Notice of Termination may be oral or written and the termination of the discharge may be immediate.

(i) If oral notice is given, it shall be given to the Authorized Representative of the user personally or by telephone and shall be followed within two (2) working days by written notice that is mailed or delivered to the business address of the user. If the Authorized Representative cannot be reached, oral notice may be given to a person who is apparently in charge of the user's office or facility. The effective date of the termination in emergencies may be immediately after oral or written notice has been given as required in this paragraph.

(ii) The Emergency Notice of Termination shall inform the user of the opportunity for an informal hearing before the WRD Manager at the earliest practical date.

[Amd. Sec. 40, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]

 


11.704 Public Participation Requirement

A list of industrial users, which were determined by the WRD Manager to be in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment requirements, shall be published at least annually in the largest daily newspaper published in the service area of the treatment plant.

A significant industrial user will have been in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria (any Industrial User may be determined to be in Significant Non-Compliance (SNC) if it has shown to have violated paragraphs C, D or H):

(A) Chronic violations of wastewater Discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent (66%) or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a 6-month (6) period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l);

(B) Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent (33%) or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a 6-month (6) period equal or exceed the product of the numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);

(C) Any other violation of a Pretreatment Standard or Requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with other Discharges, Interference or Pass Through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);

(D) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under paragraph 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent such a discharge;

(E) Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;

(F) Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, report on compliance with categorical Pretreatment Standards, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;

(G) Failure to accurately report noncompliance;

(H) Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of Best Management Practices, which the POTW determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local Pretreatment program.

[Amd. Sec. 41, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]


11.705 Consent Orders

The WRD Manager may enter into Consent Orders, assurance of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the industrial user responsible for the noncompliance.  Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the industrial user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order.  Consent Orders shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders and shall be judicially enforceable.
[Amd. Sec. 42, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.706 Show Cause Hearing

The WRD Manager may order any industrial user that causes or contributes to violations(s) of this Ordinance, wastewater permits, or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement to appear before the WRD Manager and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken.  Notice shall be served on the industrial user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken.  The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.  Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the industrial user.  Whether or not the industrial user appears as notified, immediate enforcement action may be pursued following the hearing date.
[Amd. Sec. 43, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.707 Compliance Orders

When the WRD Manager finds that an industrial user has violated or continues to violate the Ordinance, permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the WRD Manager may issue an order to the industrial user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specific time period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated.  Compliance orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer.  Furthermore, the WRD Manager may continue to require such additional self-monitoring after consistent compliance has been achieved.
[Amd. Sec. 44, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.708 Injunctive Relief

Whenever an industrial user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this Ordinance, Permits or Orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirements, the Manager/WRD Manager, may petition a court of competent jurisdiction for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as may be appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this Ordinance on activities of the industrial user.  Such other action as may be appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief may also be sought by the Manager/WRD Manager.  The Court shall grant an injunction without requiring a showing of a lack of an adequate remedy at law.
[Amd. Sec. 45, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.709 Civil Penalties

Any industrial user which has violated or continues to violate this Ordinance, any order or permit hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement shall be liable to the Manager/WRD Manager for a maximum civil penalty of $3,000 per violation per day.  In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each business day during the period of this violation.

1.  The Manager/WRD Manager may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with the enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred.

2.  In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the industrial user's violation, corrective actions by the industrial user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factors as justice requires.

3.  Where appropriate, the Manager/WRD Manager may accept mitigation projects in lieu of the payment of civil penalties where the project provides a valuable service and the industrial user's expense in undertaking the project is at least one hundred and fifty percent (150%) of the civil penalty.


[Amd. Sec. 46, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 

 


11.710 Cease and Desist Orders

When the WRD Manager finds that an industrial user has violated or continued to violate this Ordinance, permits or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the WRD Manager may issue an order to the industrial user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:

(a)  Immediately comply with all requirements.

(b) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.

[Amd. Sec. 47, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.711 Administrative Fines

Notwithstanding any other section of this Ordinance, any user, which is found to have violated any
provision of this Ordinance, permits and orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, may be fined in an amount not to exceed $3,000.  Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis.  In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each business day during the period of violation.

1.  Assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled sewer service charge and the WRD Manager may use such other collection remedies as may be available for other service charges and fees.

2.  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties may, after thirty (30) days, be assessed an additional penalty of twenty percent (20%) of the unpaid balance and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of seven percent (7%) per month.  Furthermore, these unpaid charges, fines and penalties, together with interest there from shall constitute a lien against the individual user's property.

3.  Industrial users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the WRD Manager to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within ten (10) days of being notified of the fine.  Where the WRD Manager believes a request has merit, he shall convene a hearing on the matter within fifteen (15) days of receiving the request from the industrial user.  In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment together with any interest accruing thereto shall be returned to the industrial user.  The RWRF may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders to the fine.

[Amd. Sec. 48, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]


11.712 Criminal Prosecution

1. Any industrial user who willfully or negligently violates any provisions of this Ordinance, any Orders or Permits issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one (1) year or both.

2. Any industrial user who knowingly makes any false statement, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other documentation filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this Ordinance, or Wastewater Permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this Ordinance shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one (1) year or both.


11.713 Restoration of Service

Sewer service shall not be restored until all penalties and charges, including the expense of removal, closing and restoration shall have been paid or mutually agreed upon terms concluded and the cause for discontinuance of service corrected.


11.714 Search Warrants

If the WRD Manager has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and if the WRD Manager has probable cause to believe that there may be a violation to this Ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the RWRF designed to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then upon application by the City Attorney, an appropriate Municipal Court Judge may issue a search and/or seizure warrant describing therein the specific location subject to the warrant.  The warrant shall specify what, if anything may be searched and/or seized on the property described.  Such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the WRD Manager in the company of a uniformed police officer. 
[Amd. Sec. 49, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.715 Emergency Suspensions

The WRD Manager may suspend the wastewater permit of an industrial user whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, interferes with the operation of the municipal wastewater system, or which may present an endangerment to the environment.

1.  Any industrial user notified of a suspension of its wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution.  In the event of an industrial user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the WRD Manager may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the system, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals.  The WRD Manager may allow the industrial user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the RWRF that the period of endangerment has passed, unless termination proceedings are initiated against the user.

2.  An industrial user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrences to the WRD Manager prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing.

[Amd. Sec. 50, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.716 Termination of Permit

In accordance with the wastewater revocation section of this ordinance and in addition to other provisions of this Ordinance, any industrial user, which violates conditions of this Ordinance, wastewater permits, or orders issued hereunder, is subject to permit termination.

Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the proposed termination of their wastewater permit and may be offered an opportunity to show cause why the proposed action should not be taken.


11.717 Cost Recovery

1.  The Manager/WRD Manager may recover all verifiable costs resulting from a discharge not in compliance with this Ordinance, including but not limited to the repairing of damages to the sewer system, additional treatment costs, additional maintenance costs, and the paying of fines and penalties assessed the treatment plant by regulatory agencies.  The costs may be in addition to any fines and penalties assessed the user in other sections.

2.  Notice of intent to recover shall be by letter to the discharger; sent by certified mail, which states the specific violation, the penalties and damages sustained by the sewer system, the costs of those damages and penalties, and the costs determined as attributable to the discharge and, therefore, billed to the user.

3.  The recovery costs are due and payable by the user within thirty (30) days after the notice is sent.

[Amd. Sec. 51, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.718 Appeals

A final decision by the WRD Manager to adopt a rule establishing or modifying Technically Based Local Limits may be appealed by any Jurisdictional Participant or any industrial user. A final decision by the WRD Manager concerning the issuance, denial or modification of an industrial waste discharge permit, concerning an alleged violation of this Ordinance or penalty therefore, or concerning a service charge for industrial waste may be appealed by the waste discharger affected by such action.  Such decisions may be appealed to the Regional Committee by mailing a written notice of appeal to the WRD Manager not later than twenty-one (21) days after the effective date of the decision or twenty-one (21) days after notice was mailed or otherwise given to the person, whichever is later.  All appeals shall be first considered by the Technical Advisory Group, which shall make a recommendation to the Regional Committee.  The matter shall be decided by the Regional Committee within sixty (60) days after receipt of the notice of appeal.  The decision of the Regional Committee on the appeal shall be final and binding.
[Amd. Sec. 52, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.719 Conflict

All other Ordinances and parts of other Ordinances inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict.


11.720 Severability

If any provision of this Ordinance is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect.


11.721 Water Supply Severance

Whenever an industrial user has violated or continue to violate the provisions of this Ordinance, orders, or permits issued hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed and service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.

 


11.722 Affirmative Defense

1. An industrial user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general and specific prohibitions of this Ordinance if it can prove that it did not know or have reason to know that its discharge would cause pass through or interference and that either:

(a) a local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to and during the pass through or interference, or;

(b) no local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the treatment plant was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.

2. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility shall be an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against the industrial user if the user can demonstrate that such a bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage. In order to be eligible for the affirmative defense, the industrial user must demonstrate that there was no feasible alternative to the bypass and submit notice of the bypass as required by 40 CFR 403.17.

The establishment of an affirmative defense under the provisions of this section does not relieve the user of liability for damages or extraordinary costs incurred by the Wastewater Treatment System as a result of the discharge.

 


11.723 Operating Upsets

Any user which experiences an upset in operation which places the user in a temporary state of noncompliance with this Ordinance or an Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance shall inform the WRD Manager of the upset immediately. The user shall also submit, within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset, a description of the discharge and its causes, the period of noncompliance (if not corrected, the time noncompliance is anticipated to end), and the steps being taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.

If the information is given orally, the user must also submit a written report containing such information within five (5) days.

An upset shall be an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against a user for violating a pretreatment standard and requirement if the following conditions are met:

1. The user can identify the cause of the upset.

2. The facility was operating in a prudent and workmanlike manner at the time of the upset and complied with applicable O & M procedures.

3. The upset was reported in accordance with the requirement of this section.

Noncompliance caused by operational error, improperly designed pretreatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation does not constitute an upset.

The establishment of an affirmative defense under the provisions of this section does not relieve the user of liability for damages or extraordinary costs incurred by the Wastewater Treatment System because of the discharge.
[Amd. Sec. 53, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.724 Bypass

A. For the purposes of this Section,

(1) Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a User’s treatment facility.

(2) Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.

B. A User may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause Pretreatment Standards or Requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs (C) and (D) of this Section.

C. Bypass Notifications

(1) If a User knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the WRD Manager, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible.

(2) A User shall submit oral notice to the WRD Manager of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable Pretreatment Standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the User becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The WRD Manager may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours.

D. Bypass

(1) Bypass is prohibited, and the WRD Manager may take an enforcement action against a User for a bypass, unless

(a) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage;

(b) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and

(c) The User submitted notices as required under paragraph (C) of this section.

(2) The WRD Manager may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the WRD Manager determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph (D)(1) of this Section.

[Amd. Sec. 54, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]

11 Industrial Wastewater Sewer Service Charges (11.801 to 11.804)

11.801 Wastewater Strength Determination

Each person discharging industrial wastes into the sanitary sewer system may, at his option, or shall, when directed by the Manager/WRD Manager, construct and maintain an approved control manhole, together with such flow measurement, flow sampling, and sample storage facilities for all waste entering the public sewer as may be required by the Manager/WRD Manager.  These facilities may be used to obtain flow and wastewater characteristics for use as a basis for an industrial wastewater service charge.  These facilities will be installed and maintained at the discharger's expense.
In lieu of directing the construction of measurement, sampling and sample storage facilities, the Manager/WRD Manager may require each person discharging industrial wastes into the sanitary sewer system to procure and test at the dischargers expense and in a manner approved by the WRD Manager, sufficient composite samples on which to base and compute the person's industrial wastewater service charge.
The WRD Manager may, at his option, procure and test the wastewater discharge to determine the wastewater strength for use as a basis for an industrial wastewater service charge.
At least three (3) consecutive or separate twenty-four (24) hour composite waste samples shall be taken for the initial year.  Additional composite waste samples shall be taken at least once during each subsequent eighteen (18) month period to determine changes in wastewater strengths.
A composite sample is a series of samples mixed together to approximate the average strength of discharge to the sewer.  The sampling period may include any twenty-four (24) consecutive hour period, not necessarily midnight to midnight.  All measurement methods shall be approved by the WRD Manager.
 
The WRD Manager shall determine which industrial waste discharges require sampling to determine waste strengths and shall, in accordance with this section, determine the wastewater strengths.
[Amd. Sec. 55, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]

 
12 Emergency Management Responsibility 

11.802 Wastewater Volume Determination

The wastewater volume shall be determined based on actual flow measurement.  In the event that actual flow measurement is not provided, the industrial wastewater charge shall be computed using the metered water flow to the premises as a basis for water flow. Metered water flow shall include all water delivered to or used on the premises and which is discharged to the sanitary sewer system.  Cooling waters or water not discharged to a sanitary sewer shall be separately metered at the user's expense using deduct meters or any other manner approved by the WRD Manager.  WRD Manager approval shall be obtained prior to allowing deduction of such flow from the total water used on the premises in computing the Industrial Wastewater Sewer Service Charge.  All metered water flows shall be metered at the user's expense.  Allowances may be made in accordance with the requirements of this section.
[Amd. Sec. 56, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 


11.803 Wastewater Rate Determination

Extra Strength Industrial Waste Discharge shall be defined as industrial, commercial, or hospital industrial wastes discharged into the sewer system containing a total of more than sixty (60) pounds of Biochemical Oxygen Demand, or Suspended Solids in any one (1) day and having an average strength in excess of 300 ppm of Biochemical Oxygen Demand, or Suspended Solids.

1. Composite Charge Rate.

For each extra strength industrial waste discharger, the composite charge rate shall normally be employed. The composite charge rate shall be based on the average of composited samples obtained in accordance with the provisions of the wastewater strength determination section of this Ordinance and the wastewater volume as determined in accordance with the provisions of the wastewater volume determination section of this Ordinance.

The rate shall be established per 300 ppm of Biochemical Oxygen Demand, or Suspended Solids, or fraction thereof in excess of the first 300 ppm of Biochemical Oxygen Demand, or Suspended Solids per 1,000 gallons of water. The rate shall be for the higher concentration of either BOD or Suspended Solids, but not assessed for both.

2. Other Charge Rates.

If unusual effluent conditions make the calculations by the composite method impossible or unrealistic, another method of sampling and computation may be implemented by the WRD Manager.

3. Allowances.

(a) Appropriate allowances may be made at the discretion of the WRD Manager, for the volume of domestic sewage at permissible limits of strength. The domestic sewage allowance shall be based on a ratio of one thousand gallons per month for each twenty-seven (27) employees using the sanitary sewer system.

(b) Favorable consideration will be given to users that can discharge compatible wastes during low flow periods of the night and on weekends. Case by case consideration will be given to those users at the discretion of the WRD Manager, to make rate adjustments commensurate with decreased impact on the sanitary sewer system.

(c) In the event wastewater volume determination is computed using metered water flow and deduct meters are not utilized, special allowances may be made at the discretion of the WRD Manager, for water consumption or loss based on verifiable industry standards, (e.g., evaporation, use in product, etc.).

4. Adjustments.

The WRD Manager may check sewage strength as outlined in this section and give notice that extra strength charges be adjusted where applicable at any time in accordance with the most recent analysis.

5. Resampling Request: Fees

Any user may request the WRD Manager to resample wastewater at no charge if eighteen (18) months or more have elapsed since the last such sampling. If less than eighteen (18) months have elapsed since the last sampling, then requests for the WRD Manager to resample wastes shall be submitted in writing and may require payment for a resampling fee. The resampling fee for each day of sampling shall be established by the WRD Manager.

6. Implementation of Charges.

Changes in extra strength charges shall be effective for the month next following the month in which notice of adjustment was given.
[Amd. Sec. 57, Ord. No. 2015-126, Dec. 3, 2015]
 

 


11.804 Pretreatment Charges and Fees

The RWRF may adopt reasonable charges and fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the RWRFs Pretreatment Program, which may include:

1. Fees for permit applications including the cost of processing such applications;

2. Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures, including the cost of reviewing monitoring reports submitted by industrial users;

3. Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction;

4. Fees for filing appeals;

5. Expenses incurred in collecting and analyzing samples of the industrial user's discharge.

6. Other fees and expenses as the RWRF may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this Ordinance and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the RWRF.


12 Emergency Management Responsibility

12.010 Title

This chapter may be cited as the Medford Emergency Management Code.

12.020 Purpose

The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the vulnerability of the city and its residents to loss of life, injury to persons or property, human suffering and financial loss resulting from emergencies, and to provide for recovery and relief assistance for the victims of emergencies.

12.030 Definitions

The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended.

(1) “Emergency” includes any human caused or natural event or circumstances causing or threatening loss of life, injury to person or property, human suffering or financial loss, and includes, but is not limited to, fire, explosion, flood, severe weather, earthquake, spills or releases of oil or hazardous material, contamination, disease, civil disturbance, terrorism, riot, or the interruption of essential public services.

(2) “Emergency Management Plan” means that plan approved by the city manager pursuant to Section 12.040 of this code.

(3) “City manager” means the city manager or manager's designee.

12.040 City Manager Responsibility

The city manager or manager’s designee is responsible for preparation and implementation of the Emergency Management Plan. The Emergency Management Plan shall provide policies and procedures for city response to and management of emergency situations and for the use of the powers delegated to the city manager by this chapter. The plan shall, at a minimum, provide for the following:

(1) Emergency command and coordination of the appropriate response actions;

(2) Communication systems; and

(3) Departmental responsibilities and procedures.

12.050 Declaration and Ratification of Emergency by Mayor and City Council

(1) When the Mayor determines that a state of emergency exists, the Mayor shall make a written declaration to that effect, and within 24 hours, call a special meeting of the City Council to ratify the declaration of emergency, or if a quorum of the council is not available, then as soon as a quorum can be assembled. If the Mayor, for any reason, is unable or unavailable to perform these duties, then the duties shall be performed in the following order of succession:
 
(a) City Council President;
 
(b) City Council Vice President; and
 
(c) City Council members in order of seniority in office.
 
(2) The declaration by the Mayor of a state of emergency shall:
 
(a) State the nature of the emergency;
 
(b) Designate the geographical boundaries of the area subject to the emergency procedures;
 
(c) State the duration of time during which the area so designated shall remain an emergency area; and

(d) State any special regulations imposed as a result of the state of emergency.

(3) All orders issued pursuant to this chapter shall have the full force and effect of law during a state of emergency. All existing laws, ordinances, rules and orders inconsistent with this chapter shall be inoperative during the period of time and to the extent such inconsistencies exist.

12.060 Emergency Management Procedures

During a declared emergency, the city manager in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare, in any area designated as an emergency area, shall be responsible for the following procedures:

(1) Exercise all police powers vested in the city by the Oregon Constitution, city charter and city ordinances in order to reduce the vulnerability of the city to loss of life, injury to persons or property, human suffering and financial loss resulting from emergencies, and to provide for recovery and relief assistance for the victims of emergencies;

(2) Direct any department of the city to utilize and employ city personnel or individuals appointed by the manager, equipment, and facilities for the performance of any activities designed to prevent or alleviate actual or threatened damage due to the emergency, and may direct the departments to provide services and equipment to federal, state or local agencies to restore any services in order to provide for the health and safety of the citizens of the city;

(3) Designate persons to coordinate the work of public and private relief agencies operating in such area;

(4) Request the aid and assistance of any state or other public or quasi-public agencies in the performance of duties and work attendant upon the emergency conditions in such area;

(5) Clear or remove from publicly or privately owned land or water, debris and wreckage which may threaten public health or safety, or public or private property. In exercising this responsibility the city manager may:

(a) Accept funds from the federal government, the state of Oregon or other public or private organizations for the purpose of removing debris or wreckage from publicly or privately owned land or water; and

(b) Provide to the state of Oregon or others permission for removal of such debris or wreckage from publicly or privately owned land or water;
 
(6) Redirect city funds for emergency use and suspend standard city procurement procedures;

(7) Order the evacuation of persons;

(8) Accept or borrow funds from or passed through by the state of Oregon for temporary housing for disaster victims;

(9) Enter into purchase, lease or other arrangements with any agency of the United States or the state of Oregon, Jackson County Housing Authority or private owners for temporary housing units to be occupied by disaster victims;

(10) Apply to the federal and state government, or request the state to apply on the city’s behalf, for grants and loans and to receive, on behalf of the city, such grants and loans; and (11) Determine the financial resources required to restore or resume the city’s governmental functions, and to certify the same to the state of Oregon or the federal government.

12.070 Termination of State of Emergency

The state of emergency proclaimed by the Mayor may be terminated at any time by resolution of the city council.

12.080 Due Process

Any person claiming a deprivation of liberty or property by any order of the city manager pursuant to this chapter shall be entitled to a hearing before the Municipal Court judge. The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable after execution of the questioned order. The aggrieved party shall have the right to appear in person and/or by counsel and may present evidence to support his/her grievance. The city shall present evidence in support of its action. The judge shall determine whether the questioned action was lawful and proper, and shall be empowered to restore any property or other rights of which the grievant was unlawfully deprived. The judge shall not have authority to award or deny monetary compensation or damages. Claims for compensation or damages shall be made in the manner otherwise provided by law. The city or any aggrieved party shall have the right to appeal the judge’s decision. Such appeal shall be taken and perfected in the manner provided by law for taking appeals from justice courts and as prescribed in ORS 221.350.

12.090 Penalty

Violation of any provision of chapter 12 of this code and of any orders issued pursuant to this chapter shall be a crime punishable by a fine not exceeding $500 and imprisonment not exceeding 30 days.

13 Environmental Health and Safety 

13 Statutory Authority, Findings of Fact, Purpose, and Methods

13.005 Statutory Authority, Findins of Fact, Purpose, and Methods

1) Statutory Authorization
The State of Oregon has in ORS 197.175 delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City of Medford does ordain as follows:
(2) Findings of Fact
(a)        The flood hazard areas of the City of Medford are subject to periodic inundation   which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption       of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for           flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely    affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(b)        These flood losses may be caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in         special flood hazard areas which increase flood heights and velocities, and when             inadequately anchored, cause damage in other areas. Uses that are inadequately       floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute            to flood loss.
(3) Statement of Purpose
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding in flood hazard areas by provisions designed to:
(a)         Protect human life and health;
(b)        Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(c)        Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and                      generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(d)        Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(e)        Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains;      electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in special flood hazard areas;
(f)        Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development    of flood hazard areas so as to minimize blight areas caused by flooding;
(g)        Notify potential buyers that the property is in a special flood hazard area;
(h)        Notify those who occupy special flood hazard areas that they assume         responsibility for their actions; and
(i)         Participate in and maintain eligibility for flood insurance and disaster relief.
(4) Methods of Reducing Flood Losses
In order to accomplish its purposes, this ordinance includes methods and provisions for:
(a)        Restricting or prohibiting development which is dangerous to health, safety, and    property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in           erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
(b)        Requiring that development vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve   such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(c)        Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural         protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
(d)       Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and
(e)        Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally   divert flood waters or may increase flood hazards in other areas.
[Added, Ord. No. 2020-62, May 21, 2020.]
 
13 Definitions

13.010 Definitions

Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage.
 
“Appeal” A request for a review of the interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a variance.
 
“Area of shallow flooding” A designated Zone AO, AH, AR/AO or AR/AH (or VO) on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident.  Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
 
“Area of special flood hazard” The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as Zone A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR. “Special flood hazard area” is synonymous in meaning and definition with the phrase “area of special flood hazard”.
 
“Base flood” The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
 
“Base flood elevation (BFE)” The elevation to which floodwater is anticipated to rise during the base flood.
 
“Basement” Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
 
“Building” See "Structure."
“Below-grade crawl space” An enclosed area below the base flood elevation in which the interior grade is not more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade and the height, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation, does not exceed 4 feet at any point.
“Critical facility” A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, installations which produce, use, or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste.
 
“Development” Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
 
“Flood or Flooding”
(1) A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
            (a)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
            (b)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any                                       source.
            (c)   Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as                                        defined in paragraph (1)(b) of this definition and are akin to a river of                                
                   liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as               
                   when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of                
                   the current.
(2) The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph (a)(1) of this definition.
 
“Flood elevation study” An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.       
                                                           
“Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” The official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).

“Flood Insurance Study (FIS)”  See “Flood elevation study”.
                                   
“Flood proofing” Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate risk of flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents.
 
“Floodplain or flood prone area” Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.  See "Flood or flooding."
 
“Floodplain administrator” The community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.
 
“Floodplain management” The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations.
 
“Floodplain management regulations” Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other application of police power.  The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
 
“Floodway” The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.  Also referred to as "Regulatory Floodway."
 
“Functionally dependent use” A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water.  The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
 
“Hazardous material” The Oregon Department of Environmental Quality defines hazardous materials to include any of the following:
Hazardous waste as defined in ORS 466.005;
Radioactive waste as defined in ORS 469.300, radioactive material identified by the Energy Facility Siting Council under ORS 469.605 and radioactive substances defined in ORS 453.005;
Communicable disease agents as regulated by the Health Division under ORS Chapter 431 and 433.010 to 433.045 and 433.106 to 433.990;
Hazardous substances designated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) under section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, P.L. 92-500, as amended;
Substances listed by the United States EPA in section 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 302 – Table 302.4 (list of Hazardous Substances and Reportable Quantities) and amendments;
Material regulated as a Chemical Agent under ORS 465.550;
Material used as a weapon of mass destruction, or biological weapon;
Pesticide residue; and
Dry cleaning solvent as defined by ORS 465.200(9)
“Highest adjacent grade” The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

“Historic structure” Any structure that is:

Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
 
Letter of Map Change (LOMC)” An official FEMA determination, by letter, to amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Insurance Studies. The following are categories of LOMCs:
“Conditional Letter of Map Amendment (CLOMA)” A CLOMA is FEMA’s comment on a proposed structure or group of structures that would, upon construction, be located on existing natural ground above the base (1-percent-annual-chance) flood elevation on a portion of a legally defined parcel of land that is partially inundated by the base flood.
“Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR)” A CLOMR is FEMA’s comment on a proposed project that would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic or hydraulic
      characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing        regulatory floodway, the effective base flood elevations, or the special flood hazard area.
“Conditional Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (CLOMR-F)” A CLOMR-F is FEMA’s comment on a proposed project that would, upon construction, result in a modification of the special flood hazard area through the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway.
“Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA)” An official amendment, by letter, to the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) based on technical data showing that an existing structure, parcel of land or portion of a parcel of land that is naturally high ground, (i.e., has not been elevated by fill) above the base flood, that was inadvertently included in the special flood hazard area.
“Letter of Map Revision (LOMR)” A LOMR is FEMA’s modification to an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM), or both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective base flood elevations, or the SFHA. The LOMR officially revises the FIRM or FBFM, and sometimes the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report, and, when appropriate, includes a description of the modifications. The LOMR is generally accompanied by an annotated copy of the affected portions of the FIRM, FBFM, or FIS report.
“Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F)” A LOMR-F is FEMA’s modification of the special flood hazard area shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway.
“PMR” A PMR is FEMA’s physical revision and republication of an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report. PMRs are generally based on physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective base flood elevations, or the special flood hazard area.      
“Lowest floor” The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance.
 
“Manufactured dwelling” A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached
to the required utilities.  The term "manufactured dwelling" does not include a "recreational vehicle" and is synonymous with “manufactured home”.
“Manufactured dwelling park or subdivision” A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured dwelling lots for rent or sale.
 
“Mean sea level” For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which Base Flood Elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
 
“New construction” For floodplain management purposes, “new construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by City of Medford and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

“Recreational vehicle” A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(2) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(3) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living    quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

“Regulatory floodway” See “Floodway”.

“Sheet flow area” See "Area of shallow flooding".

“Special flood hazard area” See “Area of special flood hazard” for this definition.

“Start of construction” Includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit.  The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured dwelling on a foundation.  Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.  For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
“Structure” For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured dwelling.

“Substantial damage” Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it’s before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

“Substantial improvement” Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement.  This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed.  The term does not include:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local  health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local  code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living  conditions.

“Variance” A grant of relief by City of Medford from the terms of a flood plain management regulation.

Violation:  The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations.  A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

Water dependent:  Means a structure for commerce or industry which cannot exist in any other location and is dependent on the water by reason of intrinsic nature of its operations.

Water surface elevation: The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
[Added, Ord. No. 2020-62, May 21, 2020.]

13 General Provisions

13.015 General Provisions

(1) Lands to Which This Ordinance Applies
This ordinance shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of City of Medford.
(2) Basis for Establishing the Special Flood Hazard Areas
The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Insurance Administrator in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for “Jackson County, Oregon
and Incorporated Areas”, dated January 19, 2018, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) 41029CIND0C, 41029C1769F, 41029C1788F, 41029C1956F, 41029C1957F, 41029C1958F, 41029C1959F, 41029C1966F, 41029C1967F, 41029C1976F, 41029C1977F, 41029C1978F, 41029C1979F, 41029C1983F, 41029C1986F, 41029C1987F, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. The FIS and FIRM panels are on file at the City of Medford Planning Department. 
(3) Coordination with State Of Oregon Specialty Codes
Pursuant to the requirement established in ORS 455 that the City of Medford administers and enforces the State of Oregon Specialty Codes, the City of Medford does hereby acknowledge that the Oregon Specialty Codes contain certain provisions that apply to the design and construction of buildings and structures located in special flood hazard areas. Therefore, this ordinance is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Oregon Specialty Codes.
(4) Compliance and Penalties for Noncompliance
(A) Compliance
All development within special flood hazard areas is subject to the terms of this ordinance and required to comply with its provisions and all other applicable regulations.
(B Penalties for Noncompliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this ordinance by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a public nuisance and may be abated as provided in Sections 5.520 - 5.535 of the Medford Code. The city may enjoin any violation of the provisions of this chapter through a civil suit.
Nothing contained herein shall prevent the City of Medford from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
 (5) Abrogation and Severability
  (a)  Abrogation
This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(b)  Severability
This ordinance and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. If any section clause, sentence, or phrase of the Ordinance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance.
(6) Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be:
 (a) Considered as minimum requirements;
 (b)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
 (c)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(7) Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
(A) Warning
The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.
(B) Disclaimer of Liability
This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Medford, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administrator for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
[Added, Ord. No. 2020-62, May 21, 2020.]

13 Administration

13.020 Administration

(1) Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
The City Manager and their designee is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this ordinance by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions. The Floodplain Administrator may delegate authority to implement these provisions.                                                       
(2) Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
Duties of the floodplain administrator, or their designee, shall include, but not be limited to:
Permit Review
Review all development permits to determine that:
(a) The permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied;
(b) All other required local, state, and federal permits have been obtained and  approved.
(c) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is  located in a floodway. If located in the floodway assure that the floodway  provisions of this ordinance in Section 13.025(4) are met; and
(d) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is  located in an area where Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is available either  through the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) or from another authoritative source. If  BFE data is not available then ensure compliance with the provisions of section  13.025(1)(7); and
(e) Provide to building officials the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) and one foot of  freeboard elevation standard applicable to any building requiring a development  permit. 
(f) Review all development permit applications to determine if the proposed  development qualifies as a substantial improvement as defined in Section 13.010.
(g) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development  activity is a watercourse alteration. If a watercourse alteration is proposed, ensure  compliance with the provisions in Section 13.025(1)(1).
(h) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development  activity includes the placement of fill or excavation.
(3) Information To Be Obtained and Maintained
The following information shall be obtained and maintained and shall be made available for public inspection as needed:
(a)  Obtain, record, and maintain the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of  the lowest floor (including basements) and all attendant utilities of all new or  substantially improved structures where Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is  provided through the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), Flood Insurance Rate Map  (FIRM), or obtained in accordance with Section 13.025(1)(7). 
(b) Obtain and record the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the natural grade of the building site for a structure prior to the start of construction and the placement of any fill and ensure that the requirements of Sections 13.020(2)(1)(b) and 13.025(3), are adhered to.
(c) Upon placement of the lowest floor of a structure (including basement) but prior to further vertical construction, obtain documentation, prepared and sealed by a professional licensed surveyor or engineer, certifying the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement).
(d) Where base flood elevation data are utilized, obtain As-built certification of the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) prepared and sealed by a professional licensed surveyor or engineer, prior to the final inspection.
(e) Maintain all Elevation Certificates (EC) submitted to City of Medford;
(f) Obtain, record, and maintain the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure and all attendant utilities were floodproofed for all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures where allowed under this ordinance and where Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is provided through the FIS, FIRM, or obtained in accordance with Section 13.025(10(7).
(g) Maintain all floodproofing certificates required under this ordinance;
(h) Record and maintain all variance actions, including justification for their issuance;
(i) Obtain and maintain all hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed as required under Section 13.025(3).
(j) Record and maintain all Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage calculations and determinations as required under Section 13.020(3).
(k) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance.
(4) Requirement to Notify Other Entities and Submit New Technical Data
        (1) Community Boundary Alterations
The Floodplain Administrator shall notify the Federal Insurance Administrator in writing whenever the boundaries of the community have been modified by annexation or the community has otherwise assumed authority or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area, to ensure that all Flood Hazard Boundary Maps (FHBM) and Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) accurately represent the community’s boundaries. Include within such notification a copy of a map of the community suitable for reproduction, clearly delineating the new corporate limits or new area for which the community has assumed or relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority.  
 (2) Watercourse Alterations
Notify adjacent communities, the Department of Land Conservation and Development, and other appropriate state and federal agencies, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration. This notification shall be provided by the applicant to the Federal Insurance Administration as a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) along with either:                                                           
    (a)     A proposed maintenance plan to assure the flood carrying capacity within     the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse is maintained; or
(b) Certification by a registered professional engineer that the project has been  designed to retain its flood carrying capacity without periodic  maintenance.
The applicant shall be required to submit a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) when required under Section 13.020(4)(3). Ensure compliance with all applicable requirements in Sections 13.020(4)(3) and 13.025(1)(1).
                    (3) Requirement to Submit New Technical Data
A community’s base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information becomes available, a community shall notify the Federal Insurance Administrator of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data in accordance with Section 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Sub-Section 65.3. The community may require the applicant to submit such data and review fees required for compliance with this section through the applicable FEMA Letter of Map Change (LOMC) process.
The Floodplain Administrator shall require a Conditional Letter of Map Revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for:
(1) Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood elevation; and
(2)  Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation by more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations but no floodway.

An applicant shall notify FEMA within six (6) months of project completion when an applicant has obtained a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) from FEMA. This notification to FEMA shall be provided as a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR).

The applicant shall be responsible for preparing all technical data to support CLOMR/LOMR applications and paying any processing or application fees associated with the CLOMR/LOMR.

The Floodplain Administrator shall be under no obligation to sign the Community Acknowledgement Form, which is part of the CLOMR/LOMR application, until the applicant demonstrates that the project will or has met the requirements of this code and all applicable state and federal permits.
(4)     Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage Assessments and Determinations
Conduct Substantial Improvement (SI) (as defined in Section 13.010) reviews for all structural
development proposal applications and maintain a record of SI calculations within permit files in accordance with Section 13.020(2)(2). Conduct Substantial Damage (SD) (as defined in Section 13.010) assessments when structures are damaged due to a natural hazard event or other causes. Make SD determinations whenever structures within the special flood hazard area (as established in Section 13.015(2) are damaged to the extent that the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
(5) Establishment of Development Permit
(1) Floodplain Development Permit Required
             A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins   
              within any area horizontally within the special flood hazard area established in Section
              13.015(2). The development permit shall be required for all structures, including
             manufactured dwellings, and for all other development, as defined in Section 13.010,
    including fill and other development activities.
     (2) Application for Development Permit
 Application for a development permit may be made on forms furnished by the      
      Floodplain Administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate
      drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in    
      question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities,
      and the location of the foregoing. Specifically the following information is required:
(a)   In riverine flood zones, the proposed elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of   
      the lowest floor (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and    
      substantially improved structures; in accordance with the requirements of
      Section 13.020(2)(2).
(b) Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed.
(c)   Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect licensed in the 
      State of Oregon that the floodproofing methods proposed for any non-residential
      structure meet the floodproofing criteria for non-residential structures in Section
      13.025(2)(3)(3).
(d)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated.
(e)    Base Flood Elevation data for subdivision proposals or other development    
       when required per Sections 13.020(2)(1) and 5.1.613.025(1)(6).
(f)   Substantial improvement calculation for any improvement, addition,
       reconstruction, renovation, or rehabilitation of an existing structure.
(g)  The amount and location of any fill or excavation activities proposed.
    (6) Variance Procedure
The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Flood insurance premium rates are determined by federal statute according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance.
Conditions for Variances
(a) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, in conformance with the provisions of Sections 13.020(5)(1)(c) and (e), and 13.020(5)(2). As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing a variance increases.
(b) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(c) Variances shall not be issued within any floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(d) Variances shall only be issued upon:
i.    A showing of good and sufficient cause;
ii.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in   
      exceptional hardship to the applicant;
iii.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased 
      flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
      expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or
      conflict with existing laws or ordinances.
(e) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the criteria of Sections 13.020(5)(1)(b)-(d) are met, and the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
(2) Variance Notification
Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the Base Flood Elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance and that such construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. Such notification and a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance shall be maintained in accordance with Section 13.020(2)(2).  
 
Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation of a historic structure will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
[Added, Ord. No. 2020-62, May 21, 2020.]

13 Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction

13.025 Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction

(1) General Standards
In all special flood hazard areas, the following standards shall be adhered to:
 (1) Alteration of Watercourses
Require that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse to ensure that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished. Require compliance with Sections 13.020(2)(3)(2) and 13.020(4)(3).
 (2) Anchoring
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
(b) All manufactured dwellings shall be anchored per Section 13.025(2)(3)(4).
 (3) Construction Materials and Methods
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
(b) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(4) Utilities and Equipment
        (1) Water Supply, Sanitary Sewer, and On-Site Waste Disposal Systems:
(a) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
(b) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters.
(c) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding consistent with the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.
     (2) Electrical, Mechanical, Plumbing, and Other Equipment
Electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, plumbing, duct systems, and other equipment and service facilities shall be elevated a minimum of one foot above base
flood for the City of Medford or shall be designed and installed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components and to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of flooding. In addition, electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, plumbing, duct systems, and other equipment and service facilities replaced as part of a substantial improvement shall meet all the requirements of this section.
 (5) Tanks
(a) Underground tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement under conditions of the base flood.
(b) Above-ground tanks shall be installed a minimum of one foot above base flood level for the City of Medford or shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement under conditions of the base flood.
 (6) Subdivision Proposals and Other Proposed Developments
        (1)  All new subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments (including    
                        proposals for manufactured dwelling parks and subdivisions) greater than 50 lots               or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, shall include within such proposals, Base Flood Elevation data.
        (2)  All new subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments (including    
              proposals for manufactured dwelling parks and subdivisions) shall:
    (a)     Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
    (b)     Have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and             
             water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood  
             damage.
    (c)     Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
 (7) Use of Other Base Flood Data
When Base Flood Elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 13.015(2) the local floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any Base Flood Elevation data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer Section 13.025. All new subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments (including proposals for manufactured dwelling parks and subdivisions) must meet the requirements of Section 13.025(1)(6).

Base Flood Elevations shall be determined for development proposals that are 5 acres or more in size or are 50 lots or more, whichever is lesser in any A zone that does not have an established base flood elevation. Development proposals located within a riverine unnumbered A Zone shall be reasonably safe from flooding; the test of reasonableness includes use of historical data, high water marks, FEMA provided Base Level Engineering data, and photographs of past flooding, or other methods where available. When no base flood elevation data is available, development proposals located within a
riverine unnumbered A Zone shall be elevated a minimum of two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade to be reasonably safe from flooding Failure to elevate at least two feet above grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates.
 (8) Structures Located In Multiple or Partial Flood Zones
      In coordination with the State of Oregon Specialty Codes:
(1) When a structure is located in multiple flood zones on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) the provisions for the more restrictive flood zone shall apply.
(2) When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard area, the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and substantial improvements.
 (9) Critical Facilities
Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the special flood hazard area. Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA only if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated three (3) feet above the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) or to the height of the 500-year flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the critical facility shall also be protected to the height utilized above. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters.
 (10) Specific Standards for Riverine (Including All Non-Coastal) Flood Zones
These specific standards shall apply to all new construction and substantial  improvements in addition to the General Standards contained in Section 13.025(1) of this  ordinance.
      (1) Flood Openings
All new construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) are subject to the following requirements.
Enclosed areas below the Base Flood Elevation, including crawl spaces shall:
(a)  Be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters;
  (b)  Be used solely for parking, storage, or building access;
  (c)  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed all of the following minimum criteria:
   i.     A minimum of two openings,
ii.    The total net area of non-engineered openings shall be not less than    
       one (1) square inch for each square foot of enclosed area, where the   
       enclosed area is measured on the exterior of the enclosure walls,
iii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
       grade.   
iv.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other    
        coverings or devices provided that they shall allow the automatic
        flow of floodwater into and out of the enclosed areas and shall be
        accounted for in the determination of the net open area.
v.     All additional higher standards for flood openings in the State of
        Oregon Residential Specialty Codes Section R322.2.2 shall be    
        complied with when applicable.
 (2) Garages
  (a)   Attached garages may be constructed with the garage floor slab below the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) in riverine flood zones, if the following requirements   are met:
         (1)   If located within a floodway the proposed garage must comply with the                   requirements of Section 13.025(3);
         (2)   The floors are at or above grade on not less than one side;
         (3)    The garage is used solely for parking, building access, and/or storage;
         (4)   The garage is constructed with flood openings in compliance with Section 13.025(2)(1) to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.
        (5)    The portions of the garage constructed below the BFE are constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
        (6)     The garage is constructed in compliance with the standards in Section 13.025(1); and
        (7)    The garage is constructed with electrical, and other service facilities located and installed so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of the base flood.
  (b)  Detached garages must be constructed in compliance with the standards for appurtenant structures in Section 13.025(2)(3)(6) or non-residential structures in Section 13.025(2)(3)(3) depending on the square footage of the garage.
(3) For Riverine (Non-Coastal) Special Flood Hazard Areas With Base Flood Elevations
In addition to the general standards listed in Section 13.025(1) the following specific standards shall apply in Riverine (non-coastal) special flood hazard areas with Base Flood Elevations (BFE): Zones A1-A30, AH, and AE.
     (1) Before Regulatory Floodway
In areas where a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvement, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
(2) Residential Construction
          (1)  New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above one (1) foot above the Base Flood Elevation (BFE).
         (2)  Enclosed areas below the lowest floor shall comply with the floor opening requirements in Section 13.025(2)(1).
(3) Non-Residential Construction
    (1) New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure shall:
(a) Have the lowest floor, including basement elevated to or above one (1) foot above the Base Flood Elevation (BFE);
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
(b) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
(c) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
(d) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this section based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth Section 13.020(2)(2).
          (2)  Non-residential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, shall   
          comply with the standards for enclosed areas below the lowest floor in Section 13.025(2)(1).
(3)  Applicant’s floodproofing non-residential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one (1) foot below the floodproofed level (e.g. a building floodproofed to the base flood level will be rated as one (1) foot below).
(4)   Applicants shall supply a maintenance plan for the entire structure to include but not limited to: exterior envelop of structure; all penetrations to the exterior of the structure; all shields, gates, barriers, or components designed to provide floodproofing protection to the structure; all seals or gaskets for shields, gates, barriers, or components; and, the location of all shields, gates, barriers, and components, as well as all associated hardware, and any materials or specialized tools necessary to seal the structure.
(5) Applicants shall supply an Emergency Action Plan (EAP) for the installation and sealing of the structure prior to a flooding event that clearly identifies what triggers the EAP and who is responsible for enacting the EAP.
 (4) Manufactured Dwellings
(1) New or substantially improved manufactured dwellings supported    
 on solid foundation walls shall be constructed with flood openings  that comply with Section 13.025(2)(1);
(2) The bottom of the longitudinal chassis frame beam shall be at or        
 above Base Flood Elevation;
(3) New or substantially improved manufactured dwellings shall be  nchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement during  the base flood. Anchoring methods may include, but are not  limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors  (Reference FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood  Hazard Areas” guidebook for additional techniques), and;
(4) Electrical crossover connections shall be a minimum of twelve
 (12) inches above Base Flood Elevation (BFE)
(5) Recreational Vehicles
Recreational vehicles placed on sites are required to:
(1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, and
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or  jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect  type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached  additions; or
(3) Meet the requirements of Section 13.025(2)(3)(4), including the  anchoring and elevation requirements for manufactured dwellings.
(6) Appurtenant (Accessory) Structures
Relief from elevation or floodproofing requirements for residential and non-residential structures in Riverine (Non-Coastal) flood zones may be granted for appurtenant structures that meet the following requirements:
(1) Appurtenant structures located partially or entirely within the floodway must comply with requirements for development within a floodway found in Section 13.025(3);
(2) Appurtenant structures must only be used for parking, access, and/or storage and shall not be used for human habitation;
(3) In compliance with State of Oregon Specialty Codes, appurtenant structures on properties that are zoned residential are limited to one-story structures less than 200 square feet, or 400 square feet if the property is greater than two (2) acres in area and the proposed appurtenant structure will be located a minimum of 20 feet from all property lines. Appurtenant structures on properties that are zoned as non-residential are limited in size to 120 square feet;
(4) The portions of the appurtenant structure located below the Base Flood Elevation must be built using flood resistant materials;
(5) The appurtenant structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the base flood;
(6) The appurtenant structure must be designed and constructed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls and comply with the requirements for flood openings in Section 13.025(2)(1);
(7) Appurtenant structures shall be located and constructed to have low damage potential;
(8) Appurtenant structures shall not be used to store toxic material, oil, or gasoline, or any priority persistent pollutant identified by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality unless confined in a tank installed incompliance with Section 13.025(1)(5).
(9) Appurtenant structures shall be constructed with electrical, mechanical, and other service facilities located and installed so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of the base flood.
      (7) Below-Grade Crawl Spaces
(1) The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Hydrostatic loads and the effects of buoyancy can usually be addressed
through the required flood openings stated in 13.025(20(1)(c). Because of hydrodynamic loads, crawlspace construction is not allowed in areas with flood velocities greater than five (5) feet per second unless the design is reviewed by a qualified design professional, such as a registered architect or professional engineer. Other types of foundations are recommended for these areas.
(2) The crawlspace is an enclosed area below the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) and, as such, must have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. The bottom of each flood vent opening can be no more than one (1) foot above the lowest adjacent exterior grade.
(3) Portions of the building below the BFE must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. This includes not only the foundation walls of the crawlspace used to elevate the building, but also any joists, insulation, or other materials that extend below the BFE. The recommended construction practice is to elevate the bottom of joists and all insulation above BFE.
(4) Any building utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above BFE or designed so that floodwaters cannot enter or accumulate within the system components during flood conditions. Ductwork, in particular, must either be placed above the BFE or sealed from floodwaters.
(5) The interior grade of a crawlspace below the BFE must not be more than two (2) feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade.
(6) The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall must not exceed four (4) feet at any point. The height limitation is the maximum allowable unsupported wall height according to the engineering analyses and building code requirements for flood hazard areas.
(7) There must be an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace. The enclosed area should be drained within a reasonable time after a flood event. The type of drainage system will vary because of the site gradient and other drainage characteristics, such as soil types. Possible options include natural drainage through porous, well-drained soils and drainage systems such as perforated pipes, drainage tiles or gravel or crushed stone drainage by gravity or mechanical means.
(8) The velocity of floodwaters at the site shall not exceed five (5) feet per second for any crawlspace. For velocities in excess of five (5) feet per second, other foundation types should be used.
(3) Floodways
Located within the special flood hazard areas established in Section 13.015(2) are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of the floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
(1) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless:
(a) Certification by a registered professional civil engineer is provided demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge;
or,
(b) A community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) is applied for and approved by the Federal Insurance Administrator, and the requirements for such revision as established under Volume 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Section 65.12 are fulfilled.
If an encroachment proposal resulting in an increase in Base Flood Elevation meets the following criteria:
i. Is for the purpose of fish enhancement,
ii. Does not involve the placement of any structures (as defined in Section 13.010) within the floodway,
iii. Has a feasibility analysis completed documenting that fish enhancement will be achieved through the proposed project,
iv. Has a maintenance plan in place to ensure that the stream carrying capacity is not impacted by the fish enhancement project,
v. Has approval by the National Marine Fisheries Service, the State of Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, or the equivalent federal or state agency, and
vi. Has evidence to support that no existing structures will be negatively impacted by the proposed activity;
Then an approved CLOMR may be required prior to approval of a floodplain permit.
(2) If the requirements of Section 13.025(3)(1) are satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvements, and other development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 13.025.(4) Standards for Shallow Flooding Areas
Shallow flooding areas appear on FIRMs as AO zones with depth designations or as AH zones with Base Flood Elevations. For AO zones the base flood depths range from one (1) to three (3) feet above ground where a clearly defined channel does not exist, or where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is usually characterized as sheet flow. For both AO and AH zones, adequate drainage paths are required around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(1) Standards for Ah Zones
      Development within AH Zones must comply with the standards in Sections         
      13.025(1), 13.025(2), and 13.025(4).
(2) Standards for Ao Zones
In AO zones, the following provisions apply in addition to the requirements in sections 13.025(1) and 13.025(4):
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of residential structures and manufactured dwellings within AO zones shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest grade adjacent to the building, at minimum to one (1) foot above the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) (at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified). For manufactured dwellings the lowest floor is considered to be the bottom of the longitudinal chassis frame beam.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures within AO zones shall either:
(a) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade of the building site, at minimum to one (1) foot above the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMS) (at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified); or
(b) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely floodproofed to one (1) foot above the depth number specified on the FIRM or a minimum of three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified, so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. If this method is used, compliance shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as stated in Section 13.025(3)(3)(1)(d).
(3) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within AO Zones on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) shall either:
(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, and
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or
(c) Meet the elevation requirements of Section 13.025(4)(2)(1), and the anchoring and other requirements for manufactured dwellings of Section 13.025(2)(3)(4).
(4) In AO zones, new and substantially improved appurtenant structures must comply with the standards in Section 13.025(2)(3)(6).
(5) In AO zones, enclosed areas beneath elevated structures shall comply with the requirements in Section 13.025 (2)(1).
[Added, Ord. No. 2020-62, May 21, 2020.]
